* South Kalimantan (Kalimantan Selatan)  Banjarmasin
* East Kalimantan (Kalimantan Timur)  Samarinda
* North Kalimantan (Kalimantan Utara)  Tanjung Selor

Sulawesi
* North Sulawesi (Sulawesi Utara)  Manado
* Gorontalo  Gorontalo (city)
* Central Sulawesi (Sulawesi Tengah)  Palu
* West Sulawesi (Sulawesi Barat)  Mamuju
* South Sulawesi (Sulawesi Selatan)  Makassar
* South East Sulawesi (Sulawesi Tenggara)  Kendari
Maluku Islands
* Maluku  Ambon
* North Maluku (Maluku Utara)  Sofifi
Western New Guinea
* West Papua* (Papua Barat)  Manokwari
* Papua*  Jayapura

==Geography==

Mount Semeru and Mount Bromo in East Java. Indonesia's seismic and volcanic activity is among the world's highest.
Indonesia lies between latitudes 11S and 6N, and longitudes 95E and 141E. It consists of 17,508 islands, about 6,000 of which are inhabited. ; These are scattered over both sides of the equator. The largest are Java, Sumatra, Borneo (shared with Brunei and Malaysia), New Guinea (shared with Papua New Guinea), and Sulawesi. Indonesia shares land borders with Malaysia on Borneo, Papua New Guinea on the island of New Guinea, and East Timor on the island of Timor. Indonesia shares maritime borders across narrow straits with Singapore, Malaysia, the Philippines, and Palau to the north, and with Australia to the south. The capital, Jakarta, is on Java and is the nation's largest city, followed by Surabaya, Bandung, Medan, and Semarang. 

At 1,919,440 square kilometers (741,050 sq mi), Indonesia is the world's 15th-largest country in terms of land area and world's 7th-largest country in terms of combined sea and land area. Its average population density is 134 people per square kilometer (347 per sq mi), 79th in the world, although Java, the world's most populous island, has a population density of 940 people per square kilometer (2,435 per sq mi). At 4884 m, Puncak Jaya in Papua is Indonesia's highest peak, and Lake Toba in Sumatra its largest lake, with an area of 1,145 square kilometers (442 sq mi). The country's largest rivers are in Kalimantan, and include the Mahakam and Barito; such rivers are communication and transport links between the island's river settlements. 

Indonesia's location on the edges of the Pacific, Eurasian, and Australian tectonic plates makes it the site of numerous volcanoes and frequent earthquakes. Indonesia has at least 150 active volcanoes, including Krakatoa and Tambora, both famous for their devastating eruptions in the 19th century. The eruption of the Toba supervolcano, approximately 70,000 years ago, was one of the largest eruptions ever, and a global catastrophe. Recent disasters due to seismic activity include the 2004 tsunami that killed an estimated 167,736 in northern Sumatra, and the Yogyakarta earthquake in 2006. However, volcanic ash is a major contributor to the high agricultural fertility that has historically sustained the high population densities of Java and Bali. 

Lying along the equator, Indonesia has a tropical climate, with two distinct monsoonal wet and dry seasons. Average annual rainfall in the lowlands varies from 1,780 , and up to 6,100 mm in mountainous regions. Mountainous areas &ndash; particularly in the west coast of Sumatra, West Java, Kalimantan, Sulawesi, and Papua &ndash; receive the highest rainfall. Humidity is generally high, averaging about 80%. Temperatures vary little throughout the year; the average daily temperature range of Jakarta is 26 . 

==Biota and environment==

The critically endangered Sumatran Orangutan, a great ape endemic to Indonesia.

Indonesia's size, tropical climate, and archipelagic geography, support the world's second highest level of biodiversity (after Brazil), and its flora and fauna is a mixture of Asian and Australasian species. The islands of the Sunda Shelf (Sumatra, Java, Borneo, and Bali) were once linked to the Asian mainland, and have a wealth of Asian fauna. Large species such as the tiger, rhinoceros, orangutan, elephant, and leopard, were once abundant as far east as Bali, but numbers and distribution have dwindled drastically. Forests cover approximately 60% of the country. In Sumatra and Kalimantan, these are predominantly of Asian species. However, the forests of the smaller, and more densely populated Java, have largely been removed for human habitation and agriculture. Sulawesi, Nusa Tenggara, and Maluku &ndash; having been long separated from the continental landmasseshave developed their own unique flora and fauna. ; Papua was part of the Australian landmass, and is home to a unique fauna and flora closely related to that of Australia, including over 600 bird species. 

Indonesia is second only to Australia in terms of total endemic species, with 36% of its 1,531 species of bird and 39% of its 515 species of mammal being endemic. 
Indonesia's 80,000 km of coastline are surrounded by tropical seas that contribute to the country's high level of biodiversity. Indonesia has a range of sea and coastal ecosystems, including beaches, sand dunes, estuaries, mangroves, coral reefs, sea grass beds, coastal mudflats, tidal flats, algal beds, and small island ecosystems. Indonesia is one of Coral Triangle countries with the world's greatest diversity of coral reef fish with more than 1,650 species in eastern Indonesia only. The British naturalist, Alfred Wallace, described a dividing line between the distribution of Indonesia's Asian and Australasian species. Known as the Wallace Line, it runs roughly north-south along the edge of the Sunda Shelf, between Kalimantan and Sulawesi, and along the deep Lombok Strait, between Lombok and Bali. West of the line the flora and fauna are more Asian; moving east from Lombok, they are increasingly Australian. In his 1869 book, The Malay Archipelago, Wallace described numerous species unique to the area. The region of islands between his line and New Guinea is now termed Wallacea. 

Indonesia's high population and rapid industrialization present serious environmental issues, which are often given a lower priority due to high poverty levels and weak, under-resourced governance. Issues include large-scale deforestation (much of it illegal) and related wildfires causing heavy smog over parts of western Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore; over-exploitation of marine resources; and environmental problems associated with rapid urbanization and economic development, including air pollution, traffic congestion, garbage management, and reliable water and waste water services. Deforestation and the destruction of peatlands make Indonesia the world's third largest emitter of greenhouse gases. Habitat destruction threatens the survival of indigenous and endemic species, including 140 species of mammals identified by the World Conservation Union (IUCN) as threatened, and 15 identified as critically endangered, including Bali Starling, Sumatran Orangutan, and Javan Rhinoceros. Much of Indonesia's deforestation is caused by forest clearing for the palm oil Industry, which has cleared 18 million hectares of forest for palm oil expansion. Palm oil expansion requires land reallocation as well as changes to the local and natural ecosystems. Palm oil expansion can generate wealth for local communities if done right. If down wrong it can degrade ecosystems and cause social conflicts. 

==Economy==

Using water buffalo to plough rice fields in Java. Agriculture had been the country's largest employer for centuries.

Indonesia has a mixed economy in which both the private sector and government play significant roles. The country is the largest economy in Southeast Asia and a member of the G-20 major economies. Indonesia's estimated gross domestic product (nominal), as of 2012 was US$928.274 billion with estimated nominal per capita GDP was US$3,797, and per capita GDP PPP was US$4,943 (international dollars). The gross domestic product (GDP) is about $1 trillion and the debt ratio to the GDP is 26%. According to World Bank affiliated report based on 2011 data, the Indonesian economy was the world's 10th largest by nominal GDP (PPP based), with the country contributing 2.3 percent of global economic output. The industry sector is the economy's largest and accounts for 46.4% of GDP (2012), this is followed by services (38.6%) and agriculture (14.4%). However, since 2012, the service sector has employed more people than other sectors, accounting for 48.9% of the total labor force, this has been followed by agriculture (38.6%) and industry (22.2%). Agriculture, however, had been the country's largest employer for centuries. 

According to World Trade Organization data, Indonesia was the 27th biggest exporting country in the world in 2010, moving up three places from a year before. Indonesia's main export markets (2009) are Japan (17.28%), Singapore (11.29%), the United States (10.81%), and China (7.62%). The major suppliers of imports to Indonesia are Singapore (24.96%), China (12.52%), and Japan (8.92%). In 2005, Indonesia ran a trade surplus with export revenues of US$83.64 billion and import expenditure of US$62.02 billion. The country has extensive natural resources, including crude oil, natural gas, tin, copper, and gold. Indonesia's major imports include machinery and equipment, chemicals, fuels, and foodstuffs. And the country's major export commodities include oil and gas, electrical appliances, plywood, rubber, and textiles. 

Jakarta, the capital of Indonesia and the country's largest commercial center.

The tourism sector contributes to around US$9 billion of foreign exchange in 2012, and ranked as the 4th largest among goods and services export sectors. Singapore, Malaysia, Australia, China and Japan are the top five source of visitors to Indonesia.

In the 1960s the economy deteriorated drastically as a result of political instability, a young and inexperienced government, and economic nationalism, which resulted in severe poverty and hunger. By the time of Sukarno's downfall in the mid-1960s, the economy was in chaos with 1,000% annual inflation, shrinking export revenues, crumbling infrastructure, factories operating at minimal capacity, and negligible investment. Following President Sukarno's downfall in the mid-1960s, the New Order administration brought a degree of discipline to economic policy that quickly brought inflation down, stabilized the currency, rescheduled foreign debt, and attracted foreign aid and investment. (See Berkeley Mafia). Indonesia was until recently Southeast Asia's only member of OPEC, and the 1970s oil price raises provided an export revenue windfall that contributed to sustained high economic growth rates, averaging over 7% from 1968 to 1981. Schwarz (1994), pp. 5257 Following further reforms in the late 1980s, Following a slowing of growth in the 1980s, due to over regulation and dependence on declining oil prices, growth slowed to an average of 4.3% per annum between 1981 and 1988. A range of economic reforms were introduced in the late 1980s. Reforms included a managed devaluation of the rupiah to improve export competitiveness, and de-regulation of the financial sector (Schwarz (1994), pp. 5257). foreign investment flowed into Indonesia, particularly into the rapidly developing export-oriented manufacturing sector, and from 1989 to 1997, the Indonesian economy grew by an average of over 7%. Schwarz (1994), pp. 5257. 

Indonesia was the country hardest hit by the Asian financial crisis of 199798. During the crisis there were sudden and large capital outflows leading the rupiah to go into free fall. Against the US dollar the rupiah dropped from about Rp 2,600 in late 1997 to a low point of around Rp 17,000 some months later and the economy shrank by a remarkable 13.7%. These developments led to widespread economic distress across the economy and contributed to the political crisis of 1998 which saw Suharto resign as president. The rupiah later stabilised in the Rp. 8,000 range and economic growth returned to 4% per year by 2000. However, the currency still fluctuates, dropping below Rp 11,000 per dollar in September 2013. In addition, corruption has been a persistent problem. Transparency International, for example, has since ranked Indonesia below 100 in its Corruption Perceptions Index. Since 2007, however, with the improvement in banking sector and domestic consumption, national economic growth has accelerated to over 6% annually and this helped the country weather the 20082009 global recession. The Indonesian economy performed strongly during the Global Financial Crisis and in 2012 its GDP grew by over 6%. The country regained its investment grade rating in late 2011 after losing it in the 1997. However, as of 2012, an estimated 11.7% of the population lived below the poverty line and the official open unemployment rate was 6.1%. 

==Demographics==

Balinese children. There are around 300 distinct native ethnicities in Indonesia.
According to the 2010 national census, the population of Indonesia is 237.6 million, with high population growth at 1.9%. 58% of the population lives in Java, the world's most populous island. In 1961 the first post-colonial census gave a total population of 97 million. Population is expected to grow to around 269 million by 2020 and 321 million by 2050. World Population Prospects: The 2012 Revision (2012). Indonesia. Population (thousands). Median variant. 1950-2100. United Nations 

There are around 300 distinct native ethnic groups in Indonesia, and 742 different languages and dialects. Most Indonesians are descended from Austronesian-speaking peoples whose languages can be traced to Proto-Austronesian (PAn), which possibly originated in Taiwan. Another major grouping are Melanesians, who inhabit eastern Indonesia. Taylor (2003), pp. 57, The largest ethnic group is the Javanese, who comprise 42% of the population, and are politically and culturally dominant. The Sundanese, ethnic Malays, and Madurese are the largest non-Javanese groups. Small but significant populations of ethnic Chinese, Indians, Europeans and Arabs are concentrated mostly in urban areas. A sense of Indonesian nationhood exists alongside strong regional identities. Ricklefs (1991), p. 256 Society is largely harmonious, although social, religious and ethnic tensions have triggered horrendous violence. Domestic migration (including the official Transmigrasi program) are a cause of violence including the massacre of hundreds of Madurese by a local Dayak community in West Kalimantan, and conflicts in Maluku, Central Sulawesi, and parts of Papua and West Papua ; Kyoto University: Sulawesi Kaken Team & Center for Southeast Asian Studies Chinese Indonesians are an influential ethnic minority comprising 34% of the population. Johnston notes that less than 1% of the country's 210 million inhabitants described themselves as ethnic Chinese. Many sociologists regard this as a serious underestimate: they believe that somewhere between six million and seven million people of Chinese descent are now living in Indonesia. The Republic of China (Taiwan)'s Overseas Compatriot Affairs Commission gives a figure of 7,776,000, including 207,000 of Taiwan origin; see Statistical Yearbook, Taipai: Overseas Compatriot Affairs Commission, 2007, pp. 1113, ISSN 1024-4374. Retrieved 30 September 2010. Much of the country's privately owned commerce and wealth is Chinese-Indonesian-controlled. Schwarz (1994), pp. 53, 8081 Friend (2003), pp. 8587, 164165, 233237 Chinese businesses in Indonesia are part of the larger bamboo network, a network of overseas Chinese businesses operating in the markets of Southeast Asia that share common family and cultural ties. This has contributed to considerable resentment, and even anti-Chinese violence. The riots in Jakarta in 1998much of which were aimed at the Chinesewere, in part, expressions of this resentment. 

left

The official national language is Indonesian, a form of Malay. It is based on the prestige dialect of Malay, that of the Johor-Riau Sultanate, which for centuries had been the lingua franca of the archipelago, standards of which are the official languages in Singapore, Malaysia and Brunei. Indonesian is universally taught in schools, consequently it is spoken by nearly every Indonesian. It is the language of business, politics, national media, education, and academia. It was promoted by Indonesian nationalists in the 1920s, and declared the official language under the name Bahasa Indonesia on the proclamation of independence in 1945. Most Indonesians speak at least one of the several hundred local languages and dialects, often as their first language. Of these, Javanese is the most widely spoken as the language of the largest ethnic group. On the other hand, Papua has over 270 indigenous Papuan and Austronesian languages, in a region of about 2.7 million people.

While religious freedom is stipulated in the Indonesian constitution, the government officially recognizes only six religions: Islam, Protestantism, Roman Catholicism, Hinduism, Buddhism, and Confucianism. Indonesia is the world's most populous Muslim-majority nation, at 87.2% in 2010, with the majority being Sunni (99%). http://www.pewforum.org/2011/01/27/future-of-the-global-muslim-population-sunni-and-shia/ Muslim 207176162 (87.18%), Christian 16528513 (6.96), Catholic 6907873 (2.91), Hindu 4012116 (1.69), Buddhist 1703254 (0.72), Khong Hu Chu 117091 (0.05), Other 299617 (0.13), Not Stated 139582 (0.06), Not Asked 757118 (0.32), Total 237641326 On 21 May 2011 the Indonesian Sunni-Shia Council (MUHSIN) was established. The council aims to hold gatherings, dialogues and social activities. It was an answer to violence committed in the name of religion. 9% of the population was Christian, 3% Hindu, and 2% Buddhist or other. Most Indonesian Hindus are Balinese, and most Buddhists in modern-day Indonesia are ethnic Chinese. Though now minority religions, Hinduism and Buddhism remain defining influences in Indonesian culture. Islam was first adopted by Indonesians in northern Sumatra in the 13th century, through the influence of traders, and became the country's dominant religion by the 16th century. Roman Catholicism was brought to Indonesia by early Portuguese colonialists and missionaries, Ricklefs (1991), pp. 25, 26, 28 and the Protestant denominations are largely a result of Dutch Calvinist and Lutheran missionary efforts during the country's colonial period. Ricklefs (1991), pp. 28, 62 Vickers (2005), p. 22 A large proportion of Indonesianssuch as the Javanese abangan, Balinese Hindus, and Dayak Christianspractice a less orthodox, syncretic form of their religion, which draws on local customs and beliefs. Magnis-Suseno, F. 1981, Javanese Ethics and World-View: The Javanese Idea of the Good Life, PT Gramedia Pustaka Utama, Jakarta, 1997, pp.1518, ISBN 979-605-406-X; 

Education in Indonesia is compulsory for twelve years. Parents can choose between state-run, non sectarian public schools supervised by the Department of National Education (Depdiknas) or private or semi-private religious (usually Islamic) schools supervised and financed by the Department of Religious Affairs. The enrolment rate is 94% for primary education (2011), 75% for secondary education, and 27% for tertiary education. The literacy rate is 93% (2011). 

==Culture==

Wayang Kulit (shadow puppet) in Wayang Purwa type, depicting five Pandava, from left to right: Bhima, Arjuna, Yudhishtira, Nakula, and Sahadeva, Indonesia Museum, Jakarta.
Indonesia has about 300 ethnic groups, each with cultural identities developed over centuries, and influenced by Indian, Arabic, Chinese, and European sources. Traditional Javanese and Balinese dances, for example, contain aspects of Hindu culture and mythology, as do wayang kulit (shadow puppet) performances. Textiles such as batik, ikat, ulos and songket are created across Indonesia in styles that vary by region. The most dominant influences on Indonesian architecture have traditionally been Indian; however, Chinese, Arab, and European architectural influences have been significant.

Sports in Indonesia are generally male-orientated and spectator sports are often associated with illegal gambling. The most popular sports are badminton and football. Indonesian players have won the Thomas Cup (the world team championship of men's badminton) thirteen of the twenty-six times that it has been held since 1949, as well as numerous Olympic medals since the sport gained full Olympic status in 1992. Its women have won the Uber Cup, the female equivalent of the Thomas Cup, twice, in 1994 and 1996. Liga Indonesia is the country's premier football club league. Traditional sports include sepak takraw, and bull racing in Madura. In areas with a history of tribal warfare, mock fighting contests are held, such as caci in Flores and pasola in Sumba. Pencak Silat is an Indonesian martial art.

A selection of Indonesian food, including ikan bakar (roasted fish), ayam goreng (fried chicken), nasi timbel (rice wrapped in banana leaf), sambal, fried tempeh and tofu, and sayur asem.

Indonesian cuisine varies by region and is based on Chinese, European, Middle Eastern, and Indian precedents. Rice is the main staple food and is served with side dishes of meat and vegetables. Spices (notably chili), coconut milk, fish and chicken are fundamental ingredients. Compared to the infused flavors of Vietnamese and Thai food, flavors in Indonesia are kept relatively separate, simple and substantial. Indonesian traditional music includes gamelan and keroncong. The Indonesian film industry's popularity peaked in the 1980s and dominated cinemas in Indonesia, although it declined significantly in the early 1990s. Between 2000 and 2005, the number of Indonesian films released each year has steadily increased. 

The oldest evidence of writing in Indonesia is a series of Sanskrit inscriptions dated to the 5th century. Important figures in modern Indonesian literature include: Dutch author Multatuli, who criticized treatment of the Indonesians under Dutch colonial rule; Sumatrans Muhammad Yamin and Hamka, who were influential pre-independence nationalist writers and politicians; Taylor (2003), pp. 299301 and proletarian writer Pramoedya Ananta Toer, Indonesia's most famous novelist. Vickers (2005) pp. 37 Friend (2003), pp. 74, 180 Many of Indonesia's peoples have strongly rooted oral traditions, which help to define and preserve their cultural identities. 

Media freedom in Indonesia increased considerably after the end of President Suharto's rule, during which the now-defunct Ministry of Information monitored and controlled domestic media, and restricted foreign media. The TV market includes ten national commercial networks, and provincial networks that compete with public TVRI. Private radio stations carry their own news bulletins and foreign broadcasters supply programs. At a reported 25 million users in 2008, Internet usage was estimated at 12.5% in September 2009. More than 30 million cell phones are sold in Indonesia each year, and 27% of them are local brands. 

==See also==

* List of Indonesia-related topics
* Outline of Indonesia
* Transport in Indonesia
* Tourism in Indonesia
* List of tallest buildings in Indonesia
* 
* 

==Notes==

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

; Government
* Government of Indonesia
* Minister of The State Secretary 
* Statistics Center
* Chief of State and Cabinet Members

; General information
* 
* Indonesia from UCB Libraries GovPubs
* 
* Indonesia profile from the BBC News
* Indonesia at Encyclopdia Britannica
* 
* Official Site of Indonesian Tourism
* Key Development Forecasts for Indonesia from International Futures

 



[[Indian Ocean]]

The Indian Ocean, not including the Antarctic region.

The Indian Ocean is the third largest of the world's oceanic divisions, covering approximately 20% of the water on the Earth's surface. It is bounded by Asiaincluding India, after which the ocean is named on the north, on the west by Africa, on the east by Australia, and on the south by the Southern Ocean (or, depending on definition, by Antarctica). 

As one component of the World Ocean, the Indian Ocean is delineated from the Atlantic Ocean by the 20 east meridian running south from Cape Agulhas, and from the Pacific Ocean by the meridian of 14655' east. Limits of Oceans and Seas. International Hydrographic Organization Special Publication No. 23, 1953. The northernmost extent of the Indian Ocean is approximately 30 north in the Persian Gulf. The ocean is nearly km (mi) wide at the southern tips of Africa and Australia, and its area is km (mi), Earth's Oceans. EnchantedLearning.com. Retrieved on 2013-07-16. including the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf.

The Indian Ocean's volume is estimated to be km (mi). Small islands dot the continental rims. Island nations within the ocean are Madagascar (the world's fourth largest island), Bahrain, Comoros, Maldives, Mauritius, Seychelles and Sri Lanka. The archipelago of Indonesia and the island nation of Timor-Leste border the ocean on the east.

==Geography==

Bathymetric map of the Indian Ocean
The African, Indian, and Antarctic crustal plates converge in the Indian Ocean at the Rodrigues Triple Point. Their junctures are marked by branches of the mid-oceanic ridge forming an inverted Y, with the stem running south from the edge of the continental shelf near Mumbai, India. The eastern, western, and southern basins thus formed are subdivided into smaller basins by ridges.

The ocean's continental shelves are narrow, averaging 200 kilometres (125 mi) in width. An exception is found off Australia's western coast, where the shelf width exceeds 1,000 kilometres (600 mi). The average depth of the ocean is . Its deepest point is Diamantina Deep in Diamantina Trench, at deep; also sometimes considered is Sunda Trench, at a depth of . Indian Ocean Geography, excerpted from: The World Factbook 1994, Central Intelligence Agency North of 50 south latitude, 86% of the main basin is covered by pelagic sediments, of which more than half is globigerina ooze. The remaining 14% is layered with terrigenous sediments. Glacial outwash dominates the extreme southern latitudes.

The major choke points include Bab el Mandeb, Strait of Hormuz, the Lombok Strait, the Strait of Malacca and the Palk Strait. Seas include the Gulf of Aden, Andaman Sea, Arabian Sea, Bay of Bengal, Great Australian Bight, Laccadive Sea, Gulf of Mannar, Mozambique Channel, Gulf of Oman, Persian Gulf, Red Sea and other tributary water bodies. The Indian Ocean is artificially connected to the Mediterranean Sea through the Suez Canal, which is accessible via the Red Sea.

===Climate===
The climate north of the equator is affected by a monsoon climate. Strong north-east winds blow from October until April; from May until October south and west winds prevail. In the Arabian Sea the violent Monsoon brings rain to the Indian subcontinent. In the southern hemisphere, the winds are generally milder, but summer storms near Mauritius can be severe. When the monsoon winds change, cyclones sometimes strike the shores of the Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal. The Indian Ocean is the warmest ocean in the world.

===Hydrology===
Among the few large rivers flowing into the Indian Ocean are the Zambezi, Shatt al-Arab, Indus, Narmada, Ganges, Brahmaputra, Jubba and Irrawaddy River. The ocean's currents are mainly controlled by the monsoon. Two large circular currents, one in the northern hemisphere flowing clockwise and one south of the equator moving anticlockwise, constitute the dominant flow pattern. During the winter monsoon, however, currents in the north are reversed.

Deep water circulation is controlled primarily by inflows from the Atlantic Ocean, the Red Sea, and Antarctic currents. North of 20 south latitude the minimum surface temperature is 22 C (72 F), exceeding 28 C (82 F) to the east. Southward of 40 south latitude, temperatures drop quickly.

Surface water salinity ranges from 32 to 37 parts per 1000, the highest occurring in the Arabian Sea and in a belt between southern Africa and south-western Australia. Pack ice and icebergs are found throughout the year south of about 65 south latitude. The average northern limit of icebergs is 45 south latitude.

===Subsurface features===
As the youngest of the major oceans Stow, D. A. V. (2006) Oceans : an illustrated reference Chicago : University of Chicago Press, ISBN 0-226-77664-6  page 127 for map of Indian Ocean and text it has active spreading ridges that are part of the worldwide system of mid-ocean ridges:-
*Carlsberg Ridge
*Southwest Indian Ridge
*Southeast Indian Ridge
*Central Indian Ridge

The Ninety East Ridge runs north-south at meridian 90E, dissecting the Indian Ocean into eastern and western halves.

The Chagos-Laccadive Ridge is another submerged mountain range runs approximately north-south between Lakshadweep, the Atolls of the Maldives and the Chagos Archipelago.

The Kerguelen Plateau is a small, submerged continent of volcanic origin in the southern Indian Ocean.

The Mascarene Plateau is 2000 km long undersea plateau that lies east of Madagascar.

==Trade==
A dhow off the coast of Kenya
The Indian Ocean provides major sea routes connecting the Middle East, Africa, and East Asia with Europe and the Americas. It carries a particularly heavy traffic of petroleum and petroleum products from the oil fields of the Persian Gulf and Indonesia. Large reserves of hydrocarbons are being tapped in the offshore areas of Saudi Arabia, Iran, India, and Western Australia. An estimated 40% of the world's offshore oil production comes from the Indian Ocean. The World Factbook. Cia.gov. Retrieved on 2013-07-16. Beach sands rich in heavy minerals, and offshore placer deposits are actively exploited by bordering countries, particularly India, Pakistan, South Africa, Indonesia, Sri Lanka, and Thailand.

==Marine life==
The warmth of the Indian Ocean keeps phytoplankton production low, except along the northern fringe and in a few scattered spots elsewhere; life in the ocean is thus limited. Fishing is confined to subsistence levels, because its fish are of great and growing importance to the bordering countries for domestic consumption and export. Fishing fleets from Russia, Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan also exploit the Indian Ocean, mainly for shrimp and tuna.

Endangered marine species include the dugong, seals, turtles, and whales.

Plastic pollution threatens the eastern coast of Mozambique Channel.

==History==
The economically important Silk Road (red) and spice trade routes (blue) were blocked by the Ottoman Empire in ca. 1453 with the fall of the Byzantine Empire. This spurred exploration, and a new sea route around Africa was found, triggering the Age of Discovery.
The world's earliest civilizations in Mesopotamia (beginning with Sumer), ancient Egypt, and the Indian subcontinent (beginning with the Indus Valley civilization), which began along the valleys of the Tigris-Euphrates, Nile and Indus rivers respectively, all developed around the Indian Ocean. Civilizations soon arose in Persia (beginning with Elam) and later in Southeast Asia (beginning with Funan).

During Egypt's first dynasty (c. 3000 BC), sailors were sent out onto its waters, journeying to Punt, thought to be part of present-day Somalia. Returning ships brought gold and myrrh. The earliest known maritime trade between Mesopotamia and the Indus Valley (c. 2500 BC) was conducted along the Indian Ocean. Phoenicians of the late 3rd millennium BC may have entered the area, but no settlements resulted.

The Indian Ocean's relatively calmer waters opened the areas bordering it to trade earlier than the Atlantic or Pacific oceans. The powerful monsoons also meant ships could easily sail west early in the season, then wait a few months and return eastwards. This allowed Indonesian peoples to cross the Indian Ocean to settle in Madagascar.

In the 2nd or 1st century BC, Eudoxus of Cyzicus was the first Greek to cross the Indian Ocean. Hippalus is said to have discovered the direct route from Arabia to India around this time. During the 1st and 2nd centuries AD intensive trade relations developed between Roman Egypt and the Tamil kingdoms of the Cheras, Cholas and Pandyas in Southern India. Like the Indonesian peoples above, the western sailors used the monsoon to cross the ocean. The unknown author of the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea describes this route, as well as the commodities that were traded along various commercial ports on the coasts of the Horn of Africa and India circa 1 CE. Among these trading settlements were Mosylon and Opone on the Red Sea littoral.

From 1405 to 1433, Admiral Zheng He led large fleets of the Ming Dynasty on several treasure voyages through the Indian Ocean, ultimately reaching the coastal countries of East Africa. 

British heavy cruisers Dorsetshire and Cornwall under Japanese air attack and heavily damaged on April 5, 1942
In 1497, Portuguese navigator Vasco da Gama rounded the Cape of Good Hope and became the first European to sail to India and later the Far East. The European ships, armed with heavy cannon, quickly dominated trade. Portugal attempted to achieve pre-eminence by setting up forts at the important straits and ports. They dominated trade and discovery along the coasts of Africa, and Asia until the mid 17th century. Later the Portuguese were challenged by other European powers. The Dutch East India Company (16021798) sought control of trade with the East across the Indian Ocean. France and Britain established trade companies for the area. Spain established a major trading operation in the Philippines and the Pacific. By 1815, Britain became the principal power in the Indian Ocean.

The opening of the Suez Canal in 1869 revived European interest in the East, but no nation was successful in establishing trade dominance. Since World War II the United Kingdom was forced to withdraw from the area, to be replaced by India, the USSR, and the United States. The last two tried to establish hegemony by negotiating for naval base sites. Developing countries bordering the ocean, however, seek to have it made a "zone of peace" so that they may use its shipping lanes freely. The United Kingdom and United States maintain a military base on Diego Garcia atoll in the middle of the Indian Ocean.

On 26 December 2004, the countries surrounding the Indian Ocean were hit by a tsunami caused by the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake. The waves resulted in more than 226,000 deaths and over 1 million people were left homeless.

In the late 2000s, the ocean evolved into a hub of pirate activity. By 2013, attacks off the Horn region's coast had steadily declined due to active private security and international navy patrols. 

On Saturday the 8th March 2014 between the hours of 8am and 9am local time a Boeing 777 belonging to Malaysian Airlines, Flight MH370, allegedly crashed into the far south eastern Indian Ocean approximately 1,550 km (960 miles) west-south west of Perth, Western Australia after tracking southwards for the previous 6 hours. As at 7.35pm Australian WST Friday the 4th of April 2014 no tangible piece of evidence or debris has confirmed the location of the alleged downed plane. The disappearance of this aircraft is, in the early stages, the most mysterious in modern aviation, i.e. the last 45 years.

==Culture and literature==
The Indian Ocean is known as Ratnakara in the ancient Sanskrit literature. Ratnakara means "the mine of gems". It is also called Hind Mahasagar in Hindi and other Indian languages.
:See Culture of the Indian Ocean Islands and Indian Ocean literature.

==Bordering countries and territories==
Heading roughly clockwise, the states and territories (in italics) with a coastline on the Indian Ocean (including the Red Sea and Persian Gulf) are:

===Africa===
, , , , (Runion, Mayotte), , , , , , , , , , 

===Asia===
 (Sinai Peninsula), , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 

===Australasia===
 Ashmore and Cartier Islands, , , 

===Southern Indian Ocean===
 Heard Island and McDonald Islands, 

==Major ports and harbours==

The Port of Singapore is the busiest port in the Indian Ocean, located in the Strait of Malacca where it meets the Pacific. Mumbai Port is the chief trading port in India on the coast of the Indian Ocean, often known as "The Gateway of India". A new port has been developed near Mumbai known as the Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust (JNPT) or more popularly known as Nhava Sheva to reduce the burden on Mumbai. It is amongst world's top 10 fastest growing ports. Mormugao Port and Panambur (New Mangalore Port) handle most of the Iron Ore export from India especially to Japan. Kochi is another major Indian port on the Arabian Sea. It is a deep natural harbour and is known as "The Queen of the Arabian Sea". Other major South Asian ports include Chittagong in Bangladesh, Colombo, Hambantota and Galle in Sri Lanka, Kolkata, Port Blair, Visakhapatnam, Paradip Port, Chennai, Ennore, Tuticorin, and Nagapattinam in India, and Karachi in Pakistan. Aden is a major port in Yemen and controls ships entering the Red Sea. Major African ports on the shores of the Indian Ocean include: Mombasa (Kenya), Dar es Salaam, Zanzibar (Tanzania), Durban, East London, Richard's Bay (South Africa), Beira (Mozambique), and Port Louis (Mauritius). Zanzibar is especially famous for its spice export. Other major ports in the Indian Ocean include Muscat (Oman), Yangon (Burma), Jakarta, Medan (Indonesia), Fremantle (port servicing Perth, Australia) and Dubai (UAE).

==Marginal seas==
Marginal seas, gulfs, bays and straits of the Indian Ocean include:
# Arabian Sea
# Persian Gulf
# Red Sea
# Gulf of Oman
# Gulf of Aden
# Strait of Bab-el-Mandeb connecting Arabian Sea
# Gulf of Kutch
# Gulf of Khambat
# Palk Strait connecting Arabian Sea and Bay of Bengal
# Bay of Bengal
# Andaman Sea
# Malacca Strait
# Mozambique Channel
# Great Australian Bight
# Gulf of Mannar
# Laccadive Sea

==See also==

*List of islands in the Indian Ocean
*List of island countries and territories in the Indian Ocean
*Piracy in Somalia

Oceans:
*Arctic Ocean
*Atlantic Ocean
*Pacific Ocean
*Southern Ocean
*Seven Seas

==References==

==External links==

*NOAA In-situ Ocean Data Viewer Plot and download ocean observations
*The Indian Ocean in World History: Educational Website Interactive resource from the Sultan Qaboos Cultural Center
*The Regional Tuna Tagging Project-Indian Ocean with details of the importance of Tuna in the Indian Ocean
*Detailed maps of the Indian Ocean
*The Indian Ocean Trade: A Classroom Simulation
*CIA  The World Factbook, Oceans: Indian Ocean

 



[[Ich bin ein Berliner]]

"Ich bin ein Berliner" (, "I am a Berliner") is a quotation from a June 26, 1963, speech by U.S. President John F. Kennedy in West Berlin. He was underlining the support of the United States for West Germany 22 months after Soviet-supported East Germany erected the Berlin Wall to prevent mass emigration to the West. The message was aimed as much at the Soviets as it was at Berliners and was a clear statement of U.S. policy in the wake of the construction of the Berlin Wall. Another notable (and defiant) phrase in the speech was also spoken in German, "Lass' sie nach Berlin kommen" ("Let them come to Berlin"), addressed at those who claimed "we can work with the Communists", a remark which Nikita Khrushchev scoffed at only days later.

The speech is considered one of Kennedy's best, both a notable moment of the Cold War and a high point of the New Frontier. It was a great morale boost for West Berliners, who lived in an exclave deep inside East Germany and feared a possible East German occupation. Speaking from a platform erected on the steps of Rathaus Schneberg for an audience of 450,000, Kennedy said,

Kennedy used the phrase twice in his speech, including at the end, pronouncing the sentence with his Boston accent and reading from his note "ish bin ein Bearleener", which he had written out using English spelling habits to indicate an approximation of the German pronunciation.

==Background==

The four sectors of Berlin
Germany's capital, Berlin, was deep within the area controlled after World War II by the Soviet Union. Initially governed in four sectors controlled by the four Allied powers (United States, United Kingdom, France and the Soviet Union), tensions of the Cold War escalated until the Soviet forces implemented the Berlin Blockade, which the Western allies relieved with the dramatic airlift. Afterward, the sectors controlled by the NATO Allies became an effective exclave of West Germany, completely surrounded by East Germany. From 1952, the border between East and West was closed everywhere but in Berlin. Hundreds of thousands of East Germans defected to the West via West Berlin, a labour drain that threatened East Germany with economic collapse.

In 1961, the East German government under Walter Ulbricht erected a barbed-wire barrier around West Berlin, officially called the antifaschistischer Schutzwall (anti-fascist protective barrier). The East German authorities argued that it was meant to prevent spies and agents of West Germany from crossing into the East. However, it was universally known as the Berlin Wall and its real purpose was to keep East German citizens from escaping to the West. Over a period of months the wall was rebuilt using concrete, and buildings were demolished to create a "death zone" in view of East German guards armed with machine guns.

The West, including the U.S., was accused of failing to respond forcefully to the erection of the Wall. Officially, Berlin was under joint occupation by the four allied powers, each with primary responsibility for a certain zone. Kennedy's speech marked the first instance where the U.S. acknowledged that East Berlin was part of the Soviet bloc along with the rest of East Germany. On July 25, 1961, Kennedy insisted in a presidential address that the U.S. would defend West Berlin, asserting its Four-Power rights, while making it clear that challenging the Soviet presence in Germany was not possible.

==Genesis and execution of the speech==

===Origins===
thumb
The Ich bin ein Berliner speech is in part derived from a speech Kennedy gave at a Civic Reception on May 4, 1962, in New Orleans; there also he used the phrase civis Romanus sum by saying "Two thousand years ago the proudest boast was to say, "I am a citizen of Rome." Today, I believe, in 1962 the proudest boast is to say, "I am a citizen of the United States." And it is not enough to merely say it; we must live it. Anyone can say it. But Americans who serve today in West Berlinyour sons and brothers -- are the Americans who are bearing the great burden." The phrases "I am a Berliner" and "I am proud to be in Berlin" were typed already a week before the speech on a list of expressions to be used, including a phonetic transcription of the German translation. Such transcriptions are also found in the third draft of the speech (in Kennedy's own handwriting), from June 25. The final typed version of the speech does not contain the transcriptions, which are added by hand by Kennedy himself. 

In practice sessions before the trip, Kennedy had run through a number of sentences, even paragraphs, to recite in German; in these sessions, he was helped by Margaret Plischke, a translator working for the US State Department; by Ted Sorensen, Kennedy's counsel and habitual speechwriter; and by an interpreter, Robert Lochner, who had grown up in Berlin. It became clear quickly that the president did not have a gift for languages and was more likely to embarrass himself if he was to cite in German for any length. 

But there are differing accounts on the origin of the phrase Ich bin ein Berliner. Plischke wrote a 1997 account Her letter to American Heritage is printed anonymously; however, in the first-person story the writer refers to herself as "Mrs. Plischke from the Foreign Service Institute." Additionally, she is named as Margarethe Plischke in Kennedy and the Berlin Wall by W. R. Smyser, p. 217. Retrieved 2011-05-23. of visiting Kennedy at the White House weeks before the trip to help compose the speech and teach him the proper pronunciation; she also claims that the phrase had been translated stateside already by the translator scheduled to accompany him on the trip ("a rather unpleasant man who complained bitterly that he had had to interrupt his vacation just to watch the Presidents mannerisms"). Additionally, Ted Sorensen claimed in his memoir Counselor: A Life at the Edge of History (2008) to have had a hand in the speech, and said he had incorrectly inserted the word ein, incorrectly taking responsibility for the "jelly doughnut misconception", below, a claim apparently supported by Berlin mayor Willy Brandt but dismissed by later scholars since the final typed version, which does not contain the words, is the last one Sorensen could have worked on. Robert Lochner claimed in his memoirs that Kennedy had asked him for a translation of "I am a Berliner", and that they practiced the phrase in Brandt's office. Daum credited the origin of the phrase Ich bin ein Berliner to Kennedy and his 1962 speech in New Orleans quoted above. According to Daum, Kennedy was affected by seeing the Berlin Wall, so that he "falls back on the most memorable passage of his New Orleans speech given the year before, changing pride in being an American in being a Berliner." 

===Execution===
Kennedy delivering his speech in Berlin
Behind the long table set up on the steps of the Rathaus Schneberg were US and German dignitaries, including Dean Rusk (Kennedy's Secretary of State), Lucius D. Clay (the US administrator of Germany), Konrad Adenauer (the German chancellor), Willy Brandt, and Otto Bach (President of the Abgeordnetenhaus of Berlin). The crowd was estimated at 450,000 people. This is the estimate given in Daum, Kennedy in Berlin 137. A BBC article has a much lower number, 120,000. Bach spoke first, of the recent developments in Berlin, especially the wall. He was followed by Konrad Adenauer, who spoke briefly and introduced the president.

Kennedy was accompanied not by Robert Lochner, but by Heinz Weber of the Berlin mission; Weber translated the president's speech to the audience. Besides the typescript, Kennedy had a cue card on which he himself had written the phonetic spelling, and he surprised everyone by completely disregarding the speech, which had taken weeks to prepare. Instead, he improvised: "He says more than he should, something different from what his advisers had recommended, and is more provocative than he had intended to be." 

The speech first culminated with the first of two mentions of the Ich bin ein Berliner phrase: "Today, in the world of freedom, the proudest boast is Ich bin ein Berliner!" The crowd was quiet while Weber translated and repeated the president's German line; Kennedy was obviously relieved at the crowd's positive response and thanked Weber for his translation. Weber translated this compliment also. According to Daum, after this first successful delivery, "Kennedy, who fiddles a bit with his suit jacket, is grinning like a boy who has just pulled off a coup." 

Kennedy's National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy thought the speech had gone "a little too far", and the two revised the text for a softer stance before repeating the speech at the Freie Universitt Berlin later that day. 

==Consequences and legacy==
Plaque commemorating Kennedy's speech next to the front entrance of Rathaus Schneberg
While the immediate response from the West German population was positive, the Soviet authorities were less pleased with the combative Lass sie nach Berlin kommen. Only two weeks before Kennedy had spoken in more conciliatory tones, speaking of "improving relations with the Soviet Union": in response to Kennedy's Berlin speech, Nikita Khrushchev, days later, remarked that "one would think that the speeches were made by two different Presidents." 

Ronald Reagan would evoke both the sentiment and the legacy of Kennedy's speech 24 years later in his similarly famous "Tear down this wall!" speech.

There are commemorative sites to Kennedy in Berlin, such as the German-American John F. Kennedy School and the John F. Kennedy-Institute for North American Studies of the FU Berlin. The public square in front of the Rathaus Schneberg was renamed John-F.-Kennedy-Platz. A large plaque dedicated to Kennedy is mounted on a column at the entrance of the building and the room above the entrance and overlooking the square is dedicated to Kennedy and his visit.

The original manuscript of the speech is stored with the National Archives and Records Administration.

==Jelly doughnut misconception==
A Berliner and a half

There is a misconception that Kennedy made a risible error by saying Ich bin ein Berliner (emphasis added): the claim is made that Kennedy referred to himself not as a "citizen of Berlin" but as a "jelly doughnut", known in Berlin as a "Pfannkuchen" ("pancake") but as "Berliner" in the north and west and as "Krapfen" in the south of Germany and in Austria. Kennedy should, supposedly, have said Ich bin Berliner to mean "I am a person from Berlin", and so adding the indefinite article ein to his statement implied he was a non-human Berliner, thus, "I am a jelly doughnut". However, while the indefinite article ein is omitted when speaking of an individual's profession or residence, it is still necessary when speaking in a figurative sense as Kennedy did. Since the President was not literally from Berlin but only declaring his solidarity with its citizens, "Ich bin ein Berliner" was not only correct, but the only way to express what the President wanted to say. , cited in 

An early reference to this misconception appears in Len Deighton's spy novel Berlin Game, published in 1983, which contains the following passage, spoken by Bernard Samson:

In Deighton's novel, Samson is an unreliable narrator and his words cannot necessarily be taken at face value. However The New York Times review of Deighton's novel appeared to treat Samson's remark as factual, and added the detail that Kennedy's audience found his remark funny:

Four years later it found its way into a New York Times op-ed:
 

The doughnut misconception has since been repeated by media such as the BBC (by Alistair Cooke in his Letter from America program), The Guardian, MSNBC, Onegoodmove.org "Bloopers" CNN, CNN - Cold War Time magazine, and The New York Times; mentioned in several books about Germany written by English-speaking authors, including Norman Davies Norman Davies, Europe: A History, New York 1998, p. 1113 and Kenneth C. Davis; and used in the manual for the Speech Synthesis Markup Language. It is also mentioned in Robert Dallek's biography of Kennedy, .
 Dallek, Robert, An Unfinished Life: John F. Kennedy, 19171963, 2003, p. 625: "In the midst of so tumultuous a reception, no one was ready to complain that Kennedy should have said, Ich bin Berliner instead of ein Berliner, which was colloquial German for a jelly doughnut. 

==Cultural references==
The phrase and the legend are quoted very often in fiction and popular culture in the United States. Besides a direct quote there exist many variations starting "Ich bin ein (+ noun, e.g., Frankfurter, Hamburger)" that is supposed to be understood by the primarily English-speaking audience based on the widespread knowledge of this German phrase and its myth. This phrasal template has arisen in a variety of rhetorical contexts in popular culture.

== See also ==
*Tear down this wall!, Ronald Reagan's 1987 Berlin speech, which would revisit some of those of Kennedys.

==References==

==Further reading==
*
*

==External links==

*Text, audio, video of address
*About.com article
*JFK Letter On Success of Trip to Europe 1963 Shapell Manuscript Foundation
*Text: Kennedy's Berlin speech text



[[Iqaluit]]

Iqaluit (; ) is the largest city and territorial capital of the Canadian territory of Nunavut. Until 1987, it was called Frobisher Bay, a name that is still used for the bay. Iqaluit is located on the south coast of Baffin Island at the head of Frobisher Bay. As of the 2011 census the population was 6,699, an increase of 8.3 percent from the 2006 census; it has the lowest population of any capital city in Canada. Inhabitants of Iqaluit are called Iqalummiut (singular: Iqalummiuq).

== History ==
The Royal Canadian Mounted Police on parade in Iqaluit, Canada Day 1999.
Iqaluit was founded in 1942 as an American air base, intended to provide a stop-over and refueling site for short range aircraft being ferried across the Atlantic to support the war effort in Europe. Iqaluit's first permanent inhabitant was Nakasuk, an Inuk guide who helped American Air Force planners to choose a site with a large flat area suitable for a landing strip. The wartime airstrip was known as Crystal Two and was part of the Crimson Route. Long regarded as a campsite and fishing spot by the Inuit, the place chosen had traditionally been named Iqaluit &ndash; "place of many fish" in Inuktitut &ndash; but Canadian and American authorities named it Frobisher Bay, after the name of the body of water it abuts. For the history of the air base, see Frobisher Bay Air Base.

The Hudson's Bay Company moved its south Baffin operations to the neighbouring valley of Niaqunngut, officially called Apex, in 1949 to take advantage of the airfield. The population of Frobisher Bay increased rapidly during the construction of the Distant Early Warning Line (DEW line, a system of radar stations, see North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD)) in the mid-1950s. Hundreds of construction workers, military personnel, and administrative staff moved into the community, and several hundred Inuit followed to take advantage of the access to medical care and jobs the base provided. In 1957, 489 of the town's 1,200 residents were reported to be Inuit. After 1959, the Canadian government established permanent services at Frobisher Bay, including full-time doctors, a school and social services. The Inuit population grew rapidly in response, as the government encouraged Inuit to settle permanently in communities with government services.

Naval Radio Station (NRS) Frobisher Bay, callsign CFI, was established in July 1954 as a result of the closure of NRS Chimo, Quebec. Station CFI was part of the Supplementary Radio network.

In its simplest form, a SUPRAD station operated in the following manner. When a prospective target made an emission which was heard by the Control Center, Control "flashed" the details of the emission (frequency and call sign) to the SUPRAD stations of the network. The stations tuned the signal, took bearings then reported the bearing to Control. At Control, the bearings were collated by computer and a fix area established.

Because of its remoteness and size, it was very expensive to operate. Advancing technology eventually forced the closure of CFI in 1967. 

The American military left Iqaluit in 1963, as intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBM) diminished the strategic value of the DEW line and Arctic airbases, but Frobisher Bay remained the government's administrative and logistical centre for much of the eastern Arctic. In 1964, the first elections were held for a community council, and in 1979 for the first mayor. The founding of the Gordon Robertson Educational Centre, now Inuksuk High School, in the early 1970s at Iqaluit confirmed the government's commitment to the community as an administrative centre. At the time of its founding, it was the sole high school operating in more than one-seventh of Canadian territory.

On 1 January 1987, the name of this municipality was officially changed from "Frobisher Bay" to "Iqaluit" - aligning official usage with the name that the Inuit population had always used (although, many documents still referred to Iqaluit as Frobisher Bay for several years after 1987). In December 1995, Iqaluit was selected to serve as Nunavut's future capital in a territory-wide referendum, in which it was chosen over Rankin Inlet. On 19 April 2001, it was officially redesignated as a city.

Iqaluit was designated by Canada as the host city for the 2010 meeting of the G7 finance ministers, held on 56 February. The meeting strained the northern communications technology infrastructure. 

=== Timeline ===

Legislative Assembly of Nunavut building in Iqaluit
* 1576 - Englishman Martin Frobisher sails into Frobisher Bay believing he has found the route to China. First Anglican/Episcopalian church service in North America.
* 1861 - Charles Francis Hall, an American, camps at the Sylvia Grinnell River and explores the waters of Koojesse Inlet, which he names after his Inuit guide
* 1942 - U.S. Army Air Forces selects Iqaluits current location as the site of a major air base
* 1949 - The HBC moves its trading post from Ward Inlet to Apex
* 1955 - Frobisher Bay becomes the centre for U.S. Canada DEW Line construction operations
* 1958 - Telephone exchange service established by Bell Canada
* 1963 - US military move out of Iqaluit
* 1964 - First community council formed; population of Frobisher Bay is 900
* 1970 - Frobisher Bay officially recognized as a Settlement
* 1974 - Settlement of Frobisher Bay gains village status
* 1976 - Inuit present the Nunavut proposal to the Federal government
* 1979 - First mayor elected
* 1980 - Frobisher Bay designated as a town
* 1982 - Government of Canada agrees in principle to the creation of Nunavut
* 1987 - Frobisher Bay officially becomes Iqaluit, reverting to its original Inuktitut name meaning "place of (many) fish"
* 1993 - The Nunavut Land Claims Agreement is signed in Iqaluit
* 1995 - Nunavut residents select Iqaluit as capital of the new territory 
* 1 April 1999 - The Territory of Nunavut officially comes into being
* 19 April 2001 - Iqaluit receives its order of official status as a city
* 2002 - Iqaluit, along with Nuuk, Greenland, co-host the first jointly hosted Arctic Winter Games; the Arctic Winter Games Arena was constructed in Iqaluit for the event.
* 5 February 2010 - Iqaluit hosted the finance meeting as part of the 2010 G7 summit. 

== Geography ==
Iqaluit is located in the Everett Mountains rising from Koojesse (Kuujussi) Inlet, an inlet of Frobisher Bay, on the southeast part of Baffin Island. It is well to the east of Nunavut's mainland, and northeast of Hudson Bay.

=== Suburbs ===
View of Iqaluit from Joamie Hill.
Apex is a small community about 5 km southeast () from Iqaluit's centre and is known in Inuktitut as Niaqunngut. It is located on a small peninsula separating Koojesse Inlet from Tarr Inlet. There is a women's shelter, a church, a store, a primary school, a design shop and a bed-and-breakfast.

Historically Apex was the place where most Inuit lived when Iqaluit was a military site, and as such it was off-limits to anyone not working at the base.

=== Climate ===
Iqaluit has a typically Arctic climate (Kppen: ET), although it is well outside the Arctic Circle. The city has cold winters and short summers that are too cool to permit the growth of trees. Although it is north of the tree line there are still shrubs that are classed, locally, as trees. These include the Arctic Willow (Salix arctica) which is hard to recognize as a tree because of its low height. The permafrost does not allow the taproot to get deeper than 6 in so this does not allow vertical growth. The Arctic Willow may be up to around horizontally, but only 6 in tall. Average monthly temperatures are below freezing for eight months of the year. Iqaluit averages just over 400 mm of precipitation annually, much wetter than many other localities in the Canadian Arctic Archipelago, with the summer being the wettest season.

=== Snowstorms and blizzards ===
The city of Iqaluit experiences some destructive winter storms during the winter season. A notable blizzard indirectly hit Iqaluit in early February 2007, with wind gusts up to 130 km/h.

== Demographics ==
Canada Day celebrations in Iqaluit, 1999

The 2011 Census reported that there were 6,699 people living in Iqaluit, an 8.3% increase from 2006. NHS Profile, Iqaluit, CY, Nunavut, 2011. Retrieved December 6, 2013 The land area size of the city is 52.50 km2, therefore a population density of 127.6 people per km2. Iqaluit has a total of 2,930 private dwellings, 2,367 of which are occupied by usual residents (80.8% occupancy rate). The median value of these dwellings is $376,639, quite a bit higher than the national median at $280,552. The average household has about 2.8 people living in it, and the average family has 1.4 children living at home with them. The median (after-tax) household income in Iqaluit is quite high, $98,921, almost double the national rate at $54,089. The median income for an individual in the city, is also high, $60,688. 5.9% of people (over 15 years old) are either divorced or separated, which is quite a bit lower than the national rate at 8.6%. Also, 53.3% of the population is either married or living with a common law partner. 

Iqaluit has quite a young population, the median age of the population is more than 10 years younger than the national rate, 30.1 years old compared to 40.6 years old.

Iqaluit has the highest number of Inuit people in both numbers (3,900) and percentages (59.1%), of all Canadian cities with populations greater than 5,000. The racial make up is:

There is no "majority mother tongue" in Iqaluit, as 45.4% reported their mother tongue as being English, and 45.4% also reported their mother tongue as Inuktitut. However 97.2% of Iqalummiuts can speak English, whereas only 53.1% can speak Inuktitut. French was the mother tongue of 4.8% of the population, which is the same figure of the population who can speak the language. As of 2012, "Pirurvik, Iqaluits Inuktitut language training centre, has a new goal: to train instructors from Nunavut communities to teach Inuktitut in different ways and in their own dialects when they return home." 

74.9% of the population practice some form of Christianity (Anglican is the most popular at 42.6%), and 22.9% of the population identify has having no religious affiliation. There are other religions practiced in the city, just not in large numbers.

For those over the age of 25:
* 75.7% are high school educated (15.9% as their highest level of education)
* 59.8% are post-secondary school educated
* 24.3% have no certificate, diploma or degree

=== Notable Iqalummiut ===

* Eva Aariak, politician, former MLA and second Premier of Nunavut
* Paul-Andr Brasseur, child actor
* Ann Meekitjuk Hanson, former Commissioner of Nunavut
* Kenn Harper, grocer, amateur historian, and entrepreneur
* Lucie Idlout, rock singer, songwriter
* Matty McNair, US born explorer
* Simonie Michael, first Inuk to be elected to what is now the Legislative Assembly of the Northwest Territories in 1966 The road to Nunavut: the progress of the eastern Arctic Inuit since the Second World War by Ronald Quinn Duffy 
* Nakasuk, founder of Iqaluit
* Paul Okalik, lawyer, politician, member of the Legislative Assembly of Nunavut, first Premier of Nunavut and former Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of Nunavut. Unsuccessful federal Liberal candidate for Nunavut

* Abe Okpik, politician, worked on Project Surname to obtain family names for Inuit rather than disc numbers and first Inuk to sit (appointed) on what is now the NWT Legislative Assembly 
* Dennis Patterson, politician, former MLA and Premier of the NWT (prior to division), current Canadian Senator for Nunavut
* Aqpik Peter, Nunavut speed skater, role model/poster boy for 2010 Winter Olympics 
* Ed Picco, politician, former MLA in NWT and Nunavut
* Annabella Piugattuk, actress
* Elisapee Sheutiapik, ex-politician & mayor
* Hunter Tootoo, politician, and former speaker of the Nunavut Legislative Assembly 
* Sheila Watt-Cloutier, politician, environmental activist, Nobel nominee

== Transportation ==

Iqaluit Airport
Iqaluit has the distinction of being the smallest Canadian capital in terms of population and the only capital that is not connected to other settlements by a highway. Located on an island remote from the Canadian highway system, Iqaluit is generally only accessible by aircraft and, subject to ice conditions, by boat. Iqaluit Airport is a fully modern facility whose originally Second World War era runway is more than long enough for most classes of modern jet. Plans are underway to build a new, larger passenger terminal building north of the current terminal, which would also include a larger apron adjacent to the new terminal. A persistent rumour that Iqaluit was an emergency landing site for the Space Shuttle is false. Iqaluit shared its runway with the Royal Canadian Air Force until the Canadian Forces stopped using Iqaluit as a Forward Operating Location (FOL). The barracks and F-18 hangars are maintained. Iqaluit Airport was a centre for cold-weather testing of new aircraft, such as the Airbus A380 in February 2006. Both Canadian North and First Air serve Iqaluit from Ottawa and Yellowknife as well as multiple communities in Nunavut. Air Canada Jazz also provided daily service to Iqaluit from Ottawa between March 28, 2010 and July 31, 2011. CBC reports the Air Canada service was cancelled due to rising fuel costs, among other issues, which prevented the route from being profitable. Locally based airlines include Air Nunavut, Canadian Helicopters, Nunasi Helicopters and Unaalik Aviation. All provide air charters and Air Nunavut and Kivalliq Air provide MEDIVAC/air ambulance service.

Iqaluit stop sign

In the middle of summer, a few ships &mdash; generally no larger than a Liberty class vessel &mdash; transport bulk and heavy goods to the city. Cargo is off-loaded onto barges as the harbour is not deep enough. The city is currently planning a deepwater port. Strategic Plan for the Iqaluit Deepwater Port Project, retrieved from the City of Iqaluit web site, October 2008 Experienced locals also cross the Hudson Strait from the Canadian mainland when it freezes over, either on foot or by dog sled or snowmobile, a distance of over 100 km.

Iqaluit has a local road system only stretching from the nearby community of Apex to the Sylvia Grinnell Territorial Park Reserve, 1 km west of town. Iqaluit currently has no public transportation, although there is city-wide taxi service. (There was bus service in the city before, but the service was cancelled due to low ridership.) Motor cars are increasing in number, to the extent of causing occasional traffic jams known locally as "the rush minute." However, the cost of shipping automobiles and the wear-and-tear of the harsh Arctic climate combined with its notoriously rough roadways mean that snowmobiles remain the preferred form of personal transportation. All-terrain vehicles are also increasingly common in most of the Canadian Arctic. Snowmobiles are used to travel both within the city and in the surrounding area. In winter, dog sleds are still used, but primarily for recreation. In winter, the nearby Qaummaarviit Territorial Historic Park and the more remote Katannilik Territorial Park Reserve are only accessible by snowmobile, dog sled or foot. In the summer, both are accessible by boat.

Both residents and businesses identify their locations mostly by building number, and occasionally by the name of a prominent structure. Residents know where in the city certain series of building numbers are located; numbers tend to be aggregated in blocks, so someone might say that they live in the 2600s. Around 2003, street names were developed, although there were delays in finalizing them and posting the signs. Street numbers have not been assigned, and building numbers continue to be used. Iqaluit is the only Canadian capital city not to have traffic signals. 

===Roads===

Most major roads in Iqaluit are paved with asphalt, but local and smaller roads are gravel. Roads do not have traffic signals, but use stop signs to control intersections.

==Education==

There are 7 schools located in Iqaluit, 6 public (Qikiqtani School Operations) and 1 French (Commission scolaire francophone du Nunavut).

At the post-secondary level there are 2, Nunavut Arctic College (Nunatta Campus) and Akitsiraq Law School.

==Infrastructure==

===Waste and water treatment===
The city's infrastructure is stressed by growth and lack of means to upgrade. Waste from the city is disposed off into an open air dump on Akilliq Drive (West 40) located south of the city. 

While the city has water treatment facilities, raw sewage from the city is often dumped untreated into nearby Frobisher Bay. 

As the dump has reached capacity, the city is planning to open a second dump 9 km north of the city. Iqaluit does not have a recycling program in place with all recyclable materials sent into the waste stream.

===Emergency services===
Emergency services (fire and ambulance) are provided by city from a single station on Niaqunngusiariaq. 

The emergency services fleet consists of:
* Engine 1  Spartan Diamond/Smeal pumper
* Ladder 1  Spartan Metro Star/Smeal 75' aerial
* Command 1 - Ford SUV
* Command 2  Ford F250 44 pickup
* Medic 1 and 2  Ford F450 Type II ambulances

Iqaluit Airport Emergency Services is responsible for fire services at the airport. Following a fire at the airport in 1998, the Government of Nunavut re-opened the fire station at the airport. Their fleet consists of:

* Waltek C-5500 ARFF
* Oshkosh T3000 ARFF

Policing in Iqaluit, as with the rest of Nunavut is contracted to the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) V Division. About the RCMP in Nunavut 

== Architecture and attractions ==
Much of Iqaluit's architecture is functional &mdash; designed to minimize material costs, while retaining heat and withstanding the climate. Early architecture runs from the 1950s military barracks of the original DEW line installation, through the 1970s white hyper-modernist fibreglass block of the Nakasuk School and Municipal Offices and Arena, to the lines of the steel-reinforced concrete high-rise complex on the hill above it. A number of older Hudson's Bay Company and early 1950s buildings have been retained and restored in Apex (the former nursing station has been revived as the Rannva Bed and Breakfast, the HBC buildings as an art gallery). The newer buildings are more colourful and diverse, and closer to the norms of southern architecture.

The principal exception is the Nunavut Legislative Assembly Building, which is remarkable for its colourful interior, adorned with some of the very best in Inuit art. A new legislative building is in planning to be developed and built outside the city on the Apex Road.

St. Jude's Anglican Cathedral
Another distinctive building was St. Jude's Anglican Cathedral, see of the Anglican Diocese of The Arctic, which was a white building shaped like an igloo. Originally built by the parishioners, under the guidance of Markoosie Peter, a traditional master carpenter, the altar was shaped like a traditional Inuit sled, and the cross composed of two crossed narwhal tusks. An incident of arson severely affected the Cathedral structure and interior on 5 November 2005, and it was finally demolished on 1 June 2006. The cathedral is slowly being rebuilt (foundation 2008 super structure 2010) and fund-raising continues locally and internationally. As of December 2010, the exterior of a similarly shaped replacement cathedral had been completed, and interior work was planned for 2011 with a potential opening for Christmas 2011. On a ridge overlooking the city is the distinctive blue and white Inuksuk High School. The school is made up of four square sections joined together that give a clover leaf shape when viewed from the air.

The city is also the location of the Nunatta Sunakkutaangit Museum, which houses a large collection of Inuit and Arctic objects. The museum is housed in a restored and extended Hudson's Bay Company building, clad in the HBC signature red and white, transported to Iqaluit from its original site on the Apex Beach.

Just west of Iqaluit is the Sylvia Grinnell Territorial Park Reserve. This park is dominated by the valley of the Sylvia Grinnell River. A small visitor's centre with viewing platform is located on top of a hill overlooking scenic waterfalls, tidal flats and traditional fishing sites.

Nearby on an island near Peterhead Inlet, is the Qaummaarviit Territorial Historic Park. It is a site with a long Inuit history and numerous artifacts have been recovered, including the remains of 11 semi-buried sod houses.

A little farther, across Frobisher Bay, are the Katannilik Territorial Park Reserve and the Soper Heritage River Park forming a park corridor linking Iqaluit along traditional overland travel routes with Kimmirut (formerly Lake Harbour). Frobisher Bay extends for almost 70 miles to the east, with moderate hills, glaciers and traditional and summer camp sites, opening into the Davis Straits which divide Nunavut from Greenland.

Iqaluit, like many Nunavut communities has a volunteer run annual spring festival. Called Toonik Tyme it involves a combination of traditional Inuit activities combined with more modern events, while the Alianait Music and Arts Festival is held for a week each June 21.

== Media ==
;Radio

* AM 1230 - CFFB, CBC Radio One, English and Inuktitut current affairs, news and local programming
* FM 88.3 - CBM-FM-3, CBC Radio 2 (repeater of CBM-FM, Montreal)
* FM 93.3 - CIQA-FM, weather, marine info
* FM 99.9 - CKIQ-FM, adult contemporary music, recorded
* FM 103.5 - CKGC-FM, oldies
* FM 107.3 - CFRT-FM, community radio (French(Canada))

;Television
* Channel 10 - CH4161, APTN (Eastern terrestrial feed)
* Channel 12 - CH2260, Radio-Canada (community-owned repeater of CBFT-DT, Montreal)

Iqaluit was previously served by CFFB-TV channel 8, a CBC Television / CBC North repeater of CFYK-DT Yellowknife; that station closed down on July 31, 2012 due to budget cuts affecting the CBC. Speaking notes for Hubert T. Lacroix regarding measures announced in the context of the Deficit Reduction Action Plan Broadcasting Decision CRTC 2012-384, July 17, 2012. 

;Communications
* Meshnet Community WiFi - Free Community WiFi and Paid Service available in most areas of city. Free services include access to Isuma.tv, and many other resources.

;Press
* Nunatsiaq News
* News/North

==References==

=== Further reading ===

* Baffin Regional Health Board (Nunavut), and Health Needs Assessment Project (Nunavut). Iqaluit Community Profile. Iqaluit, Nunavut?: Health Needs Assessment Project, Baffin Regional Health Board?, 1994.
* Eno, Robert V. Crystal Two The Origin of Iqaluit. Arctic. 2003.
* Hodgson, D. A. Quaternary geology of western Meta Incognita Peninsula and Iqaluit area, Baffin Island, Nunavut. Ottawa: Geological Survey of Canada, 2005. ISBN 0-660-19405-8
* Keen, Jared. Iqaluit Gateway to the Arctic. Calgary: Weigl, 2000. ISBN 1-896990-55-X
* Kublu, Alexina, and Mlanie Gagnon. Inuit Recollections on the Military Presence in Iqaluit. Memory and history in Nunavut, v. 2. Iqaluit, N.W.T.: Nunavut Arctic College, 2002. ISBN 1-896204-54-6
* Newbery, Nick. Iqaluit gateway to Baffin. Iqaluit, NT: Published for the Royal Canadian Legion Branch No. 4, Iqaluit by Nortext Pub. Co, 1995. ISBN 1-55036-452-9

==External links==

*City of Iqaluit

 



[[Island]]

An island or isle is any piece of sub-continental land that is surrounded by water. Very small islands such as emergent land features on atolls can be called islets, skerries, cays or keys. An island in a river or a lake island may be called an eyot or ait, or a holm. A grouping of geographically or geologically related islands is called an archipelago, e.g. the Philippines.

An island may be described as such despite the presence of an artificial land bridge, for example Singapore and its causeway, or the various Dutch delta islands, such as IJsselmonde. Some places may even retain "island" in their names for historical reasons after being connected to a larger landmass by a wide land bridge, such as Coney Island or Coronado Island. Conversely, when a piece of land is separated from the mainland by a man-made canal, for example the Peloponnese by the Corinth Canal, it is generally not considered an island.

There are two main types of islands: continental islands and oceanic islands. There are also artificial islands.

==Etymology==
The word island comes from Middle English iland, from Old English igland (from ig, similarly meaning 'island' when used independently, and -land carrying its contemporary meaning; cf. Dutch eiland ("island"), German Eiland ("small island")). However, the spelling of the word was modified in the 15th century due to an incorrect association with the etymologically unrelated Old French loanword isle, which itself comes from the Latin word insula. Old English ig is actually a cognate of Latin aqua (water). 

==Difference between islands and continents==
Greenland is the world's largest island with an area of over 2.1 million km, while Australia, the world's smallest continent has an area of 7.6 million km, but there is no standard of size which distinguishes islands from continents, Brown, Mike. How I Killed Pluto and Why It Had It Coming. New York: Random House Digital, 2010. ISBN 0-385-53108-7 or from islets. Royle, Stephen A. A Geography of Islands: Small Island Insularity. Psychology Press, 2001. pp. 711 ISBN 1-85728-865-3 There is a difference between islands and continents in terms of geology. Continents sit on continental lithosphere which is part of tectonic plates floating high on Earth's molten mantle. Oceanic crust is also part of tectonic plates, but it is denser than continental lithosphere, so it floats low on the mantle. Islands are either extensions of the oceanic crust (e.g. volcanic islands) or geologically they are part of some continent sitting on continental lithosphere (e.g. Greenland). This holds true for Australia, which sits on its own continental lithosphere and tectonic plate.

==Types of islands==
===Continental islands===

Continental islands are bodies of land that lie on the continental shelf of a continent. Examples include Borneo, Java, and Sumatra off Asia; New Guinea, Tasmania, and Kangaroo Island off Australia; Great Britain, Ireland, and Sicily off Europe; Greenland, Newfoundland, Long Island, and Sable Island off North America; and Barbados and Trinidad off South America.

A special type of continental island is the microcontinental island, which results when a continent is rifted. Examples are Madagascar and Socotra off Africa, the Kerguelen Islands, New Caledonia, New Zealand, and some of the Seychelles.

Another subtype is an island or bar formed by deposition of tiny rocks where a water current loses some of its carrying capacity. An example is barrier islands, which are accumulations of sand deposited by sea currents on the continental shelves. Another example is islands in river deltas or in large rivers. While some are transitory and may disappear if the volume or speed of the current changes, others are stable and long-lived. Islets are very small islands.

===Desert islands===

A desert island is an island with no people. Typically, a desert island is denoted as such because it exists in a state of being deserted, or abandoned. An arid desert climate is not typically implied; one dictionary uses the phrase 'desert island' to illustrate the use of 'desert' as an adjective meaning "desolate and sparsely occupied or unoccupied". According to another, "A desert island is a small tropical island, where nobody lives or an undiscovered island." Collins Cobuild Dictionary (1995) 

===Oceanic islands===

Oceanic islands are ones that do not sit on continental shelves. The vast majority are volcanic in origin such as Saint Helena in the South Atlantic Ocean. Lomolino, Mark V. (editor); (et al.) (2004) Foundations of Biogeography: Classic Papers with Commentaries. University of Chicago Press. p. 316. ISBN 0226492362 The few oceanic islands that are not volcanic are tectonic in origin and arise where plate movements have lifted up the deep ocean floor to above the surface. Examples of this include Saint Peter and Paul Rocks in the Atlantic Ocean and Macquarie Island in the Pacific.

One type of volcanic oceanic island is found in a volcanic island arc. These islands arise from volcanoes where the subduction of one plate under another is occurring. Examples include the Aleutian Islands, the Mariana Islands, and most of Tonga in the Pacific Ocean. Some of the Lesser Antilles and the South Sandwich Islands are the only Atlantic Ocean examples.

Another type of volcanic oceanic island occurs where an oceanic rift reaches the surface. There are two examples: Iceland, which is the world's second largest volcanic island, and Jan Mayen. Both are in the Atlantic.

A third type of volcanic oceanic island is formed over volcanic hotspots. A hotspot is more or less stationary relative to the moving tectonic plate above it, so a chain of islands results as the plate drifts. Over long periods of time, this type of island is eventually "drowned" by isostatic adjustment and eroded, becoming a seamount. Plate movement across a hot-spot produces a line of islands oriented in the direction of the plate movement. An example is the Hawaiian Islands, from Hawaii to Kure, which then extends beneath the sea surface in a more northerly direction as the Emperor Seamounts. Another chain with similar orientation is the Tuamotu Archipelago; its older, northerly trend is the Line Islands. The southernmost chain is the Austral Islands, with its northerly trending part the atolls in the nation of Tuvalu. Tristan da Cunha is an example of a hotspot volcano in the Atlantic Ocean. Another hot spot in the Atlantic is the island of Surtsey, which was formed in 1963.

An atoll is an island formed from a coral reef that has grown on an eroded and submerged volcanic island. The reef rises to the surface of the water and forms a new island. Atolls are typically ring-shaped with a central lagoon. Examples include the Line Islands in the Pacific and the Maldives in the Indian Ocean.

===Tropical islands===

There are approximately 45,000 tropical islands on Earth. Among coral tropic islands for example are Maldives, Tonga, Nauru and Polynesia. Granite islands include Seychelles and Tioman and Volcanic islands such as Saint Helena. The socio-economic diversity of these regions ranges from the Stone Age societies in the interior of Madagascar, Borneo or Papua New Guinea to the high-tech lifestyles of the city-islands of Singapore and Hong Kong. International tourism is a significant factor in the local economy of Seychelles, Sri Lanka, Mauritius, Runion, Hawaii and the Maldives, among others.

==Natural vs artificial islands==

Most of the Earth's islands are natural and have been formed by tectonic forces or volcanic eruptions. However, artificial (man-made) islands also exist, such as the island in Osaka Bay off the Japanese island of Honshu, on which Kansai International Airport is located. Artificial islands can be built using natural materials (e.g., earth, rock, or sand) and/or artificial ones (e.g. concrete slabs or recycled waste). Sometimes natural islands are artificially enlarged, such as Vasilyevsky Island in the Russian city of St. Petersburg, which had its western shore extended westward by some 0.5 km in the construction of a new sea terminal.

==Island Superlatives==

*Largest island: Greenland.
*Largest island in a lake: Manitoulin Island.
*Largest island in a river: Ilha do Bananal.
*Largest island in fresh water: Maraj.
*Lowest island: Unnamed island in Yech'ew Hayk Lake, Ethiopia.
*Largest island on an island: Samosir (created by cutting a canal).
*Largest natural island on an island: Glover Island.
*Largest island in a lake in an island in a lake: Treasure Island (Ontario), Lake Mindemoya.
*Largest island in a lake in an island in a lake in an island: Nameless island at 69.793 N, 108.241 W, Victoria Island (Canada), Nunavut .
*Most populous island: Java.
*Island shared by largest number of countries: Borneo (shared by three countries).

==See also==

*High island
*Inland island
*Insularity
*Island biogeography 
*Island country
*Island hopping
*List of ancient islands
*List of archipelagos
*List of artificial islands
*List of divided islands
*List of fictional islands
*List of island countries
*List of islands by area
*List of islands by continent

*List of islands by body of water
*List of islands by country
*List of islands by highest point
*List of islands by name
*List of islands by population
*List of islands by population density
*List of islands in lakes
*List of islands named after people
*List of islands of Europe
*Phantom island
*Private island
*Small Island Developing States 
*Tidal island
*Tied island

==References==
Notes

==External links==

*
*
*Definition of island from United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
*Listing of islands from United Nations Island Directory.

 



[[Iao Valley]]

ao Valley (English: Iao, Hawaiian: -ao: "cloud supreme", pronounced similar to "EE-ow") is a lush, stream-cut valley in West Maui, Hawaii, located 5 km west of Wailuku. Because of its natural beauty and historical significance, it has become a popular tourist location. It was designated a National Natural Landmark in 1972. 

== ao Valley State Monument ==
alt=Photo of vegetation-covered lava promontory

The state park is located on 6.2 acre at the end of ao Valley Road (Highway 32). The ao Needle (Kkaemoku) is a famous landmark in the state park, a vegetation-covered lava remnant rising 1200 ft from the valley floor or 2250 ft when measured from sea level. The "needle" itself is an illusion, and is in reality a sharp ridge that gives the appearance of being a spire when viewed end-on. The needle is an extension of and surrounded by the cliffs of the West Maui Mountains, an extinct volcano. One can take a short trail (ao Needle Lookout Trail and Ethnobotanical Loop) to a windy overlook. Park hours are from 7 am to 7 pm. 
 

== Rainforest ==
alt=Photo of stream
ao Valley is covered in dense rainforest, most of which consists of introduced vegetation on the valley floor. The Puu Kukui summit area at the valley's head receives an average 386 in of rainfall per year, making it the state's second wettest location after Mount Waialeale. Much of this rainfall ends up flowing into the ao Stream. Trails in the State Park run alongside ao Stream and through the forest.

== History ==
The Hawaiian god Kne is considered to be the procreator and the provider of life. He is associated with wai (fresh water) as well as clouds, rain, streams and springs. Kanaloa, the Hawaiian god of the underworld, is represented by the phallic stone of the ao Needle. 

Kapawa, the king of Hawaii prior to Pili, was buried here. Maui's ruler Kakae, in the late 15th century, designated ao Valley as an alii burial ground. The remains were buried in secret places. In 1790, the Battle of Kepaniwai took place there, in which Kamehameha the Great defeated Kalanikpule and the Maui army during his campaign to unify the islands. The battle was said to be so bloody that dead bodies blocked ao Stream, and the battle site was named Kepaniwai ("the damming of the waters").
alt=Photo displaying one male and one female bronze figure both wearing hats

20th Century Fox's 1997 motion picture was partially filmed here. 

== Kepaniwai Park's Heritage Gardens ==
Since 1952, Kepaniwai Park's Heritage Gardens have memorialized Maui's multicultural history. Scale models of ethnic buildings and gardens representing the immigration of Hawaiian, American missionary, Chinese, Japanese, Portuguese, Korean, and Filipino cultures are the park's highlight. The gardens were restored in 1994. The Hawaii nature center is located just outside the gardens, which provides access to a museum and children's education about Hawaii and conservation. 
Korean architecture

==References==

==Further reading==

*



[[Troll (Internet)]]

In Internet slang, a troll (, ) is a person who sows discord on the Internet by starting arguments or upsetting people, 
by posting inflammatory, extraneous, or off-topic messages in an online community (such as a forum, chat room, or blog) with the deliberate intent of provoking readers into an emotional response 
 
or of otherwise disrupting normal on-topic discussion. 
 

This sense of the word troll and its associated verb trolling are associated with Internet discourse, but have been used more widely. Media attention in recent years has equated trolling with online harassment. For example, mass media has used troll to describe "a person who defaces Internet tribute sites with the aim of causing grief to families." 

==Usage==
The advice to ignore rather than engage with a troll is sometimes phrased as "Please do not feed the trolls."
Application of the term troll is subjective. Some readers may characterize a post as trolling, while others may regard the same post as a legitimate contribution to the discussion, even if controversial. Like any pejorative term, it can be used as an ad hominem attack, suggesting a negative motivation.

As noted in an OS News article titled "Why People Troll and How to Stop Them" (January 25, 2012), "The traditional definition of trolling includes intent. That is, trolls purposely disrupt forums. This definition is too narrow. Whether someone intends to disrupt a thread or not, the results are the same if they do." Others have addressed the same issue, e.g., Claire Hardaker, in her Ph.D. thesis "Trolling in asynchronous computer-mediated communication: From user discussions to academic definitions", and Dr. Phil. Popular recognition of the existence (and prevalence) of non-deliberate, "accidental trolls", has been documented widely, in sources as diverse as the Urban Dictionary, Nicole Sullivan's keynote speech at the 2012 Fluent Conference, titled "Don't Feed the Trolls" Gizmodo, online opinions on the subject written by Silicon Valley executives and comics. 

Regardless of the circumstances, controversial posts may attract a particularly strong response from those unfamiliar with the robust dialogue found in some online, rather than physical, communities. Experienced participants in online forums know that the most effective way to discourage a troll is usually to ignore it, because responding tends to encourage trolls to continue disruptive postshence the often-seen warning: "Please do not feed the trolls".

A popular early article defining and explaining the issue of Internet Trolls included the suggestion, "The only way to deal with trolls is to limit your reaction to reminding others not to respond to trolls." 

The "trollface" is an image occasionally used to indicate trolling in Internet culture. Trollface hack strikes PlayStation 3? PSU community member reports XMB weirdness. "Pasta" y "MasterDog" ya son parte de la jerga universitaria. "Forever Alone" y "Ay s, ay s", entre los ms populares. 

==Origin and etymology==
There are competing theories of where and when troll was first used in Internet slang, with numerous unattested accounts of BBS and UseNet origins in the early 80s or before.

The English noun troll in the standard sense of ugly dwarf or giant dates to 1610 and comes from the Old Norse word troll meaning giant or demon. 
The word evokes the trolls of Scandinavian folklore and children's tales, where they are at times beings bent on mischief and wickedness. 

In modern English usage, trolling may describe the fishing technique of slowly dragging a lure or baited hook from a moving boat whereas trawling describes the generally commercial act of dragging a fishing net.

Early non-Internet related slang use of trolling for actions deliberately performed to provoke a reaction can be found in the military: by 1972 the term trolling for MiGs was documented in use by US Navy pilots in Vietnam. 

The contemporary slang use of the term is alleged to have appeared on the Internet in the late 1980s, 
 
but the earliest known attestation according to the OED is in 1992. 
 

Another claim sets the origin in Usenet in the early 1990s as in the phrase "trolling for newbies", as used in alt.folklore.urban (AFU). 
 
 
Commonly, what is meant is a relatively gentle inside joke by veteran users, presenting questions or topics that had been so overdone that only a new user would respond to them earnestly. For example, a veteran of the group might make a post on the common misconception that glass flows over time. Long-time readers would both recognize the poster's name and know that the topic had been discussed a lot, but new subscribers to the group would not realize, and would thus respond. These types of trolls served as a practice to identify group insiders. This definition of trolling, considerably narrower than the modern understanding of the term, was considered a positive contribution. 
 
One of the most notorious AFU trollers, David Mikkelson, went on to create the urban folklore website Snopes.com.

By the late 1990s, alt.folklore.urban had such heavy traffic and participation that trolling of this sort was frowned upon. Others expanded the term to include the practice of playing a seriously misinformed or deluded user, even in newsgroups where one was not a regular; these were often attempts at humor rather than provocation. In such contexts, the noun troll usually referred to an act of trolling  or to the resulting discussion  rather than to the author.

===In other languages===
In Chinese, trolling is referred to as bi m (), which can be straightforwardly explained as "eyes without pupils", in the sense that whilst the pupil of the eye is used for vision, the white section of the eye cannot see, and trolling involves blindly talking nonsense over the internet, having total disregard to sensitivities or being oblivious to the situation at hand, akin to having eyes without pupils. An alternative term is bi ln (), which describes a post completely nonsensical and full of folly made to upset others, and derives from a Taiwanese slang term for the male genitalia, where genitalia that is pale white in colour represents that someone is young, and thus foolish. Both terms originate from Taiwan, and are also used in Hong Kong and mainland China. Another term, xio bi () is a derogatory term that refers to both bi m and bi ln that is used on anonymous posting internet forums. Another common term for a troll used in mainland China is pn zi ().

In Japanese, means "fishing" and refers to intentionally misleading posts whose only purpose is to get the readers to react, i.e. get trolled. means "laying waste" and can also be used to refer to simple spamming.

In Icelandic, urs (a thurs) or trll (a troll) may refer to trolls, the verbs ursa (to troll) or ursast (to be trolling, to troll about) may be used.

In Korean, nak-si () means "fishing", and is used to refer to Internet trolling attempts, as well as purposefully misleading post titles. A person who recognizes the troll after having responded (or, in case of a post title nak-si, having read the actual post) would often refer to himself as a caught fish.

In Portuguese, more commonly in its Brazilian variant, troll (produced in most of Brazil as spelling pronunciation) is the usual term to denote internet trolls (examples of common derivate terms are trollismo or trollagem, "trolling", and the verb trollar, "to troll", which entered popular use), but an older expression, used by those which want to avoid anglicisms or slangs, is complexo do pombo enxadrista to denote trolling behavior, and pombos enxadristas (literally, "chessplayer pigeons") or simply pombos are the terms used to name the trolls. The terms are explained by an adage or popular saying: "Arguing with fulano (i.e., John Doe) is the same as playing chess with a pigeon: the pigeon defecates on the table, drop the pieces and simply fly, claiming victory."

In Thai, the term "krean" () has been adopted to address Internet trolls. The term literally refers to a closely cropped hairstyle worn by most school boys in Thailand, thus equating Internet trolls to school boys. The term "tob krean" (), or "slapping a cropped head", refers to the act of posting intellectual replies to refute and cause the messages of Internet trolls to be perceived as unintelligent.

In Sinhala Language this is called ala kirma ( ), which means "Turning it into Potatoes (Sabotage)". Sometimes it is used as ala vagaa kirma (  )  "Planting Potatoes". People/Profiles who does trolling often are called "Potato Planters"  ala vagkaruvan ( ). This seems to be originated from university slang ala veda ( ) which means "Potato business" is used for breaking the laws/codes of the university.

==Trolling, identity, and anonymity==
Jimbo Wales at Wikimania 2006 on a conference discussing the identification and elimination of trolls
Early incidents of trolling Stevan Harnad (1987/2011) "Sky-Writing, Or, When Man First Met Troll" The Atlantic were considered to be the same as flaming, but this has changed with modern usage by the news media to refer to the creation of any content that targets another person. The Internet dictionary NetLingo suggests there are four grades of trolling: playtime trolling, tactical trolling, strategic trolling, and domination trolling. 
The relationship between trolling and flaming was observed in open-access forums in California, on a series of modem-linked computers. CommuniTree was begun in 1978 but was closed in 1982 when accessed by high school teenagers, becoming a ground for trashing and abuse. Some psychologists have suggested that flaming would be caused by deindividuation or decreased self-evaluation: the anonymity of online postings would lead to disinhibition amongst individuals Others have suggested that although flaming and trolling is often unpleasant, it may be a form of normative behavior that expresses the social identity of a certain user group 
According to Tom Postmes, a professor of social and organisational psychology at the universities of Exeter, England, and Groningen, The Netherlands, and the author of Individuality and the Group, who has studied online behavior for 20 years, "Trolls aspire to violence, to the level of trouble they can cause in an environment. They want it to kick off. They want to promote antipathetic emotions of disgust and outrage, which morbidly gives them a sense of pleasure." 

In academic literature, the practice of trolling was first documented by Judith Donath (1999). Donath's paper outlines the ambiguity of identity in a disembodied "virtual community" such as Usenet:

Donath provides a concise overview of identity deception games which trade on the confusion between physical and epistemic community:

Trolls can be costly in several ways. A troll can disrupt the discussion on a newsgroup, disseminate bad advice, and damage the feeling of trust in the newsgroup community. Furthermore, in a group that has become sensitized to trollingwhere the rate of deception is highmany honestly nave questions may be quickly rejected as trollings. This can be quite off-putting to the new user who upon venturing a first posting is immediately bombarded with angry accusations. Even if the accusation is unfounded, being branded a troll is quite damaging to one's online reputation. 

Susan Herring and colleagues in "Searching for Safety Online: Managing 'Trolling' in a Feminist Forum" point out the difficulty inherent in monitoring trolling and maintaining freedom of speech in online communities: "harassment often arises in spaces known for their freedom, lack of censure, and experimental nature". 
 
Free speech may lead to tolerance of trolling behavior, complicating the members' efforts to maintain an open, yet supportive discussion area, especially for sensitive topics such as race, gender, and sexuality. 

In an effort to reduce uncivil behavior by increasing accountability, many web sites (e.g. Reuters, Facebook, and Gizmodo) now require commenters to register their names and e-mail addresses. J. Zhao, Where Anonymity Breeds Contempt, NY Times, 29 Nov 2010. 

==Psychological characteristics of trolls==
Two studies published in 2013 and 2014 have found that people who are identified as trolls tend to have dark personality traits and show signs of sadism, antisocial behavior, psychopathy, and Machiavellianism.
 
 
 
 

The 2013 study suggested that there are a number of similarities between anti-social and flame trolling activities and the 2014 study suggested that the noxious personality characteristics known as the dark triad of personality should be investigated in the analysis of trolling, and concluded that trolling appears "to be an Internet manifestation of everyday sadism." Their relevance is suggested by research linking these traits to bullying in both adolescents and adults. The 2014 study found that trolls operate as agents of chaos on the Internet, exploiting hot-button issues to make users appear overly emotional or foolish in some manner. If an unfortunate person falls into their trap, trolling intensies for further, merciless amusement. This is why novice Internet users are routinely admonished, "Do not feed the trolls!" The 2013 study found that trolls often have a high expectation of what it means 
to be successful, which is higher than they are able to attain, and this results in them resenting 
others who think they are successful but who fall below their standards. "Haters gonna hate" sums up this line of thinking. 

==Concern troll==
A concern troll is a false flag pseudonym created by a user whose actual point of view is opposed to the one that the troll claims to hold. The concern troll posts in Web forums devoted to its declared point of view and attempts to sway the group's actions or opinions while claiming to share their goals, but with professed "concerns". The goal is to sow fear, uncertainty and doubt within the group. 
 

An example of this occurred in 2006 when Tad Furtado, a staffer for then-Congressman Charles Bass (R-NH), was caught posing as a "concerned" supporter of Bass' opponent, Democrat Paul Hodes, on several liberal New Hampshire blogs, using the pseudonyms "IndieNH" or "IndyNH". "IndyNH" expressed concern that Democrats might just be wasting their time or money on Hodes, because Bass was unbeatable. 
 
 Hodes eventually won the election.

Although the term "concern troll" originated in discussions of online behavior, it now sees increasing use to describe similar behaviors that take place offline. For example, James Wolcott of Vanity Fair accused a conservative New York Daily News columnist of "concern troll" behavior in his efforts to downplay the Mark Foley scandal. Wolcott links what he calls concern trolls to what Saul Alinsky calls "Do-Nothings", giving a long quote from Alinsky on the Do-Nothings' method and effects:

The Hill published an op-ed piece by Markos Moulitsas of the liberal blog Daily Kos titled "Dems: Ignore 'Concern Trolls'". The concern trolls in question were not Internet participants; they were Republicans offering public advice and warnings to the Democrats. The author defines "concern trolling" as "offering a poisoned apple in the form of advice to political opponents that, if taken, would harm the recipient". 
 

==Troll sites==

While many webmasters and forum administrators consider trolls a scourge on their sites, some websites welcome them. For example, a New York Times article discussed troll activity at 4chan and at Encyclopedia Dramatica, which it described as "an online compendium of troll humor and troll lore". 
This site and others are often used as a base to troll against sites that their members can not normally post on. These trolls feed off the reactions of their victims because "their agenda is to take delight in causing trouble". 
 

==Media coverage and controversy==
Mainstream media outlets have focused their attention on the willingness of how some Internet users to go to extreme lengths to participate in organized psychological harassment.

===Australia===
In February 2010, the Australian government became involved after users defaced the Facebook tribute pages of murdered children Trinity Bates and Elliott Fletcher. Australian communications minister Stephen Conroy decried the attacks, committed mainly by 4chan users, as evidence of the need for greater Internet regulation, stating, "This argument that the Internet is some mystical creation that no laws should apply to, that is a recipe for anarchy and the wild west." "Internet without laws a 'recipe for anarchy', 1 April 2010. Retrieved 5 April 2010. Facebook responded by strongly urging administrators to be aware of ways to ban users and remove inappropriate content from Facebook pages. "Facebook takes (small) step against tribute page trolls", TG Daily, 30 March 2010. Retrieved 5 April 2010. In 2012, the Daily Telegraph started a campaign to take action against "Twitter trolls", who abuse and threaten users. Several high-profile Australians including Charlotte Dawson, Robbie Farah, Laura Dundovic, and Ray Hadley have been victims of this phenomenon. 

===United Kingdom===
In the United Kingdom, contributions made to the Internet are covered by the Communications Act 2003. Sending messages which are "grossly offensive or of an indecent, obscene or menacing character" is an offense whether they are received by the intended recipient or not. Several people have been imprisoned in the UK for trolling. 

Sean Duffy, who mocked the testimonial page of a dead teenager, was sentenced to eighteen weeks in prison and banned from using social networking sites for five years. Jamie Counsel was sentenced to four years for trying to incite riots. Trolls of the testimonial page of Georgia Varley faced no prosecution due to misunderstandings of the legal system in the wake of the term trolling being popularized. In October 2012, a twenty-year-old man was jailed for twelve weeks for posting offensive jokes to a support group for friends and family of April Jones. Later that month, The Register said there was a viewpoint that "the Crown Prosecution Service needs to reel in cops who are busily collaring trolls more or less at random ... usually responding to public pressure from media or social media". 

===United States===
On March 31, 2010, the Today Show ran a segment detailing the deaths of three separate adolescent girls and trolls' subsequent reactions to their deaths. Shortly after the suicide of high school student Alexis Pilkington, anonymous posters began performing organized psychological harassment across various message boards, referring to Pilkington as a "suicidal slut", and posting graphic images on her Facebook memorial page. The segment also included an expos of a 2006 accident, in which an eighteen-year old fatally crashed her father's car into a highway pylon; trolls emailed her grieving family the leaked pictures of her mutilated corpse. "Trolling: The Today Show Explores the Dark Side of the Internet", March 31, 2010. Retrieved on April 4, 2010. In 2012, the subject of trolling was featured on the HBO series The Newsroom.

==Examples==

As reported on April 8, 1999, investors became victims of trolling via an online financial discussion regarding PairGain, a telephone equipment company based in California. Trolls operating in the stock's Yahoo Finance chat room posted a fabricated Bloomberg News article stating that an Israeli telecom company could potentially acquire PairGain. As a result, PairGain's stock jumped by 31%. However, the stock promptly crashed after the reports were identified as false. 

So-called Gold Membership trolling originated in 2007 on 4chan boards, users posting fake images claiming to offer upgraded 4chan account privileges; without a "Gold" account, one could not view certain content. This turned out to be a hoax designed to fool board members, especially newcomers. It was copied and became an Internet meme. In some cases, this type of troll has been used as a scam, most notably on Facebook, where fake Facebook Gold Account upgrade ads have proliferated in order to link users to dubious websites and other content. "All that glisters is not (Facebook) gold", CounterMeasures: Security, Privacy & Trust (A TrendMicro Blog). Retrieved 6 April 2010. 

The case of Zeran v. America Online, Inc. resulted primarily from trolling. Six days after the Oklahoma City bombing, anonymous users posted advertisements for shirts celebrating the bombing on AOL message boards, claiming that the shirts could be obtained by contacting Mr. Kenneth Zeran. The posts listed Zeran's address and home phone number. Zeran was subsequently harassed. 

Anti-Scientology protests by Anonymous, commonly known as Project Chanology, are sometimes labeled as "trolling" by media such as Wired, and the participants sometimes explicitly self-identify as "trolls".

==See also==

* Anti-social behaviour
* Cyber-bullying
* Flame war
* Griefer
* Heckler
* Hit-and-run posting
* Patent troll
* Poe's Law
* Social gadfly
* Sockpuppet (Internet)
* Vandalism on Wikipedia

==References==

==Further reading==
* Bishop, J. (2012). Scope and Limitations in the Government of Wales Act 2006 for Tackling Internet Abuses in the Form of 'Flame Trolling'. Statute Law Review. Online (Subscription).
* Bishop, J. (2013). Examining the Concepts, Issues, and Implications of Internet Trolling. IGI Global. ISBN 1466628030.
* Walter, T.; Hourizi, R.; Moncur, W.; Pitsillides (2012). Does the Internet Change How We Die And Mourn? An Overview Online.

==External links==

===Trolling advocacy and safety===
* The Trolling Academy - trolling advice, comment, and training
* The Troll Network - trolling discussion and comment
* Cyber Mentors - youth support group run by young people
* Get Safe Online - free expert advice on online safety

===Background and definitions===
* 
* NetLingo definition
* Urban Dictionary definition
* Trolling lore and essays
* Trolling news and features

===Academic and debate===
* Searching for Safety Online: Managing "Trolling" in a Feminist Forum 
* Malwebolence  The World of Web Trolling; New York Times Magazine, By Mattathias Schwartz; August 3, 2008.
* Building relationships online with avatars and characters

 



[[Geography of India]]

This video was taken by the crew of Expedition 29 on board the ISS on a pass from western Europe to Central India.

The geography of India describes the geographic features of India, a country in South Asia. India lies largely on the Indian Plate, the northern portion of the Indo-Australian Plate, whose continental crust forms the Indian subcontinent. The country is situated north of the equator between 84' and 376' north latitude and 687' and 9725' east longitude. It is the seventh-largest country in the world, with a total area of 3166414 km2. Total area excludes disputed territories not under Indian control. India measures 3214 km from north to south and 2933 km from east to west. It has a land frontier of 15200 km and a coastline of 7517 km. 

On the south, India projects into and is bounded by the Indian Ocean  in particular, by the Arabian Sea on the southwest, the Laccadive Sea to the south, and the Bay of Bengal on the southeast. The Palk Strait and Gulf of Mannar separate India from Sri Lanka to its immediate southeast, and the Maldives are some 400 km to the southwest. India's Andaman and Nicobar Islands, some 1200 km southeast of the mainland, share maritime borders with Burma, Thailand and Indonesia. Kanyakumari at 8441N and 773228E is the southernmost tip of the Indian mainland, while the southernmost point in India is Indira Point on Great Nicobar Island. India's territorial waters extend into the sea to a distance of 12 nmi from the coast baseline. 

The northern frontiers of India are defined largely by the Himalayan mountain range, where the country borders China, Bhutan, and Nepal. Its western border with Pakistan lies in the Punjab Plain and the Thar Desert. In the far northeast, the Chin Hills and Kachin Hills, deeply forested mountainous regions, separate India from Burma. On the east, its border with Bangladesh is largely defined by the Khasi Hills and Mizo Hills, and the watershed region of the Indo-Gangetic Plain.

The Ganges is the longest river originating in India. The GangesBrahmaputra system occupies most of northern, central, and eastern India, while the Deccan Plateau occupies most of southern India. Kangchenjunga, on the border between Nepal and the Indian state of Sikkim, is the highest point in India at 8598 m and the world's 3rd highest peak. Climate across India ranges from equatorial in the far south, to alpine and tundra in the upper reaches of the Himalayas.

==Geological development==
The Indian Plate

India is entirely contained on the Indian Plate, a major tectonic plate that was formed when it split off from the ancient continent Gondwanaland (ancient landmass, consisting of the southern part of the supercontinent of Pangea). The Indo-Australian is subdivided into the Indian and Australian plates. About 90 million years ago, during the late Cretaceous Period, the Indian Plate began moving north at about 15 cm/year (6 in/yr). About 50 to 55 million years ago, in the Eocene Epoch of the Cenozoic Era, the plate collided with Asia after covering a distance of 2000 to, having moved faster than any other known plate. In 2007, German geologists determined that the Indian Plate was able to move so quickly because it is only half as thick as the other plates which formerly constituted Gondwanaland. The collision with the Eurasian Plate along the modern border between India and Nepal formed the orogenic belt that created the Tibetan Plateau and the Himalayas. , the Indian Plate is moving northeast at 5 cm/yr (2 in/yr), while the Eurasian Plate is moving north at only 2 cm/yr (0.8 in/yr). India is thus referred to as the "fastest continent". This is causing the Eurasian Plate to deform, and the Indian Plate to compress at a rate of 4 mm/yr (0.15 in/yr).

==Political geography==

India is divided into 29 states (further subdivided into districts) and 7 union territories.
Indian Kashmir, LoC and LAC
India's borders run a total length of 15106.70 km. Its borders with Pakistan and Bangladesh were delineated according to the Radcliffe Line, which was created in 1947 during Partition of India. Its western border with Pakistan extends up to 3323 km, dividing the Punjab region and running along the boundaries of the Thar Desert and the Rann of Kutch. This border runs along the Indian states of Jammu & Kashmir, Rajasthan, Gujarat, and Punjab. http://mha.nic.in/sites/upload_files/mha/files/BM_MAN-IN-PAKS-060513.pdf Both nations delineated a Line of Control (LoC) to serve as the informal boundary between the Indian and Pakistan-administered areas of Kashmir. According to India's claim, it also shares a 106 km border with Afghanistan in northwestern Kashmir, which is under Pakistani control. 

India's border with Bangladesh runs 4096.70 km. West Bengal, Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram are the States which share the border with Bangladesh. http://mha.nic.in/sites/upload_files/mha/files/BM_MAN-IN-BANG-270813.pdf There are 92 enclaves of Bangladesh on Indian soil and 106 enclaves of India are on Bangladeshi soil. The Teen Bigha Corridor is a strip of land formerly belonging to India on the West BengalBangladesh border which has been leased indefinitely to Bangladesh so that it can access its DehgramAngalpota enclaves.

The Line of Actual Control (LAC) is the effective border between India and the People's Republic of China. It traverses 4,057 km along the Indian states of Jammu and Kashmir, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim and Arunachal Pradesh. The border with Burma (Myanmar) extends up to 1643 km along the southern borders of India's northeastern states viz. Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Manipur and Mizoram. http://mha.nic.in/sites/upload_files/mha/files/Indo-Myanmar-1011.pdf Located amidst the Himalayan range, India's border with Bhutan runs 699 km. Sikkim,
West Bengal, Assam and Arunachal Pradesh are the States, which
share the border with Bhutan. http://mha.nic.in/sites/upload_files/mha/files/Indo-Bhutan-1011.pdf The border with Nepal runs 1751 km along the foothills of the Himalayas in northern India. Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal and Sikkim are the States, which share the border with Nepal. http://mha.nic.in/sites/upload_files/mha/files/Indo-Nepal-270813.pdf The Siliguri Corridor, narrowed sharply by the borders of Bhutan, Nepal and Bangladesh, connects peninsular India with the northeastern states.

==Physiographic regions==
topography map

India can be divided into five physiographic regions. They are
#The Northern Mountains
#Indo Gangetic Plains
#The Peninsular Plateau
#Thar Desert
#The Coastal Plains

=== The Northern Mountains===
Map of the hilly regions in India.
A great arc of mountains, consisting of the Himalayas, Hindu Kush, and Patkai ranges define the northern Indian subcontinent. These were formed by the ongoing tectonic collision of the Indian and Eurasian plates. The mountains in these ranges include some of the world's tallest mountains which act as a natural barrier to cold polar winds. They also facilitate the monsoon winds which in turn influence the climate in India. Rivers originating in these mountains, flow through the fertile IndoGangetic plains. These mountains are recognised by biogeographers as the boundary between two of the Earth's great ecozones: the temperate Palearctic that covers most of Eurasia and the tropical and subtropical Indomalaya ecozone which includes the Indian subcontinent, Southeast Asia and Indonesia.

India has eight major mountain ranges having peaks of over 1000 m

* The Himalayan range is considered as the world's highest mountain range, with its tallest peak Mt. Everest (8848 m) on the NepalChina border. They form India's northeastern border, separating it from northeastern Asia. They are one of the world's youngest mountain ranges and extend almost uninterrupted for 2500 km, covering an area of 500000 km2. The Himalayas extend from Jammu and Kashmir in the north to Arunachal Pradesh in the east. These states along with Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, and Sikkim lie mostly in the Himalayan region. Numerous Himalayan peaks rise over 7000 m and the snow line ranges between 6000 m in Sikkim to around 3000 m in Kashmir. Kanchenjungaon the SikkimNepal borderis the highest point in the area administered by India. Most peaks in the Himalayas remain snowbound throughout the year. The Himalayas act as a barrier to the frigid katabatic winds flowing down from Central Asia. Thus, North India is kept warm or only mildly cooled during winter; in summer, the same phenomenon makes India relatively hot.
Mt. Kanchenjunga in Sikkim.

*The Karakoram is situated in the disputed state of Jammu and Kashmir. It has more than sixty peaks above 7000 m, including K2, the second highest peak in the world 8611 m. K2 is just 237 m smaller than the 8848 m Mount Everest. The range is about 500 km in length and the most heavily glaciated part of the world outside of the polar regions. The Siachen Glacier at 76 km and the Biafo Glacier at 67 km rank as the world's second and third-longest glaciers outside the polar regions. Measurements are from recent imagery, generally supplemented with Russian 1:200,000 scale topographic mapping as well as Jerzy Wala, Orographical Sketch Map: Karakoram: Sheets 1 & 2, Swiss Foundation for Alpine Research, Zurich, 1990. Just to the west of the northwest end of the Karakoram, lies the Hindu Raj range, beyond which is the Hindu Kush range. The southern boundary of the Karakoram is formed by the Gilgit, Indus and Shyok rivers, which separate the range from the northwestern end of the Himalayas.

*The Patkai, or Purvanchal, are situated near India's eastern border with Burma. They were created by the same tectonic processes which led to the formation of the Himalayas. The physical features of the Patkai mountains are conical peaks, steep slopes and deep valleys. The Patkai ranges are not as rugged or tall as the Himalayas. There are three hill ranges that come under the Patkai: the PatkaiBum, the GaroKhasiJaintia and the Lushai hills. The GaroKhasi range lies in Meghalaya. Mawsynram, a village near Cherrapunji lying on the windward side of these hills, has the distinction of being the wettest place in the world, receiving the highest annual rainfall. 
The Vindhyas in central India
*The Vindhya range runs across most of central India, extending 1050 km. The average elevation of these hills is from 300 to and rarely goes above 700 m. They are believed to have been formed by the wastes created by the weathering of the ancient Aravali mountains. Geographically, it separates northern India from southern India. The western end of the range lies in eastern Gujarat, near its border with Madhya Pradesh, and runs east and north, almost meeting the Ganges at Mirzapur.

*The Satpura Range begins in eastern Gujarat near the Arabian Sea coast and runs east across Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh. It extends 900 km with many peaks rising above 1000 m. It is triangular in shape, with its apex at Ratnapuri and the two sides being parallel to the Tapti and Narmada rivers. It runs parallel to the Vindhya Range, which lies to the north, and these two east-west ranges divide the IndoGangetic plain from the Deccan Plateau located north of River Narmada.

Western Ghats near Matheran
Kolli Hills of the Eastern Ghats, Tamil Nadu

*The Aravali Range is the oldest mountain range in India, running across Rajasthan from northeast to southwest direction, extending approximately 800 km. Aravali Range Students' Britannica India, by Dale Hoiberg, Indu Ramchandani. Published by Popular Prakashan, 2000. ISBN 0-85229-760-2. Page 92-93. The northern end of the range continues as isolated hills and rocky ridges into Haryana, ending near Delhi. The highest peak in this range is Guru Shikhar at Mount Abu, rising to 1722 m, lying near the border with Gujarat. The Aravali Range is the eroded stub of an ancient fold mountain system. The range rose in a Precambrian event called the AravaliDelhi orogen. The range joins two of the ancient segments that make up the Indian craton, the Marwar segment to the northwest of the range, and the Bundelkhand segment to the southeast.

*The Western Ghats or Sahyadri mountains run along the western edge of India's Deccan Plateau and separate it from a narrow coastal plain along the Arabian Sea. The range runs approximately 1600 km from south of the Tapti River near the GujaratMaharashtra border and across Maharashtra, Goa, Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu to the southern tip of the Deccan peninsula. The average elevation is around 1000 m. Anai Mudi in the Anaimalai Hills 2695 m in Kerala is the highest peak in the Western Ghats. 

*The Eastern Ghats are a discontinuous range of mountains, which have been eroded and vivisected by the four major rivers of southern India, the Godavari, Mahanadi, Krishna, and Kaveri. These mountains extend from West Bengal to Orissa, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu, along the coast and parallel to the Bay of Bengal. Though not as tall as the Western Ghats, some of its peaks are over 1000 m in height. The Nilgiri hills in Tamil Nadu lies at the junction of the Eastern and Western Ghats. Arma Konda (1680 m) in Andhra Pradesh is the tallest peak in Eastern Ghats. 

===Indo-Gangetic plain===

The Indo-Gangetic plains, also known as the Great Plains are large alluvial plains dominated by three main rivers, the Indus, Ganges, and Brahmaputra. They run parallel to the Himalayas, from Jammu and Kashmir in the west to Assam in the east, and drain most of northern and eastern India. The plains encompass an area of 700000 km2. The major rivers in this region are the Ganges, Indus, and Brahmaputra along with their main tributariesYamuna, Chambal, Gomti, Ghaghara, Kosi, Sutlej, Ravi, Beas, Chenab, and Tistaas well as the rivers of the Ganges Delta, such as the Meghna.

Extent of the Indo-Gangetic plain across South Asia.
The great plains are sometimes classified into four divisions:

* The Bhabar belt is adjacent to the foothills of the Himalayas and consists of boulders and pebbles which have been carried down by streams. As the porosity of this belt is very high, the streams flow underground. The Bhabar is generally narrow with its width varying between 6 to.
* The Terai belt lies south of the adjacent Bhabar region and is composed of newer alluvium. The underground streams reappear in this region. The region is excessively moist and thickly forested. It also receives heavy rainfall throughout the year and is populated with a variety of wildlife.
* The Bangar belt consists of older alluvium and forms the alluvial terrace of the flood plains. In the Gangetic plains, it has a low upland covered by laterite deposits.
* The Khadar belt lies in lowland areas after the Bangar belt. It is made up of fresh newer alluvium which is deposited by the rivers flowing down the plain.

The Indo-Gangetic belt is the world's most extensive expanse of uninterrupted alluvium formed by the deposition of silt by the numerous rivers. The plains are flat making it conducive for irrigation through canals. The area is also rich in ground water sources.

The plains are one of the world's most intensely farmed areas. The main crops grown are rice and wheat, which are grown in rotation. Other important crops grown in the region include maize, sugarcane and cotton. The Indo-Gangetic plains rank among the world's most densely populated areas.

===Thar Desert===
Thar desert, Rajasthan India

The Thar Desert (also known as the deserts) is the world's seventh largest desert, by others the tenth. It forms a significant portion of western India and covers an area of 200000 to. The desert continues into Pakistan as the Cholistan Desert. Most of the Thar Desert is situated in Rajasthan, covering 61% of its geographic area.

About 10 percent of this region comprises sand dunes, and the remaining 90 percent consist of craggy rock forms, compacted salt-lake bottoms, and interdunal and fixed dune areas. Annual temperatures can range from 0 C in the winter to over 50 C during the summer. Most of the rainfall received in this region is associated with the short JulySeptember southwest monsoon that brings 100 to of precipitation. Water is scarce and occurs at great depths, ranging from 30 to below the ground level. Rainfall is precarious and erratic, ranging from below 120 mm in the extreme west to 375 mm eastward.The only river in this region is Luni. The soils of the arid region are generally sandy to sandy-loam in texture. The consistency and depth vary as per the topographical features. The low-lying loams are heavier and may have a hard pan of clay, calcium carbonate or gypsum.

===Highlands===
The Central Highlands consists of three main plateaus  the Malwa Plateau in the west, the Deccan Plateau in the south (covering most of the Indian peninsula) and the Chota Nagpur Plateau in the east.
Dry deciduous and thorny forests of plateau regions in India
The Malwa Plateau is spread across Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat. The average elevation of the Malwa plateau is 500 metres, and the landscape generally slopes towards the north. Most of the region is drained by the Chambal River and its tributaries; the western part is drained by the upper reaches of the Mahi River.

Dry Evergreen Forests along the Eastern Ghats, Andhra Pradesh
The Deccan Plateau is a large triangular plateau, bounded by the Vindhyas to the north and flanked by the Eastern and Western Ghats. The Deccan covers a total area of 1.9 million km (735,000 mile). It is mostly flat, with elevations ranging from 300 to. The average elevation of the plateau is 2000 ft above sea level. The surface slopes from 3000 ft in the west to 1500 ft in the east. It slopes gently from west to east and gives rise to several peninsular rivers such as the Godavari, the Krishna, the Kaveri and the Mahanadi which drain into the Bay of Bengal. This region is mostly semi-arid as it lies on the leeward side of both Ghats. Much of the Deccan is covered by thorn scrub forest scattered with small regions of deciduous broadleaf forest. Climate in the Deccan ranges from hot summers to mild winters.

The Chota Nagpur Plateau is situated in eastern India, covering much of Jharkhand and adjacent parts of Orissa, Bihar and Chhattisgarh. Its total area is approximately 65000 km2 and is made up of three smaller plateaus  the Ranchi, Hazaribagh, and Kodarma plateaus. The Ranchi plateau is the largest, with an average elevation of 700 m. Much of the plateau is forested, covered by the Chota Nagpur dry deciduous forests. Vast reserves of metal ores and coal have been found in the Chota Nagpur plateau. The Kathiawar peninsula in western Gujarat is bounded by the Gulf of Kutch and the Gulf of Khambat. The natural vegetation in most of the peninsula is xeric scrub, part of the Northwestern thorn scrub forests ecoregion.

In western India, the Kutch region in Gujarat and Koyna in Maharashtra are classified as a Zone IV region (high risk) for earthquakes. The Kutch city of Bhuj was the epicentre of the 2001 Gujarat earthquake, which claimed the lives of more than 1,337 people and injured 166,836 while destroying or damaging near a million homes. The 1993 Latur earthquake in Maharashtra killed 7,928 people and injured 30,000. Other areas have a moderate to low risk of an earthquake occurring. 

===Coasts===
Varkala beach on Kerala's coast, Arabian Sea
Visakhapatnam Beach View, Bay of Bengal, Andhra Pradesh
The Eastern Coastal Plain is a wide stretch of land lying between the Eastern Ghats and the Bay of Bengal. It stretches from Tamil Nadu in the south to West Bengal in the east. The Mahanadi, Godavari, Kaveri, and Krishna rivers drain these plains. The temperature in the coastal regions often exceeds 30 C, and is coupled with high levels of humidity. The region receives both the northeast monsoon and southwest monsoon rains. The southwest monsoon splits into two branches, the Bay of Bengal branch and the Arabian Sea branch. The Bay of Bengal branch moves northwards crossing northeast India in early June. The Arabian Sea branch moves northwards and discharges much of its rain on the windward side of Western Ghats. Annual rainfall in this region averages between 1000 and. The width of the plains varies between 100 and. The plains are divided into six regionsthe Mahanadi delta, the southern Andhra Pradesh plain, the Krishna-Godavari deltas, the Kanyakumari coast, the Coromandel Coast, and sandy coastal.

The Western Coastal Plain is a narrow strip of land sandwiched between the Western Ghats and the Arabian Sea, ranging from 50 to in width. It extends from Gujarat in the north and extends through Maharashtra, Goa, Karnataka, and Kerala. Numerous rivers and backwaters inundate the region. Mostly originating in the Western Ghats, the rivers are fast-flowing, usually perennial, and empty into estuaries. Major rivers flowing into the sea are the Tapi, Narmada, Mandovi and Zuari. Vegetation is mostly deciduous, but the Malabar Coast moist forests constitute a unique ecoregion. The Western Coastal Plain can be divided into two parts, the Konkan and the Malabar Coast.

== Islands ==
Aerial view of the Andaman Islands

The Lakshadweep and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands are India's two major island formations and are classified as union territories. The Lakshadweep Islands lie 200 to off the coast of Kerala in the Arabian sea with an area of 32 km2. They consist of twelve atolls, three reefs, and five submerged banks, with a total of about 35 islands and islets.

The Andaman and Nicobar Islands are located between 6 and 14 north latitude and 92 and 94 east longitude. They consist of 572 isles, lying in the Bay of Bengal near the Burmese coast. They are located 1255 km from Kolkata (Calcutta) and 193 km from Cape Negrais in Burma. The territory consists of two island groups, the Andaman Islands and the Nicobar Islands. The Andaman Islands consists of 204 small islands across a total length of 352 km. India's only active volcano, Barren Island is situated here. It last erupted in May 2005. The Narcondum is a dormant volcano and there is a mud volcano at Baratang. Indira Point, India's southernmost land point, is situated in the Nicobar islands at 64510N and 934936E, and lies just 189 km from the Indonesian island of Sumatra, to the southeast. The highest point is Mount Thullier at 642 m.

Other significant islands in India include Diu daman, a former Portuguese enclave; Majuli, a river island of the Brahmaputra; Elephanta in Bombay Harbour; and Sriharikota, a barrier island in Andhra Pradesh. Salsette Island is India's most populous island on which the city of Mumbai (Bombay) is located. Forty-two islands in the Gulf of Kutch constitute the Marine National Park.

==Water bodies==
Rivers in India.

India has around 14,500 km of inland navigable waterways. There are twelve rivers which are classified as major rivers, with the total catchment area exceeding 2528000 km2. All major rivers of India originate from one of the three main watersheds: 
#The Himalaya and the Karakoram ranges
#Vindhya and Satpura range in central India
#Sahyadri or Western Ghats in western India

The Himalayan river networks are snow-fed and have a perennial supply throughout the year. The other two river systems are dependent on the monsoons and shrink into rivulets during the dry season. The Himalayan rivers that flow westward into Pakistan are the Indus, Jhelum, Chenab, Ravi, Beas, and Sutlej. 

The Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghana system has the largest catchment area of about 1,600,000 km2. The Ganges Basin alone has a catchment of about 1100000 km2. The Ganges originates from the Gangotri Glacier in Uttarakhand. It flows southeast, draining into the Bay of Bengal. The Yamuna and Gomti rivers also arise in the western Himalayas and join the Ganges in the plains. The Brahmaputra originates in Tibet, China, where it is known as the Yarlung Tsangpo River (or "Tsangpo"). It enters India in the far-eastern state of Arunachal Pradesh, then flows west through Assam. The Brahmaputra merges with the Ganges in Bangladesh, where it is known as the Jamuna River. Brahmaputra River, Encyclopdia Britannica 

The Chambal, another tributary of the Ganges, via the Yamuna, originates from the Vindhya-Satpura watershed. The river flows eastward. Westward-flowing rivers from this watershed are the Narmada and Tapti, which drain into the Arabian Sea in Gujarat. The river network that flows from east to west constitutes 10% of the total outflow.
The Godavari River at Papi Hills
Bhagirathi River at Gangotri, source river of the Ganges .
The Western Ghats are the source of all Deccan rivers, which include the Mahanadi River through the Mahanadi River Delta, Godavari River, Krishna River and Kaveri River, all draining into the Bay of Bengal. These rivers constitute 20% of India's total outflow. 

The heavy southwest monsoon rains cause the Brahmaputra and other rivers to distend their banks, often flooding surrounding areas. Though they provide rice paddy farmers with a largely dependable source of natural irrigation and fertilisation, such floods have killed thousands of people and tend to cause displacements of people in such areas.

Major gulfs include the Gulf of Cambay, Gulf of Kutch, and the Gulf of Mannar. Straits include the Palk Strait, which separates India from Sri Lanka; the Ten Degree Channel, which separates the Andamans from the Nicobar Islands; and the Eight Degree Channel, which separates the Laccadive and Amindivi Islands from the Minicoy Island to the south. Important capes include the Kanyakumari (formerly called Cape Comorin), the southern tip of mainland India; Indira Point, the southernmost point in India (on Great Nicobar Island); Rama's Bridge, and Point Calimere. The Arabian Sea lies to the west of India, the Bay of Bengal and the Indian Ocean lie to the east and south, respectively. Smaller seas include the Laccadive Sea and the Andaman Sea. There are four coral reefs in India, located in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the Gulf of Mannar, Lakshadweep, and the Gulf of Kutch. Important lakes include Sambhar Lake, the country's largest saltwater lake in Rajasthan, Vembanad Lake in Kerala, Kolleru Lake in Andhra Pradesh, Loktak Lake in Manipur, Dal Lake in Kashmir, Chilka Lake(lagoon lake) in Orrisa, and Sasthamkotta Lake in Kerala.

== Wetlands ==
A map of the Indian Sunderbans in West Bengal.
Pichavaram Mangroves, Tamil Nadu
India's wetland ecosystem is widely distributed from the cold and arid located in the Ladakh region of Jammu and Kashmir, and those with the wet and humid climate of peninsular India. Most of the wetlands are directly or indirectly linked to river networks. The Indian government has identified a total of 71 wetlands for conservation and are part of sanctuaries and national parks. Mangrove forests are present all along the Indian coastline in sheltered estuaries, creeks, backwaters, salt marshes and mudflats. The mangrove area covers a total of 4461 km2, which comprises 7% of the world's total mangrove cover. Prominent mangrove covers are located in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the Sundarbans delta, the Gulf of Kutch and the deltas of the Mahanadi, Godavari and Krishna rivers. Parts of Maharashtra, Karnataka and Kerala also have large mangrove covers. 

The Sundarbans delta is home to the largest mangrove forest in the world. It lies at the mouth of the Ganges and spreads across areas of Bangladesh and West Bengal. The Sundarbans is a UNESCO World Heritage Site, but is identified separately as the Sundarbans (Bangladesh) and the Sundarbans National Park (India). The Sundarbans are intersected by a complex network of tidal waterways, mudflats and small islands of salt-tolerant mangrove forests. The area is known for its diverse fauna, being home to a large variety of species of birds, spotted deer, crocodiles and snakes. Its most famous inhabitant is the Bengal tiger. It is estimated that there are now 400 Bengal tigers and about 30,000 spotted deer in the area.

The Rann of Kutch is a marshy region located in northwestern Gujarat and the bordering Sindh province of Pakistan. It occupies a total area of 27900 km2. The region was originally a part of the Arabian Sea. Geologic forces such as earthquakes resulted in the damming up of the region, turning it into a large saltwater lagoon. This area gradually filled with silt thus turning it into a seasonal salt marsh. During the monsoons, the area turns into a shallow marsh, often flooding to knee-depth. After the monsoons, the region turns dry and becomes parched.

== Climate ==
Many areas remain flooded during the heavy rains brought by monsoon in the Indian state of West Bengal.
National Highway 31A winds along the banks of the Teesta River near Kalimpong (West Bengal), in the Darjeeling Himalayan hill region.

Based on the Kppen system, India hosts six major climatic subtypes, ranging from arid desert in the west, alpine tundra and glaciers in the north, and humid tropical regions supporting rainforests in the southwest and the island territories. The nation has four seasons: winter (JanuaryFebruary), summer (MarchMay), a monsoon (rainy) season (JuneSeptember) and a post-monsoon period (OctoberDecember). 
Temperature averages in India; units are in degree Celsius.
The Himalayas act as a barrier to the frigid katabatic winds flowing down from Central Asia. Thus, North India is kept warm or only mildly cooled during winter; in summer, the same phenomenon makes India relatively hot. Although the Tropic of Cancerthe boundary between the tropics and subtropicspasses through the middle of India, the whole country is considered to be tropical.

Summer lasts between March and June in most parts of India. Temperatures can exceed 40 C during the day. The coastal regions exceed 30 C coupled with high levels of humidity. In the Thar desert area temperatures can exceed 45 C. The rain-bearing monsoon clouds are attracted to the low-pressure system created by the Thar Desert. The southwest monsoon splits into two arms, the Bay of Bengal arm and the Arabian Sea arm. The Bay of Bengal arm moves northwards crossing northeast India in early June. The Arabian Sea arm moves northwards and deposits much of its rain on the windward side of Western Ghats. Winters in peninsula India see mild to warm days and cool nights. Further north the temperature is cooler. Temperatures in some parts of the Indian plains sometimes fall below freezing. Most of northern India is plagued by fog during this season. The highest temperature recorded in India was 50.6 C in Alwar, Rajasthan. The lowest was -45 C in Kashmir.

== Geology ==

Eparchaean Unconformity of Detrital rocks of Tirumala Hills, Eastern Ghats
India's geological features are classified based on their era of formation. The Precambrian formations of Cudappah and Vindhyan systems are spread out over the eastern and southern states. A small part of this period is spread over western and central India. The Paleozoic formations from the Cambrian, Ordovician, Silurian and Devonian system are found in the Western Himalaya region in Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh. The Mesozoic Deccan Traps formation is seen over most of the northern Deccan; they are believed to be the result of sub-aerial volcanic activity. The Trap soil is black in colour and conducive to agriculture. The Carboniferous system, Permian System and Triassic systems are seen in the western Himalayas. The Jurassic system is seen in the western Himalayas and Rajasthan.
Geological regions of India
Tertiary imprints are seen in parts of Manipur, Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh and along the Himalayan belt. The Cretaceous system is seen in central India in the Vindhyas and part of the Indo-Gangetic plains. The Gondowana system is seen in the Narmada River area in the Vindhyas and Satpuras. The Eocene system is seen in the western Himalayas and Assam. Oligocene formations are seen in Kutch and Assam. The Pleistocene system is found over central India. The Andaman and Nicobar Island are thought to have been formed in this era by volcanoes. The Himalayas were formed by the convergence and deformation of the Indo-Australian and Eurasian Plates. Their continued convergence raises the height of the Himalayas by 1 cm each year.

Soils in India can be classified into 8 categories: alluvial, black, red, laterite, forest, arid & desert, saline & alkaline and peaty & organic soils. Alluvial soil constitute the largest soil group in India, constituting 80% of the total land surface. It is derived from the deposition of silt carried by rivers and are found in the Great Northern plains from Punjab to the Assam valley. Alluvial soil are generally fertile but they lack nitrogen and tend to be phosphoric. 

Black soil are well developed in the Deccan lava region of Maharashtra, Gujarat, and Madhya Pradesh. These contain high percentage of clay and are moisture retentive. Red soil are found in Tamil Nadu, Karnataka plateau, Andhra plateau, Chota Nagpur plateau and the Aravallis. These are deficient in nitrogen, phosphorus and humus. Laterite soils are formed in tropical regions with heavy rainfall. Heavy rainfall results in leaching out all soluble material of top layer of soil. These are generally found in Western ghats, Eastern ghats and hilly areas of northeastern states that receive heavy rainfall. Forest soils occur on the slopes of mountains and hills in Himalayas, Western Ghats and Eastern Ghats. These generally consist of large amounts of dead leaves and other organic matter called humus.

==Natural resources==
Indian coal production is the 3rd highest in the world according to the 2008 Indian Ministry of Mines estimates. Shown above is a coal mine in Jharkhand.

India's total renewable water resources are estimated at 1,907.8 km3/year. Its annual supply of usable and replenshable groundwater amounts to 350 billion cubic metres. Only 35% of groundwater resources are being utilized. About 44 million tonnes of cargo is moved annually through the country's major rivers and waterways. Groundwater supplies 40% of water in India's irrigation canals. 56% of the land is arable and used for agriculture. Black soils are moisture-retentive and are preferred for dry farming and growing cotton, linseed, etc. Forest soils are used for tea and coffee plantations. Red soil have a wide diffusion of iron content. 

Most of India's estimated 5.4 Goilbbl in oil reserves are located in the Mumbai High, upper Assam, Cambay, the Krishna-Godavari and Cauvery basins. India possesses about seventeen trillion cubic feet of natural gas in Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat and Orissa. Uranium is mined in Andhra Pradesh. India has 400 medium-to-high enthalpy thermal springs for producing geothermal energy in seven "provinces"  the Himalayas, Sohana, Cambay, the Narmada-Tapti delta, the Godavari delta and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands (specifically the volcanic Barren Island.) 

India is the world's biggest producer of mica blocks and mica splittings. India ranks second amongst the world's largest producers of barites and chromites. The Pleistocene system is rich in minerals. India is the third-largest coal producer in the world and ranks fourth in the production of iron ore. It is the fifth-largest producer of bauxite and crude steel, the seventh-largest of manganese ore and the eighth-largest of aluminium. India has significant sources of titanium ore, diamonds and limestone. India possesses 24% of the world's known and economically viable thorium, which is mined along shores of Kerala. Gold had been mined in the now-defunct Kolar Gold Fields in Karnataka. 

==Antipodes==
The only land area antipodal to India is Easter Island, which is antipodal to the western corner of Rajasthan. The triangular island closely reflects the triangle between the cities of Mokal, Kuchchri, and Habur. Habur corresponds to Hanga Roa, and Mokal to the eastern cape.

==References==

==Further reading==

* .
* .
* .
* 

 



[[Demographics of India]]

Crude birth rate trends in India(per 1000 people, national average) 
Infant mortality rate trends in India(per 1000 births, under age 1, national average)
The demographics of India are inclusive of the second most populous country in the world, with over 1.21 billion people (2011 census), more than a sixth of the world's population. Already containing 17.5% of the world's population, India is projected to be the world's most populous country by 2025, surpassing China, its population reaching 1.6 billion by 2050. Its population growth rate is 1.41%, ranking 102nd in the world in 2010. Indian population reached the billion mark in 2000.

India has more than 50% of its population below the age of 25 and more than 65% below the age of 35. It is expected that, in 2020, the average age of an Indian will be 29 years, compared to 37 for China and 48 for Japan; and, by 2030, India's dependency ratio should be just over 0.4. 

India has more than two thousand ethnic groups, and every major religion is represented, as are four major families of languages (Indo-European, Dravidian, Austroasiatic and Tibeto-Burman languages) as well as two language isolates (the Nihali language spoken in parts of Maharashtra and the Burushaski language spoken in parts of Jammu and Kashmir).

Further complexity is lent by the great variation that occurs across this population on social parameters such as income and education. Only the continent of Africa exceeds the linguistic, genetic and cultural diversity of the nation of India. India, a Country Study United States Library of Congress, Note on Ethnic groups 

==Salient features==
India occupies 2.8% of the world's land area and supports over 17.5% of the world's population. Per the 2001 census, 72.2% of the population Rural-Urban distribution Census of India: Census Data 2001: India at a glance >> Rural-Urban Distribution. Office of the Registrar General and Census Commissioner, India. Retrieved on 2008-11-26. lives in about 638,000 villages Number of Villages Census of India: Number of Villages Office of the Registrar General and Census Commissioner, India. Retrieved on 2008-11-26. and the remaining 27.8% lives in more than 5,100 towns and over 380 urban agglomerations. Urban Agglomerations and Towns Census of India: Urban Agglomerations and Towns. Office of the Registrar General and Census Commissioner, India. Retrieved on 2008-11-26. 

India's population has exceeded that of the entire continent of Africa by 200 million people; however, since Africa's population growth is nearly double that of India, it is expected to surpass both China and India by 2025.

===Comparative demographics===

 Category Global Ranking Notes (Reference) 
 Area 7th 
 Population 2nd 
 Population growth rate 102nd of 212 in 2010 
 Population density (people per square kilometer of land area) 24th of 212 in 2010 
 Male to Female ratio, at birth 12th of 214 in 2009 

===List of States and Union territories by demographics===

 S.No. Census Year Population % Change 
 1 1951 361,088,000 ----- 
 2 1961 439,235,000 21.6 
 3 1971 548,160,000 24.8 
 4 1981 683,329,000 24.7 
 5 1991 846,387,888 23.9 
 6 2001 1,028,737,436 21.5 
 7 2011 1,210,193,422 17.6 
 

 Population distribution in India by states 
 Rank State / Union Territory Type Population % Males Females Sex Ratio Literacy Rural Population Urban Population Area (km) Density (/km) 
 1 Uttar Pradesh State 199,812,341 16.5 104,480,510 95,331,831 912 67.68 131,658,339 34,539,582 240,928 828 
 2 Maharashtra State 121,455,333 9.28 58,243,056 54,131,277 929 82.34 55,777,647 41,100,980 307,713 365 
 3 Bihar State 103,804,637 8.6 54,278,157 49,821,295 918 61.80 74,316,709 8,681,800 94,163 1,102 
 4 West Bengal State 91,276,115 7.54 46,809,027 44,467,088 950 76.26 57,748,946 22,427,251 88,752 1,030 
 5 Andhra Pradesh State 84,580,777 6.99 42,442,146 42,138,631 993 67.02 55,401,067 20,808,940 275,045 308 
 6 Madhya Pradesh State 72,626,809 6.00 37,612,306 35,014,503 931 69.32 44,380,878 15,967,145 308,245 236 
 7 Tamil Nadu State 72,147,030 5.96 36,137,975 36,009,055 996 80.09 34,921,681 27,483,998 130,058 555 
 8 Rajasthan State 68,548,437 5.66 35,550,997 32,997,440 928 66.11 43,292,813 13,214,375 342,239 201 
 9 Karnataka State 61,095,297 5.05 30,966,657 30,128,640 973 75.36 34,889,033 17,961,529 191,791 319 
 10 Gujarat State 60,439,692 4.99 31,491,260 28,948,432 919 78.03 31,740,767 18,930,250 196,024 308 
 11 Odisha State 41,974,218 3.47 21,212,136 20,762,082 979 72.87 31,287,422 5,517,238 155,707 269 
 12 Kerala State 33,406,061 2.76 16,027,412 17,378,649 1084 94.00 23,574,449 8,266,925 38,863 859 
 13 Jharkhand State 32,988,134 2.72 16,930,315 16,057,819 948 66.41 20,952,088 5,993,741 79,714 414 
 14 Assam State 31,205,576 2.58 15,939,443 15,266,133 958 72.19 23,216,288 3,439,240 78,438 397 
 15 Punjab State 27,743,338 2.29 14,639,465 13,103,873 895 75.84 16,096,488 8,262,511 50,362 550 
 16 Chhattisgarh State 25,545,198 2.11 12,832,895 12,712,303 991 70.28 16,648,056 4,185,747 135,191 189 
 17 Haryana State 25,351,462 2.09 13,494,734 11,856,728 879 75.55 15,029,260 6,115,304 44,212 573 
 18 Delhi UT 16,787,941 1.39 8,987,326 7,800,615 868 86.21 944,727 12,905,780 11,297 9,340 
 19 Jammu and Kashmir State 12,541,302 1.04 6,640,662 5,900,640 889 67.16 7,627,062 2,516,638 222,236 56 
 20 Uttarakhand State 10,086,292 0.83 5,137,773 4,948,519 963 78.82 6,310,275 2,179,074 53,483 189 
 21 Himachal Pradesh State 6,864,602 0.57 3,481,873 3,382,729 972 82.80 5,482,319 595,581 55,673 123 
 22 Tripura State 3,673,917 0.30 1,874,376 1,799,541 960 87.22 2,653,453 545,750 10,486 350 
 23 Meghalaya State 2,966,889 0.25 1,491,832 1,475,057 989 74.43 1,864,711 454,111 22,429 132 
 24 Manipur State 2,855,794 0.21 1,290,171 1,280,219 992 79.21 1,590,820 575,968 22,327 122 
 25 Nagaland State 1,978,502 0.16 1,024,649 953,853 931 79.55 1,647,249 342,787 16,579 119 
 26 Goa State 1,458,545 0.12 739,140 719,405 973 88.70 677,091 670,577 3,702 394 
 27 Arunachal Pradesh State 1,383,727 0.11 713,912 669,815 938 65.38 870,087 227,881 83,743 17 
 28 Pondicherry UT 1,247,953 0.10 612,511 635,442 1037 85.85 325,726 648,619 479 2,598 
 29 Mizoram State 1,097,206 0.09 555,339 541,867 976 91.33 447,567 441,006 21,081 52 
 30 Chandigarh UT 1,055,450 0.09 580,663 474,787 818 86.05 92,120 808,515 114 9,252 
 31 Sikkim State 610,577 0.05 323,070 287,507 890 81.42 480,981 59,870 7,096 86 
 32 Andaman and Nicobar Islands UT 380,581 0.03 202,871 177,710 876 86.63 239,954 116,198 8,249 46 
 33 Dadra and Nagar Haveli UT 343,709 0.03 193,760 149,949 774 76.24 170,027 50,463 491 698 
 34 Daman and Diu UT 243,247 0.02 150,301 92,946 618 87.10 100,856 57,348 112 2,169 
 35 Lakshadweep UT 64,473 0.01 33,123 31,350 946 91.85 33,683 26,967 32 2,013 
 TOTAL India 28 + 7 1,210,193,422 100 623,724,248 586,469,174 940 74.04 833,087,662 377,105,760 3,287,240 382 

===States in India===

 Rank India/State/UT No. of Districts in 2001 No. of Districts in 2011 No. of Districts without any geographical change 
 1 Uttar Pradesh 75 85 - 
 2 Madhya Pradesh 45 50 - 
 3 Bihar 37 38 34 
 4 Maharashtra 35 35 31 
 5 Rajasthan 32 33 18 
 6 Tamil Nadu 30 32 25 
 7 Karnataka 27 30 24 
 8 Odisha 30 30 26 
 9 Assam 23 27 15 
 10 Gujarat 25 26 20 
 11 Jharkhand 18 24 9 
 12 Andhra Pradesh 23 23 23 
 13 Jammu and Kashmir 14 22 5 
 14 Haryana 19 21 17 
 15 Punjab 17 22 8 
 16 West Bengal 18 19 17 
 17 Chhattisgarh 16 27 8 
 18 Kerala 14 14 14 
 19 Arunachal Pradesh 13 16 10 
 20 Uttarakhand 13 13 11 
 21 Himachal Pradesh 12 12 12 
 22 Nagaland 8 11 3 
 23 Delhi 9 9 9 
 24 Manipur 9 9 9 
 25 Mizoram 8 8 4 
 26 Meghalaya 7 7 4 
 27 Sikkim 4 4 4 
 28 Tripura 4 4 2 
 29 Puducherry 4 4 4 
 30 Andaman and Nicobar Islands 2 3 1 
 31 Goa 2 2 2 
 32 Daman and Diu 2 2 2 
 33 Dadra and Nagar Haveli 1 1 1 
 34 Chandigarh 1 1 1 
 35 Lakshadweep 1 1 1 
 Total INDIA 593 640 464 

 

===Religious demographics===

The table below summarizes India's demographics (excluding Mao-Maram, Paomata and Purul subdivisions of Senapati District of Manipur state due to cancellation of census results) according to religion per 2001 census in percent. The data is "unadjusted" (without excluding Assam and Jammu and Kashmir); The 1981 census was not conducted in Assam and the 1991 census was not conducted in Jammu and Kashmir.

 Table 2: Census information for 2001 
 Composition Hindus Muslims Christians Sikhs Buddhist Jains Others 
 % total of population 2001 80.5% 13.4% 2.3% 1.9% 0.8% 0.4% 0.6% 
 10-Yr Growth % (est '91'01) 20.3% 29.5% 22.6% 18.2% 18.2% 26.0% 103.1% 
 No. of females/1000 males. (avg. = 944) 944 940 1009 895 955 940 1000 
 Literacy rate (71.7% for Age 7 and above) 75.5% 60.0% 90.3% 70.4% 73.0% 95.0% 50.0% 
 Work Participation Rate 40.4 31.3 39.7 37.7 40.6 32.9 48.4 
 Rural sex ratio 1000 953 1001 895 958 937 995 
 Urban sex ratio 922 907 1026 886 944 941 966 
 Child sex ratio (06 yrs) 925 950 964 786 942 870 976 

including Bah's, Jews, and Parsis. Tribal Animists (and non religious) are included after 1926 (1931 census onwards)

===Neonatal and infant demographics===
Male to female sex ratio for India, based on its official census data, from 1941 through 2011. "Sex Composition of the Population", Office of Registrar General and Census Commissioner of India, Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India (2013) The data suggests the existence of high sex ratios before and after the arrival of ultrasound-based prenatal care and sex screening technologies in India.
The table below represents the infant mortality rate trends in India, by gender, in the last 15 years. In the urban areas of India, average male infant mortality rates are slightly higher than the female infant mortality rates.

 Infant mortality demographic trends of India per 1000 births 
 Year Infant (01 year), male Infant (01 year), female Reference 
 1998 70 74 
 2005 56 58 
 2009 49 52 

Some activists believe India's 2011 census shows a serious decline in the number of girls under the age of seven - activists fear eight million female foetuses may have been aborted between 2001 and 2011. These claims are controversial. Scientists who study human sex ratios and demographic trends suggest that birth sex ratio between 1.08 to 1.12 can be because of natural factors, such as the age of mother at baby's birth, age of father at baby's birth, number of babies per couple, economic stress, endocrinological factors, etc. The 2011 census birth sex ratio in India, of 917 girls to 1000 boys, is similar to 870-930 girls to 1000 boys birth sex ratios observed in Japanese, Chinese, Cuban, Filipino and Hawaiian ethnic groups in the United States between 1940 to 2005. They are also similar to birth sex ratios below 900 girls to 1000 boys observed in mothers of different age groups and gestation periods in the United States. 

===Population within the age group of 06===

 State/UT Code India/State/UT Person Males Females 
 01 Jammu and Kashmir 2,008,644 1,080,662 927,982 
 02 Himachal Pradesh 763,864 400,681 363,183 
 03 Punjab 2,941,570 1,593,262 1,348,308 
 04 Chandigarh 117,953 63,187 54,766 
 05 Uttarakhand 1,328,844 704,769 624,075 
 06 Haryana 3,297,724 1,802,047 1,495,677 
 07 Delhi 1,970,510 1,055,735 914,775 
 08 Rajasthan 10,504,916 5,580,212 4,924,704 
 09 Uttar Pradesh 29,728,235 15,653,175 14,075,060 
 10 Bihar 18,582,229 9,615,280 8,966,949 
 11 Sikkim 61,077 31,418 29,659 
 12 Arunachal Pradesh 202,759 103,430 99,329 
 13 Nagaland 285,981 147,111 138,870 
 14 Manipur 353,237 182,684 170,553 
 15 Mizoram 165,536 83,965 81,571 
 16 Tripura 444,055 227,354 216,701 
 17 Meghalaya 555,822 282,189 273,633 
 18 Assam 4,511,307 2,305,088 2,206,219 
 19 West Bengal 10,112,599 5,187,264 4,925,335 
 20 Jharkhand 5,237,582 2,695,921 2,541,661 
 21 Odisha 5,035,650 2,603,208 2,432,442 
 22 Chhattisgarh 3,584,028 1,824,987 1,759,041 
 23 Madhya Pradesh 10,548,295 5,516,957 5,031,338 
 24 Gujarat 7,564464 3,974,286 3,519,890 
 25 Daman and Diu 25,880 13,556 
 26 Dadra and Nagar Haveli 49,196 25,575 23,621 
 27 Maharashtra 12,848,375 6,822,262 6,026,113 
 28 Andhra Pradesh 8,642,686 4,448,330 4,194,356 
 29 Karnataka 6,855,801 3,527,844 3,327,957 
 30 Goa 139,495 72,669 66,826 
 31 Lakshadweep 7,088 3,715 3,373 
 32 Kerala 3,322,247 1,695,889 1,626,358 
 33 Tamil Nadu 6,894,821 3,542,351 3,352,470 
 34 Puducherry 127,610 64,932 62,678 
 35 Andaman and Nicobar Islands 39,497 20,094 19,403 
 INDIA 158,789,287 82,952,135 75,837,152 

 

===Population above the age of 7===

 State/UT Code India/State/UT Persons Males Females 
 01 Jammu and Kashmir 10,540,274 5,584,889 4,955,385 
 02 Himachal Pradesh 6,092,645 3,073,211 3,019,434 
 03 Punjab 24,762,666 13,041,557 11,721,109 
 04 Chandigarh 936,733 517,095 419,638 
 05 Uttarakhand- 8,787,908 4,449,409 4,338,499 
 06 Haryana 22,055,357 11,703,083 10,352,274 
 07 Delhi 14,782,725 7,920,675 6,862,050 
 08 Rajasthan 58,116,096 30,039,874 28,076,222 
 09 Uttar Pradesh 169,853,242 88,943,240 80,910,002 
 10 Bihar 85,222,408 44,570,067 40,652,341 
 11 Sikkim 546,611 290,243 256,368 
 12 Arunachal Pradesh 1,179,852 616,802 563,050 
 13 Nagaland 1,694,621 878,596 816,025 
 14 Manipur 2,368,519 1,187,080 1,181,439 
 15 Mizoram 925,478 468,374 457,104 
 16 Tripura 3,226,977 1,644,513 1,582,464 
 17 Meghalaya 2,408,185 1,210,479 1,197,706 
 18 Assam 26,657,965 13,649,839 13,008,126 
 19 West Bengal 81,235,137 41,740,125 39,495,012 
 20 Jharkhand 27,728,656 14,235,767 13,492,889 
 21 Odisha 36,911,708 18,598,470 18,313,238 
 22 Chhattisgarh 21,956,168 11,002,928 10,953,240 
 23 Madhya Pradesh 62,049,270 32,095,963 29,953,307 
 24 Gujarat 52,889,452 27,507,996 25,381,456 
 25 Daman and Diu 217,031 136,544 80,487 
 26 Dadra and Nagar Haveli 293,657 167,603 126,054 
 27 Maharashtra 99,524,597 51,539,135 47,985,462 
 28 Andhra Pradesh 76,022,847 38,061,551 37,961,296 
 29 Karnataka 54,274,903 27,529,898 26,745,005 
 30 Goa 1,318,228 668,042 650,186 
 31 Lakshadweep 57,341 29,391 27,950 
 32 Kerala 30,065,430 14,325,355 15,740,075 
 33 Tamil Nadu 65,244,137 32,616,520 32,627,617 
 34 Puducherry 1,116,854 545,553 571,301 
 35 Andaman and Nicobar Islands 340,447 182,236 158,211 
 INDIA 1,051,404,135 540,772,113 510,632,022 

 

===Literacy rate in India===

 State/UT Code India/State/UT Literate Persons (%) Males (%) Females (%) 
 01 Jammu and Kashmir 86.61 87.26 85.23+- 
 02 Himachal Pradesh 83.78 90.83 76.60 
 03 Punjab 76.6 81.48 71.34 
 04 Chandigarh 86.43 90.54 81.38 
 05 Uttarakhand 79.63 88.33 70.70 
 06 Haryana 76.64 85.38 66.77 
 07 Delhi 86.34 91.03 80.93 
 08 Rajasthan 67.06 80.51 52.66 
 09 Uttar Pradesh 69.72 79.24 59.26 
 10 Bihar 63.82 73.39 53.33 
 11 Sikkim 82.20 87.29 76.43 
 12 Arunachal Pradesh 66.95 73.69 59.57 
 13 Nagaland 80.11 83.29 76.69 
 14 Manipur 79.85 86.49 73.17 
 15 Mizoram 91.58 93.72 89.40 
 16 Tripura 87.75 92.18 83.15 
 17 Meghalaya 75.48 77.17 73.78 
 18 Assam 73.18 78.81 67.27 
 19 West Bengal 77.08 82.67 71.16 
 20 Jharkhand 67.63 78.45 56.21 
 21 Odisha 72.9 82.40 64.36 
 22 Chhattisgarh 71.04 81.45 60.59 
 23 Madhya Pradesh 70.63 80.53 60.02 
 24 Gujarat 79.31 87.23 70.73 
 25 Daman and Diu 87.07 91.48 79.59 
 26 Dadra and Nagar Haveli 77.65 86.46 65.93 
 27 Maharashtra 83.2 89.82 75.48 
 28 Andhra Pradesh 67.66 75.56 59.74 
 29 Karnataka 75.60 82.85 68.13 
 30 Goa 87.40 92.81 81.84 
 31 Lakshadweep 92.28 96.11 88.25 
 32 Kerala 93.91 96.02 91.98 
 33 Tamil Nadu 80.33 86.81 73.86 
 34 Puducherry 86.55 92.12 81.22 
 35 Andaman and Nicobar Islands 86.27 90.11 81.84 
 INDIA 74.03 82.14 65.46 

 

===Linguistic demographics===

41.03% of the Indians speak Hindi while the rest speak Assamese, Bengali, Gujarati, Kannada, Malayalam, Marathi, Punjabi, Tamil, Telugu and a variety of other languages.

The table immediately below excludes Mao-Maram, Paomata and Purul subdivisions of Senapati District of Manipur state due to cancellation of census results.

 Languages of India by number of native speakers as per the 2001 census Abstract of speakers' strength of languages and mother tongues - 2000, Census of India, 2001 Rank Language Speakers Percentage 
 1 Hindi dialects includes Western Hindi, Eastern Hindi, Bihari languages, Rajasthani languages and Pahari languages. 422,048,642 41.03% 
 2 Bengali 83,369,769 8.11% 
 3 Telugu 74,002,856 7.19% 
 4 Marathi 71,936,894 6.99% 
 5 Tamil 60,793,814 5.91% 
 6 Urdu 51,536,111 5.01% 
 7 Gujarati 46,091,617 4.48% 
 8 Kannada 37,924,011 3.69% 
 9 Malayalam 33,066,392 3.21% 
 10 Oriya 33,017,446 3.21% 
 11 Punjabi 29,102,477 2.83% 
 12 Assamese 13,168,484 1.28% 
 13 Maithili 12,179,122 1.18% 
 14 Bhili/Bhilodi 9,582,957 0.93% 
 15 Santali 6,469,600 0.63% 
 16 Kashmiri 5,527,698 0.54% 
 17 Nepali 2,871,749 0.28% 
 18 Gondi 2,713,790 0.26% 
 19 Sindhi 2,535,485 0.25% 
 20 Konkani 2,489,015 0.24% 
 21 Dogri 2,282,589 0.22% 
 22 Khandeshi 2,075,258 0.20% 
 23 Kurukh 1,751,489 0.17% 
 24 Tulu 1,722,768 0.17% 
 25 Meitei (Manipuri) 1,466,705* 0.14% 
 26 Bodo 1,350,478 0.13% 
 27 Khasi - Garo 1,128,575 0.112% 
 28 Mundari 1,061,352 0.105% 
 29 Ho 1,042,724 0.103% 

===Largest cities===

==Vital statistics==

===UN estimates World Population Prospects: The 2010 Revision ===

 Period Births per year Deaths per year Natural change per year CBR1 CDR1 NC1 TFR1 IMR1 
 19501955 16,832,000 9,928,000 6,904,000 43.3 25.5 17.7 5.90 165.0 
 19551960 17,981,000 9,686,000 8,295,000 42.1 22.7 19.4 5.90 153.1 
 19601965 19,086,000 9,358,000 9,728,000 40.4 19.8 20.6 5.82 140.1 
 19651970 20,611,000 9,057,000 11,554,000 39.2 17.2 22.0 5.69 128.5 
 19701975 22,022,000 8,821,000 13,201,000 37.5 15.0 22.5 5.26 118.0 
 19751980 24,003,000 8,584,000 15,419,000 36.3 13.0 23.3 4.89 106.4 
 19801985 25,577,000 8,763,000 16,814,000 34.5 11.8 22.7 4.47 95.0 
 19851990 26,935,000 9,073,000 17,862,000 32.5 10.9 21.5 4.11 85.1 
 19901995 27,566,000 9,400,000 18,166,000 30.0 10.2 19.8 3.72 76.4 
 19952000 27,443,000 9,458,000 17,985,000 27.2 9.4 17.8 3.31 68.9 
 20002005 27,158,000 9,545,000 17,614,000 24.8 8.7 16.1 2.96 60.7 
 20052010 27,271,000 9,757,000 17,514,000 23.1 8.3 14.8 2.73 52.9 
 1 CBR = crude birth rate (per 1000); CDR = crude death rate (per 1000); NC = natural change (per 1000); TFR = total fertility rate (number of children per woman); IMR = infant mortality rate per 1000 births 

===Sample Registration System United nations. Demographic Yearbooks Census of India. Vital statistics Sample Registration System ===

 Average population (x 1000) Live births1 Deaths1 Natural change Crude birth rate (per 1000) Crude death rate (per 1000) Natural change (per 1000) Total Fertility Rate 
 1981 716 493 24 289 000 8 956 000 15 333 000 33.9 12.5 21.4 
 1982 733 152 24 781 000 8 725 000 16 056 000 33.8 11.9 21.9 
 1983 750 034 25 276 000 8 925 000 16 351 000 33.7 11.9 21.8 
 1984 767 147 26 006 000 9 666 000 16 340 000 33.9 12.6 21.3 
 1985 784 491 25 810 000 9 257 000 16 553 000 32.9 11.8 21.1 
 1986 802 052 26 147 000 8 903 000 17 244 000 32.6 11.1 21.5 
 1987 819 800 26 316 000 8 936 000 17 380 000 32.1 10.9 21.2 
 1988 837 700 26 388 000 9 215 000 17 173 000 31.5 11.0 20.5 
 1989 855 707 26 185 000 8 814 000 17 371 000 30.6 10.3 20.3 
 1990 873 785 26 388 000 8 476 000 17 912 000 30.2 9.7 20.5 3.8 
 1991 891 910 26 133 000 8 741 000 17 392 000 29.3 9.8 19.5 
 1992 910 065 26 392 000 9 192 000 17 200 000 29.0 10.1 18.9 
 1993 928 226 26 640 000 8 633 000 18 007 000 28.7 9.3 19.4 
 1994 946 373 27 161 000 8 801 000 18 360 000 28.7 9.3 19.4 
 1995 964 486 27 295 000 8 680 000 18 615 000 28.3 9.0 19.3 3.5 
 1996 982 553 26 824 000 8 745 000 18 079 000 27.3 8.9 18.4 
 1997 1 000 558 27 215 000 8 905 000 18 310 000 27.2 8.9 18.3 
 1998 1 018 471 26 989 000 9 166 000 17 823 000 26.5 9.0 17.5 
 1999 1 036 259 26 943 000 9 015 000 17 928 000 26.0 8.7 17.3 
 2000 1 053 898 27 191 000 8 958 000 18 233 000 25.8 8.5 17.3 3.2 
 2001 1 071 374 27 213 000 9 000 000 18 213 000 25.4 8.4 17.0 
 2002 1 088 694 27 217 000 8 818 000 18 399 000 25.0 8.1 16.9 
 2003 1 105 886 27 426 000 8 847 000 18 579 000 24.8 8.0 16.8 
 2004 1 122 991 27 064 000 8 422 000 18 642 000 24.1 7.5 16.6 
 2005 1 140 043 27 133 000 8 664 000 18 469 000 23.8 7.6 16.2 2.9 
 2006 1 157 039 27 190 000 8 678 000 18 512 000 23.5 7.5 16.0 
 2007 1 173 972 27 119 000 8 687 000 18 432 000 23.1 7.4 15.7 
 2008 1 190 864 27 152 000 8 812 000 18 340 000 22.8 7.4 15.4 2.6 
 2009 1 207 740 27 174 000 8 817 000 18 357 000 22.5 7.3 15.2 2.6 
 2010 1 224 614 27 064 000 8 817 000 18 247 000 22.1 7.2 14.9 2.5 
 2011 1 242 738 27 092 000 8 823 000 18 268 000 21.8 7.1 14.7 2.44 
 2012 1 261 006 27 237 000 8 827 000 18 410 000 21.6 7.0 14.6 2.4 

1 The numbers of births and deaths were calculated from the birth and death rates and the average population

===Regional vital Statistics===
Chart showing the Total Fertility Rate of Indian states (SRS survey 1996-98) 
The below table gives the vital statistics (Births, Deaths, IMR and NGR) for the year 2010, according to the Registrar Gen., India. [http://www.censusindia.gov.in/vital_statistics/SRS_Bulletins/SRS%20Bulletin_%20December%202011%20.pdf ] 

 State Birth Rate BR Rural BR Urban Death Rate DR Rural DR Urban NGR NGR Rural NGR Urban IMR 
 Andhra Pradesh 17.9 18.3 16.7 7.6 8.6 5.4 1.02% 0.97% 1.13% 46 
 Assam 23.2 24.4 15.8 8.2 8.6 5.8 1.49% 1.58% 1.01% 58 
 Arunachal Pradesh 28.1 28.8 22.0 6.8 7.0 5.6 2.13% 2.18% 1.64% 48 
 Chhattisgarh 25.3 26.8 18.6 8.0 8.4 6.2 1.73% 1.84% 1.24% 51 
 Delhi 17.8 19.7 17.5 4.2 4.6 4.1 1.36% 1.50% 1.34% 30 
 Gujarat 21.8 23.3 19.4 6.7 7.5 5.5 1.51% 1.58% 1.40% 44 
 Haryana 22.3 23.3 19.8 6.6 7.0 5.6 1.57% 1.63% 1.43% 48 
 Jammu and Kashmir 18.3 19.5 13.5 5.7 5.9 4.7 1.26% 1.36% 0.88% 43 
 Jharkhand 25.3 26.7 19.3 7.0 7.4 5.4 1.83% 1.93% 1.39% 42 
 Karnataka 19.2 20.2 17.5 7.1 8.1 5.4 1.21% 1.21% 1.21% 38 
 Kerala 14.8 14.8 14.8 7.0 7.1 6.7 0.78% 0.77% 0.81% 13 
 Madhya Pradesh 27.3 29.2 20.5 8.3 9.0 6.0 1.89% 2.02% 1.45% 62 
 Maharashtra 35.1 34.6 26.4 26.3 25.5 22.3 4.06% 3.02% 3.11% 78 
 Odisha 20.5 21.4 15.2 8.6 9.0 6.6 1.19% 1.24% 0.86% 61 
 Punjab 16.6 17.2 15.6 7.0 7.7 5.8 0.96% 0.95% 0.98% 34 
 Rajasthan 26.7 27.9 22.9 6.7 6.9 6.0 2.00% 2.09% 1.69% 55 
 Tamil Nadu 15.9 16.0 15.8 7.6 8.2 6.9 0.83% 0.78% 0.89% 24 
 Uttar Pradesh 28.3 29.2 24.2 8.1 8.5 6.3 2.02% 2.07% 1.79% 61 
 West Bengal 16.8 18.6 11.9 6.0 6.0 6.3 1.07% 1.26% 0.56% 31 
 Bihar 20.5 22.1 14.6 5.9 6.9 2.3 1.46% 1.52% 1.23% 31 
 Goa 13.2 12.6 13.7 6.6 8.1 5.7 0.66% 0.45% 0.80% 10 
 Himachal Pradesh 16.9 17.5 11.5 6.9 7.2 4.2 1.00% 1.03% 0.73% 40 
 Manipur 14.9 14.8 15.3 4.2 4.3 4.0 1.07% 1.05% 1.13% 14 
 Meghalaya 24.5 26.6 14.8 7.9 8.4 5.6 1.66% 1.82% 0.92% 55 
 Mizoram 17.1 21.1 13.0 4.5 5.4 3.7 1.25% 1.57% 0.93% 37 
 Nagaland 16.8 17.0 16.0 3.6 3.7 3.3 1.32% 1.33% 1.27% 23 
 Sikkim 17.8 18.1 16.1 5.6 5.9 3.8 1.23% 1.23% 1.23% 30 
 Tripura 14.9 15.6 11.5 5.0 4.8 5.7 0.99% 1.08% 0.58% 27 
 Uttarakhand 19.3 20.2 16.2 6.3 6.7 5.1 1.30% 1.35% 1.11% 38 
 Andaman and Nicobar Islands 15.6 15.5 15.8 4.3 4.8 3.3 1.13% 1.07% 1.26% 25 
 Chandigarh 15.6 21.6 15.0 3.9 3.7 3.9 1.16% 1.79% 1.10% 22 
 Dadra and Nagar Haveli 26.6 26.0 28.6 4.7 5.1 3.3 2.19% 2.09% 2.53% 38 
 Daman and Diu 18.8 19.1 18.3 4.9 4.9 4.8 1.39% 1.42% 1.36% 23 
 Lakshadweep 14.3 15.5 13.2 6.4 6.1 6.7 0.80% 0.95% 0.65% 25 
 Puducherry 16.7 16.7 16.7 7.4 8.2 7.0 0.93% 0.85% 0.96% 22 

==CIA World Factbook demographic statistics==
The following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.

;Total population:
1,166,079,217 (July 2009 est. CIA) 
1,028.7 million (2001 Census final figures, 1 March enumeration and estimated 124,000 in areas of Manipur that could not be covered in the enumeration)

Map showing the population density of each district in India.

;Rural Population:
72.2%, male: 381,668,992, female: 360,948,755 (2001 Census)

;Age structure:
014 years: 30.8%, male: 188,208,196, female: 171,356,024
1564 years: 64.3%, male: 386,432,921, female: 364,215,759
65+ years: 4.9%, male: 27,258,259, female: 30,031,289 (2007 est.)

;Median age:
25.1 years

;Population growth rate:
1.548% (2009 est.)

Map showing the literacy rate of each district in India.

;Literacy rate:
71.7% (Age 7 and above, in 2001) 
81.4% (Total population, Age 15-25, in 2006) 

;Percent of the population under the poverty line:
22% (2006 est.)

;Unemployment Rate:
7.8%

;Net migration rate:
0.05 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2007 est.)

;Sex ratio:
at birth:
1.12 male(s)/female
under 10 years:
1.14 male(s)/female
1524 years:
1.09 male(s)/female
2464 years:
1.06 male(s)/female
65 years and over:
0.908 male(s)/female
total population:
1.08 male(s)/female (2011 est.)

;Life expectancy at birth:
total population:
65.8 years (Source: UN Human Development Report 2013)

;Total fertility rate:
2.72 children born/woman (2009 est.), although more up to date statistics indicate that India's TFR was 2.6 in 2008 
The TFR (Total number of children born per women) according to Religion in 2001 was :

Hindus  2.0
Muslims  3.4
Sikhs  2.1
Christians  2.1
Buddhists  2.1
Jains  1.4
Animists and Others  2.99
Tribals  3.16
Scheduled Castes  2.89

;Religions:
Hindu 80.5%
Muslim 13.4%
Christian 2.3%
Sikh 1.8%
Buddhists 0.8%
Jains 0.4%
others 0.7%
unspecified 0.1% (2001 Census)
 Religious Composition Census of India: Census Data 2001: India at a glance >> Religious Composition. Office of the Registrar General and Census Commissioner, India. Retrieved on 2008-11-26. International Religious Freedom Report 2007  India International Religious Freedom Report 2007. U.S. Department of State. Bureau of South and Central Asian Affairs  Background Note: India 

;Scheduled Castes and Tribes:
Scheduled Castes: 16.2% (2001 Census)
Scheduled Tribes: 8.2% (2001 Census)

Languages: See Languages of India and List of Indian languages by total speakers.
There are 216 languages with more than 10,000 native speakers in India. The largest of these is Hindi with some 337 million (the second largest being Bengali. 22 languages are recognized as official languages. In India, there are 1,652 languages and dialects in total. Rupert Goodwins. Smashing India's language barriers. ZDNet UK. 

==Population projections==
India is projected to overtake China as the world's most populous nation by 2030. India's population growth has raised concerns that it would lead to widespread unemployment and political instability. Note that these projections make assumptions about future fertility and death rates which may not turn out to be correct in the event.

Source: 
* 2020: 1,326,093,000
* 2030: 1,460,743,000
* 2040: 1,571,715,000
* 2050: 1,656,554,000

===2020 Estimate===
In millions (example: 361 = 361,000,000)

Source: Based on P.N. Mari Bhat, "Indian Demographic Scenario 2025", Institute of Economic Growth, New Delhi, Discussion Paper No. 27/2001. 

 Year Under 15 1564 65+ Total 
 2000 361 604 45 1010 
 2005 368 673 51 1093 
 2010 370 747 58 1175 
 2015 372 819 65 1256 
 2020 373 882 76 1332 

==Ethnic groups==

The national Census of India does not recognize racial or ethnic groups within India, Kumar, Jayant. Census of India. 2001. 4 September 2006. Indian Census but recognizes many of the tribal groups as Scheduled Castes and Tribes (see list of Scheduled Tribes in India). Nevertheless, some anthropologists classify Indians as belonging to one of four major ethno-racial groups, which significantly overlap because of racial admixture between populations: Caucasoids, Australoids, Mongoloids and Negritos. The Caucasoids are found in the north, central and south-western regions of India and generally speak Indo-Aryan languages; Australoids are found in the south and generally speak Dravidian languages; Mongoloids are largely confined to the Northeastern region of the country and for the most part, speak Tibeto-Burman languages; and Negritos are found on the Andaman Islands located on the southeastern side of the country. These speak a language known simply as Great Andamanese, a linguistic isolate not related to any known language. And finally, Austroasiatic languages are spoken by only tribals or Adivasis, who can be of either Australoid or Mongoloid racial stock. http://www.imtech.res.in/raghava/reprints/IGVdb.pdf 

According to a 2009 study published by Reich et al., the modern Indian population is composed of two genetically divergent and heterogeneous populations which mixed in ancient times (about 1,200-3,500 BC), known as Ancestral North Indians (ANI) and Ancestral South Indians (ASI). ASI corresponds to the Dravidian-speaking population of southern India, whereas ANI corresponds to the Indo-Aryan-speaking population of northern India. 

For a list of ethnic groups in the Republic of India (as well as neighboring countries) see ethnic groups of the Indian subcontinent or the tree diagram above.

==Genetics==

===Y-chromosome DNA===
 

Y-Chromosome DNA Y-DNA represents the male lineage, The Indian Y-chromosome pool may be summarized as follows where haplogroups R-M420, H, R2, L and NOP comprise generally more than 80% of the total chromosomes. 
Hammer et al. 2005, S. Sahoo et al. 2006, R. Trivedi et al. 2007, Zhao et al. 2008 
* H ~ 30%
* R1a ~ 20%
* R2 ~ 15%
* L ~ 10%
* NOP ~ 10% (Excluding R)
* Other Haplogroups 15%

===Mitochondrial DNA===
 

Mitochondrial DNA mtDNA represents the female lineage. The Indian mitochondrial DNA is primarily made up of Haplogroup M Semino et al. 2000, Kivisild et al. 2003, Metspalu et al. 2004, Rajkumar et al. 2005, Chandrasekar et al. 2007, Gonzalez et al. 2007 
* Haplogroup M ~ 60%
* Haplogroup UK ~ 15%
* Haplogroup N ~ 25% (Excluding UK)

===Autosomal DNA===
Numerous genomic studies have been conducted in the last 15 years to seek insights into India's demographic and cultural diversity. These studies paint a complex and conflicting picture.
* In a 2003 study, Basu, Majumder et al. have concluded on the basis of results obtained from mtDNA, Y-chromosome and autosomal markers that "(1) there is an underlying unity of female lineages in India, indicating that the initial number of female settlers may have been small; (2) the tribal and the caste populations are highly differentiated; (3) the Austroasiatic tribals are the earliest settlers in India, providing support to one anthropological hypothesis while refuting some others; (4) a major wave of humans entered India through the northeast; (5) the Tibeto-Burman tribals share considerable genetic commonalities with the Austroasiatic tribals, supporting the hypothesis that they may have shared a common habitat in southern China, but the two groups of tribals can be differentiated on the basis of Y-chromosomal haplotypes; (6) the Dravidian speaking populations were possibly widespread throughout India but are regulated to South India now ; (7) formation of populations by fission that resulted in founder and drift effects have left their imprints on the genetic structures of contemporary populations; (8) the upper castes show closer genetic affinities with Central Asian populations, although those of southern India are more distant than those of northern India; (9) historical gene flow into India has contributed to a considerable obliteration of genetic histories of contemporary populations so that there is at present no clear congruence of genetic and geographical or sociocultural affinities." 
* In a later 2010 review article, Majumder affirms some of these conclusions, introduces and revises some other. The on-going studies, concludes Majumder, suggest India has served as the major early corridor for geographical dispersal of modern humans from out-of-Africa. The archaeological and genetic traces of the earliest settlers in India has not provided any conclusive evidence. The tribal populations of India are older than the non-tribal populations. The autosomal differentiation and genetic diversity within India's caste populations at 0.04 is significantly lower than 0.14 for continental populations and 0.09 for 31 world population sets studied by Watkins et al., suggesting that while tribal populations were differentiated, the differentiation effects within India's caste population was less than previously thought. Majumder also concludes that recent studies suggest India has been a major contributor to the gene pool of southeast Asia. 
* Another study covering a large sample of Indian populations allowed Watkins et al. to examine eight Indian caste groups and four endogamous south Indian tribal populations. The Indian castes data show low between-group differences, while the tribal Indian groups show relatively high between-group differentiation. This suggests that people between Indian castes were not reproductively isolated, while Indian tribal populations experienced reproductive isolation and drift. Furthermore, the genetic fixation index data shows historical genetic differentiation and segregation between Indian castes population is much smaller than those found in east Asia, Africa and other continental populations; while being similar to the genetic differentiation and segregation observed in European populations. 
* In 2006, Sahoo et al. reported their analysis of genomic data on 936 Y-chromosomes representing 32 tribal and 45 caste groups from different regions of India. These scientists find that the haplogroup frequency distribution across the country, between different caste groups, was found to be predominantly driven by geographical, rather than cultural determinants. They conclude there is clear evidence for both large-scale immigration into ancient India of Tibeto-Burman speakers and language change of former Austroasiatic speakers, in the northeast Indian region. 
* The genome studies through 2010 have been on relatively small population sets. Many are from just one southeastern state of Andhra Pradesh. Any conclusions on demographic history of India must therefore be interpreted with caution. A larger national genome study with demographic growth and sex ratio balances may offer further insights on the extent of genetic differentiation and segregation in India over the millenniums. 

==See also==
* Culture of India
* Non-resident Indian and Person of Indian Origin
* Demography of Central Asia
* Female foeticide in India

===Government===
* 2011 census of India
* National Commission on Population

===Lists===
* List of most populous cities in India
* List of most populous metropolitan areas in India
* List of million-plus urban agglomerations in India
* List of states and union territories of India by population

==Notes==

==References==

==External links==
* Census of India; government site with detailed data from 2001 census
* Census of India map generator; generates maps based on 2001 census figures
* Demographic data for India; provides sources of demographic data for India
* 2001 maps; provides maps of social, economic and demographic data of India in 2001
* Population of India 2011 map; distribution of population amongst states and union territories
* India's Demographic Outlook: Implications and Trends
* United Nations "World Population Prospects": Country Profile - India
* Aggregated demographic statistics from Indian and global data sources

 

[[Politics of India]]

Parliament of India.
Politics in India (Hindi: ) takes place within the framework of a constitution. India is a federal parliamentary democratic republic in which the President of India is head of state and the Prime Minister of India is the head of government. India follows the dual polity, i.e. double government which consists of the union at the centre and states at the periphery. The constitution defines the organisation, powers and limitations of both central and state governments, it is written, rigid and supreme, i.e. laws of the nation must conform to it. There is provision for a bicameral legislature consisting of an Upper House, i.e. Rajya Sabha, which represent the states of the Indian federation and a lower house i.e. Lok Sabha, that represents the people of India as a whole. Indian constitution provides for an independent Judiciary headed by the Supreme Court to adhere and protect the constitution and to settle disputes between the centre and the states or between the states, it can also nullify any central or state laws if they are against the constitution. 

The governments,union or state, are formed through elections held every five years(unless otherwise specified), by having the majority of members in their respective lower houses (Lok Sabha in centre and Vidhan Sabha in states). India had its first general election in 1951, which was dominated by Indian National Congress, and went on to dominate the successive elections, up till 1977, when the first non-Congress government was formed for the first time in independent India. The 1990s saw the end of Single Party domination and rise of Coalition Governments. The elections for 16th Lok Sabha held in April and May 2014 once again brought back single-party rule in the country, that of the Bharatiya Janata Party. 

==Political parties and Alliances==

===Features of Political Parties in India===
As compared to other democratic countries India has a large number of political parties, it has been estimated that over 200 parties were formed after India became independent in 1947. 

One feature of the political parties in India is that the parties are generally woven around their leaders, the leaders actively playing a dominant role, the role of leadership can be transferred and tends to take dynastic route. Such parties include both national and regional parties, parties such as Indian National Congress(INC) has been led by Nehru-Gandhi dynasty since independence, starting from Jawaharlal Nehru who dominated the INC and led it to victory in three consecutive elections. After a brief interlude of the prime ministership of Lal Bahadur Shastri, Nehru's daughter, Indira Gandhi became prime minister. After the split in the Congress party in 1969 she formed her own Indian National congress (Ruling). After a a further split, she formed the Congress (Indira) or Congress(I). Indira remained the leader of the party until her death in 1984, when her son Rajiv Gandhi took the reigns and after his death his widow Sonia Gandhi, the current leader of INC took command. As a result of such dominance, the leaders of political parties of the country tend to take an autocratic tone.
 
One other major feature of the political parties is that, except the communist parties, most of the political parties of India lack an ideological basis. Instead political parties in India are formed on the basis of race, religion, language, caste etc. factors, thus the high number of political parties. 

===Types of Political Parties===

There are two types of political parties in India - National Party and Regional/State party. Every political party must bear a symbol and must be registered with the Election Commission of India.

In the current amendment to the Symbols Order, the Commission, has infused the following five principles, which, in its view, should govern the polity in the country, situate as it is in its present state: 
# Legislative presence is a must for recognition as a National or State party.
# For a National party, it must be the legislative presence in the Lok Sabha, and, for a State party, the legislative presence must be reflected in the State Assembly.
# In any election, a party can set up a candidate only from amongst its own members.
# A party, that loses its recognition, shall not lose its symbol immediately, but shall be given the facility to use that symbol for some time to try and retrieve its status. the grant of such facility to the party to use its symbol will not mean the extension of other facilities to it, as are available to recognised parties, like, free time on Doordarshan/AIR, free supply of copies of electoral rolls, etc.
# Recognition should be given to a party only on the basis of its own performance in elections and not because it is a splinter group of some other recognised party.

Criteria -

*A political party shall be eligible to be recognised as a National party if :-

# it secures at least six percent(6%) of the valid votes polled in any four or more states, at a general election to the House of the People or, to the State Legislative Assembly; and
# in addition, it wins at least four seats in the House of the People from any State or States.

OR
it wins at least two percent (2%) seats in the House of the People (i.e., 11 seats in the existing House having 543 members), and these members are elected from at least three different States.

*Likewise, a political party shall be entitled to be recognised as a State party, if :-

# it secures at least six percent (6%) of the valid votes polled in the State at a general election, either to the House of the People or to the Legislative Assembly of the State concerned; and
# in addition, it wins at least two seats in the Legislative Assembly of the State concerned.

OR

it wins at least three percent (3%) of the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the State, or at least three seats in the Assembly, whichever is more.

At present there are 6 national parties and over 40 state parties.

===Alliances===
There are three alliances on a national level in India, competing with each other for the position of Government. The member parties work in harmony for gratifying national interests, although a party can jump ships whenever it may deem fit.

The three alliances -
* United Progressive Alliance(UPA) - Centre-Left coalition led by INC, this alliance was created after the 2004 General Elections, with the alliance forming the Government. The alliance even after losing some of its members, was reelected in 2009 General Elections with Manmohan Singh as head of the government.

* National Democratic Alliance(NDA) - Centre-Right coalition led by BJP was formed in 1998 after the elections, NDA formed the government although the government didn't last long as AIADMK withdrew support from it resulting in 1999 general elections, in which NDA won and resumed power. The coalition government went on to complete the full five years term, becoming the first non-Congress government to do so. In the 2014 General Elections NDA once again returned to power for the second time, with a historic mandate of 336 out of 543 Lok Sabha seats. BJP itself won 282 seats thereby electing Narendra Modi as the head of the government. 
 
* Third front - The coalition of parties which do not belong to any of the above camps due to certain issues. One of the major parties in the alliance CPI(M), prior to 2009 General Elections was a member party of the UPA. The alliance has no official leading party.

==Local governance==

On April 24, 1993, the Constitutional (73rd Amendment) Act, 1992 came into force to provide constitutional status to the Panchayati Raj institutions. This Act was extended to Panchayats in the tribal areas of eight States, namely Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa and Rajasthan from 24 December 1996.

The Act aims to provide 3-tier system of Panchayati Raj for all States having population of over 2 million, to hold Panchayat elections regularly every 5 years, to provide reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Women, to appoint State Finance Commission to make recommendations as regards the financial powers of the Panchayats and to constitute District Planning Committee to prepare draft development plan for the district.

==Role of political parties==

As with any other democracy, political parties represent different sections among the Indian society and regions, and their core values play a major role in the politics of India. Both the executive branch and the legislative branch of the government are run by the representatives of the political parties who have been elected through the elections. Through the electoral process, the people of India choose which representative and which political party should run the government. Through the elections any party may gain simple majority in the lower house. Coalitions are formed by the political parties, in case no single party gains a simple majority in the lower house. Unless a party or a coalition have a majority in the lower house, a government cannot be formed by that party or the coalition.

Indian state governments led by various political parties as of March 2014.
India has a multi-party system, where there are a number of national as well as regional parties. A regional party may gain a majority and rule a particular state. If a party is represented in more than 4 states, it would be labelled a national party. Out of the 66 years of India's independence, India has been ruled by the Indian National Congress (INC) for 53 of those years.

The party enjoyed a parliamentary majority save for two brief periods during the 1970s and late 1980s. This rule was interrupted between 1977 to 1980, when the Janata Party coalition won the election owing to public discontent with the controversial state of emergency declared by the then Prime Minister Indira Gandhi. The Janata Dal won elections in 1989, but its government managed to hold on to power for only two years.

Between 1996 and 1998, there was a period of political flux with the government being formed first by the nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) followed by a left-leaning United Front coalition. In 1998, the BJP formed the National Democratic Alliance with smaller regional parties, and became the first non-INC and coalition government to complete a full five-year term. The 2004 Indian elections saw the INC winning the largest number of seats to form a government leading the United Progressive Alliance, and supported by left-parties and those opposed to the BJP.

On 22 May 2004, Manmohan Singh was appointed the Prime Minister of India following the victory of the INC & the left front in the 2004 Lok Sabha election. The UPA now rules India without the support of the left front. Previously, Atal Bihari Vajpayee had taken office in October 1999 after a general election in which a BJP-led coalition of 13 parties called the National Democratic Alliance emerged with a majority. In May 2014, Narendra Modi of BJP was elected as Prime Minister of India.

Formation of coalition governments reflects the transition in Indian politics away from the national parties toward smaller, more narrowly based regional parties. Some regional parties, especially in South India, are deeply aligned to the ideologies of the region unlike the national parties and thus the relationship between the central government and the state government in various states has not always been free of rancor. Disparity between the ideologies of the political parties ruling the centre and the state leads to severely skewed allocation of resources between the states.

==Political issues==

===Social issues===
The lack of homogeneity in the Indian population causes division between different sections of the people based on religion, region, language, caste and race. This has led to the rise of political parties with agendas catering to one or a mix of these groups.

Some parties openly profess their focus on a particular group; for example, the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam's and the All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam's focus on the Dravidian population, and the Shiv Sena's pro-Marathi agenda. Some other parties claim to be universal in nature, but tend to draw support from particular sections of the population. For example, the Rashtriya Janata Dal (translated as National People's Party) has a vote bank among the Yadav and Muslim population of Bihar and the All India Trinamool Congress does not have any significant support outside West Bengal.

The narrow focus and votebank politics of most parties, even in the central government and central legislature, sidelines national issues such as economic welfare and national security. Moreover, internal security is also threatened as incidences of political parties instigating and leading violence between two opposing groups of people is a frequent occurrence.

===Economic issues===
Economic issues like poverty, unemployment, development are main issues that influence politics. Garibi hatao (eradicate poverty) has been a slogan of the Indian National Congress for a long time. The well known Bharatiya Janata Party encourages a free market economy. The Communist Party of India (Marxist) vehemently supports left-wing politics like land-for-all, right to work and strongly opposes neo-liberal policies such as globalization, capitalism and privatization.

===Law and order===
Terrorism, Naxalism, religious violence and caste-related violence are important issues that affect the political environment of the Indian nation. Stringent anti-terror legislation such as TADA, POTA and MCOCA have received much political attention, both in favour and opposed.

Terrorism had effected politics India since its conception, be it the terrorism supported from Pakistan or the internal guerrilla groups such as Naxalites. In 1991 the former prime minister Rajiv Gandhi was assassinated during an election campaign. The suicide bomber was later linked to the Sri Lankan terrorist group Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, as it was later revealed the killing was an act of vengeance for Rajiv Gandhi sending troops in Sri Lanka against them in 1987. 

The Babri Masjid demolition on December 6, 1992 by Hindu Karsevaks resulted in nation-wide communal riots in two months, with worst occurring in Mumbai with at least 900 dead. The riots were followed by 1993 Mumbai Bomb Blasts, which resulted in more deaths.

Law and order issues, such as action against organised crime are issues which do not affect the outcomes of elections. On the other hand, there is a criminalpolitician nexus. Many elected legislators have criminal cases against them. In July 2008, the Washington Post reported that nearly a fourth of the 540 Indian Parliament members faced criminal charges, "including human trafficking, immigration rackets, embezzlement, rape and even murder". 

==See also==
* Government of India
* Law of India
* Indian political scandals

==References==

==Further reading==

*Chowdhuri, Satyabrata Rai. Leftism in India, 1917-1947. Palgrave, U.K., 2007.
*Shively, W. Phillips. Power and Choice: An Introduction to Political ScienceChapter 14 Example: Parliamentary Government in India. McGraw Hill Higher Education, 2008. ISBN 978-0-07-340391-5
*Mitra, Subrata K. and Singh, V.B.. Democracy and Social Change in India: A Cross-Sectional Analysis of the National Electorate. New Delhi: Sage Publications, 1999. ISBN 81-7036-809-X (India HB) ISBN 0-7619-9344-4 (U.S. HB).
*Tawa Lama-Rewal, Stphanie. "Studying Elections in India: Scientific and Political Debates". South Asia Multidisciplinary Academic Journal, 3, 2009.

==External links==

* Outline of the Indian Government
* Official party websites:
** Official Indian National Congress Web Site
** Official Bharatiya Janata Party Web Site

*

[[Telecommunications in India]]

Communications in India 
 Revenue (Total) USD 33,350 million 
 Telephony 
 Telephone Subscribers (Total) (2013) 915.19 million (December 2013) 
 Fixed lines (December 2013) 28.89 million 
 Mobile phones (2013) 886.3 million 
 Monthly telephone additions (Net) (December 2013) 5.5 million 
 Teledensity (2013) 74.02% 
 Rural Teledensity 42.67% 
 Internet access 
 Percent household access (total), 2012 10.2% of households (137 million) 
 Percent broadband household access 1.18% of households (14.31 million) 
 Broadband internet users 55.20 million (December 2013) 
 Internet Service Providers (2012) 155 
 country code top-level domain .in 
 Broadcasting 
 Television broadcast stations (2009) 1,400 
 Radio broadcast stations (1997) 800 

More than half of the mobile phones sold in India in 2012 were smart phones
India's telecommunication network is the second largest in the world based on the total number of telephone users (both fixed and mobile phone). It has one of the lowest call tariffs in the world enabled by the mega telephone networks and hyper-competition among them. It has the world's third-largest Internet user-base. According to the Internet And Mobile Association of India (IAMAI), the Internet user base in the country stood at 190 million at the end of June, 2013. http://www.ndtv.com/article/india/india-to-have-243-million-internet-users-by-june-2014-report-476987 Major sectors of the Indian telecommunication industry are telephony, internet and television broadc Industry in the country which is in an ongoing process of transforming into next generation network, employs an extensive system of modern network elements such as digital telephone exchanges, mobile switching centres, media gateways and signalling gateways at the core, interconnected by a wide variety of transmission systems using fibre-optics or Microwave radio relay networks. The access network, which connects the subscriber to the core, is highly diversified with different copper-pair, optic-fibre and wireless technologies. DTH, a relatively new broadcasting technology has attained significant popularity in the Television segment. The introduction of private FM has given a fillip to the radio broadcasting in India. Telecommunication in India has greatly been supported by the INSAT system of the country, one of the largest domestic satellite systems in the world. India possesses a diversified communications system, which links all parts of the country by telephone, Internet, radio, television and satellite. 

Indian telecom industry underwent a high pace of market liberalisation and growth since the 1990s and now has become the world's most competitive and one of the fastest growing telecom markets. The Industry has grown over twenty times in just ten years, from under 37 million subscribers in the year 2001 to over 846 million subscribers in the year 2011. 
India has the world's second-largest mobile phone user base with over 929.37 million users as of May 2012. It has the world's third-largest Internet user-base with over 137 million as of June 2012. Internet subscriber base in India may reach 150 mn: Report 

The total revenue of the Indian telecom sector grew by 7% to for 201011 financial year, while revenues from telecom equipment segment stood at . 

Telecommunication has supported the socioeconomic development of India and has played a significant role to narrow down the rural-urban digital divide to some extent. It also has helped to increase the transparency of governance with the introduction of e-governance in India. The government has pragmatically used modern telecommunication facilities to deliver mass education programmes for the rural folk of India. 

==History==

===The beginning===
A microwave tower for short distance (~50 km) communication
The history of Indian telecom can be started with the introduction of telegraph. The Indian postal and telecom sectors are one of the worlds oldest. In 1850, the first experimental electric telegraph line was started between Calcutta and Diamond Harbour. In 1851, it was opened for the use of the British East India Company. The Posts and Telegraphs department occupied a small corner of the Public Works Department, at that time.

Subsequently, the construction of of telegraph lines connecting Kolkata (then Calcutta) and Peshawar in the north along with Agra, Mumbai (then Bombay) through Sindwa Ghats, and Chennai (then Madras) in the south, as well as Ootacamund and Bangalore was started in November 1853. William O'Shaughnessy, who pioneered the telegraph and telephone in India, belonged to the Public Works Department, and worked towards the development of telecom throughout this period. A separate department was opened in 1854 when telegraph facilities were opened to the public.

In 1880, two telephone companies namely The Oriental Telephone Company Ltd. and The Anglo-Indian Telephone Company Ltd. approached the Government of India to establish telephone exchanges in India. The permission was refused on the grounds that the establishment of telephones was a Government monopoly and that the Government itself would undertake the work. In 1881, the Government later reversed its earlier decision and a licence was granted to the Oriental Telephone Company Limited of England for opening telephone exchanges at Calcutta, Bombay, Madras and Ahmedabad and the first formal telephone service was established in the country. On 28 January 1882, Major E. Baring, Member of the Governor General of India's Council declared open the Telephone Exchanges in Calcutta, Bombay and Madras. The exchange in Calcutta named the "Central Exchange" had a total of 93 subscribers in its early stage. Later that year, Bombay also witnessed the opening of a telephone exchange. 

===Further developments and milestones===
* Pre-1902  Cable telegraph
* 1902  First wireless telegraph station established between Sagar Island and Sandhead.
* 1907  First Central Battery of telephones introduced in Kanpur.
* 19131914  First Automatic Exchange installed in Shimla.
* 1927  Radio-telegraph system between the UK and India, with Imperial Wireless Chain beam stations at Khadki and Daund. Inaugurated by Lord Irwin on 23 July by exchanging greetings with King George V.
* 1933  Radiotelephone system inaugurated between the UK and India.
* 1953  12 channel carrier system introduced.
* 1960  First subscriber trunk dialling route commissioned between Lucknow and Kanpur.
* 1975  First PCM system commissioned between Mumbai City and Andheri telephone exchanges.
* 1976  First digital microwave junction.
* 1979  First optical fibre system for local junction commissioned at Pune.
* 1980  First satellite earth station for domestic communications established at Sikandarabad, Pradesh|U.P. Noida Sector 62SCMS ].
* 1983  First analogue Stored Programme Control exchange for trunk lines commissioned at Mumbai.
* 1984  C-DOT established for indigenous development and production of digital exchanges.
* 1995  First mobile telephone service started on non-commercial basis on 15 August 1995 in Delhi.
* 1995  Internet Introduced in India starting with laxmi nagar delhion 15 August 1995 

Development of Broadcasting: Radio broadcasting was initiated in 1927 but became state responsibility only in 1930. In 1937 it was given the name All India Radio and since 1957 it has been called Akashvani. Schwartzberg, Joseph E. (2008), India, Encyclopdia Britannica Limited duration of television programming began in 1959, and complete broadcasting followed in 1965. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting owned and maintained the audio-visual apparatusincluding the television channel Doordarshanin the country prior to the economic reforms of 1991. In 1997, an autonomous body was established in the name of Prasar Bharti to take care of the public service broadcasting under the Prasar Bharti Act. All India Radio and Doordarshan, which earlier were working as media units under the Ministry of I&B became constituents of the body. 

Pre-liberalisation statistics: While all the major cities and towns in the country were linked with telephones during the British period, the total number of telephones in 1948 numbered only around 80,000. Post independence, growth remained slow because the telephone was seen more as a status symbol rather than being an instrument of utility. The number of telephones grew leisurely to 980,000 in 1971, 2.15 million in 1981 and 5.07 million in 1991, the year economic reforms were initiated in the country.

===Liberalisation and privatisation===
Liberalisation of Indian telecommunication industry started in 1981 when Prime Minister Indira Gandhi signed contracts with Alcatel CIT of France to merge with the state owned Telecom Company (ITI), in an effort to set up 5,000,000 lines per year. But soon the policy was let down because of political opposition. Attempts to liberalise the telecommunication industry were continued by the following government under the prime-minister-ship of Rajiv Gandhi. He invited Sam Pitroda, a US-based Non-resident Indian NRI and a former Rockwell International executive to set up a Centre for Development of Telematics(C-DOT) which manufactured electronic telephone exchanges in India for the first time. Sam Pitroda had a significant role as a consultant and adviser in the development of telecommunication in India. 

In 1985, the Department of Telecom(DoT) was separated from Indian Post & Telecommunication Department. DoT was responsible for telecom services in entire country until 1986 when Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited (MTNL) and Videsh Sanchar Nigam Limited (VSNL) were carved out of DoT to run the telecom services of metro cities(Delhi and Mumbai) and international long distance operations respectively. 

The demand for telephones was ever increasing and in the 1990s Indian government was under increasing pressure to open up the telecom sector for private investment as a part of Liberalisation-Privatisation-Globalisation policies that the government had to accept to overcome the severe fiscal crisis and resultant balance of payments issue in 1991. Consequently, private investment in the sector of Value Added Services (VAS) was allowed and cellular telecom sector were opened up for competition from private investments. It was during this period that the Narsimha Rao-led government introduced the National Telecommunications policy (NTP) in 1994 which brought changes in the following areas: ownership, service and regulation of telecommunications infrastructure. The policy introduced the concept of telecommunication for all and its vision was to expand the telecommunication facilities to all the villages in India. Liberalisation in the basic telecom sector was also envisaged in this policy. They were also successful in establishing joint ventures between state owned telecom companies and international players. Foreign firms were eligible to 49% of the total stake. The multi-nationals were just involved in technology transfer, and not policy making. 

During this period, the World Bank and ITU had advised the Indian Government to liberalise long distance services to release the monopoly of the state owned DoT and VSNL and to enable competition in the long distance carrier business which would help reduce tariff's and better the economy of the country. The Rao run government instead liberalised the local services, taking the opposite political parties into confidence and assuring foreign involvement in the long distance business after 5 years. The country was divided into 20 telecommunication circles for basic telephony and 18 circles for mobile services. These circles were divided into category A, B and C depending on the value of the revenue in each circle. The government threw open the bids to one private company per circle along with government owned DoT per circle. For cellular service two service providers were allowed per circle and a 15 years licence was given to each provider. During all these improvements, the government did face oppositions from ITI, DoT, MTNL, VSNL and other labour unions, but they managed to keep away from all the hurdles. 

In 1997, the government set up TRAI (Telecom Regulatory Authority of India) which reduced the interference of Government in deciding tariffs and policy making. The political powers changed in 1999 and the new government under the leadership of Atal Bihari Vajpayee was more pro-reforms and introduced better liberalisation policies. In 2000, the Vajpayee government constituted the Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal (TDSAT) through an amendment of the TRAI Act, 1997. The primary objective of TDSAT's establishment was to release TRAI from adjudicatory and dispute settlement functions in order to strengthen the regulatory framework. Any dispute involving parties like licensor, licensee, service provider and consumers are resolved by TDSAT. Moreover, any direction, order or decision of TRAI can be challenged by appealing in TDSAT. The government corporatised the operations wing of DoT on 1 October 2000 and named it as Department of Telecommunication Services (DTS) which was later named as Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL). The proposal of raising the stake of foreign investors from 49% to 74% was rejected by the opposite political parties and leftist thinkers. Domestic business groups wanted the government to privatise VSNL. Finally in April 2002, the government decided to cut its stake of 53% to 26% in VSNL and to throw it open for sale to private enterprises. TATA finally took 25% stake in VSNL. 

This was a gateway to many foreign investors to get entry into the Indian Telecom Markets. After March 2000, the government became more liberal in making policies and issuing licences to private operators. The government further reduced licence fees for cellular service providers and increased the allowable stake to 74% for foreign companies. Because of all these factors, the service fees finally reduced and the call costs were cut greatly enabling every common middle-class family in India to afford a cell phone. Nearly 32 million handsets were sold in India. The data reveals the real potential for growth of the Indian mobile market. Many private operators, such as Reliance Communications, Tata Indicom, Vodafone, Loop Mobile, Airtel, Idea etc., successfully entered the high potential Indian telecom market.

In March 2008 the total GSM and CDMA mobile subscriber base in the country was 375 million, which represented a nearly 50% growth when compared with previous year. 
As the unbranded Chinese cell phones which do not have International Mobile Equipment Identity (IMEI) numbers pose a serious security risk to the country, Mobile network operators therefore suspended the usage of around 30 million mobile phones (about 8% of all mobiles in the country) by 30 April. Phones without valid IMEI cannot be connected to cellular operators. "TTC DOT Directs ban on usage of Chinese", Yahoo! News 56 years the average monthly subscribers additions were around 0.05 to 0.1 million only and the total mobile subscribers base in December 2002 stood at 10.5 millions. However, after a number of proactive initiatives taken by regulators and licensors, the total number of mobile subscribers has increased rapidly to over 929 million subscribers as of May 2012.

India has opted for the use of both the GSM (global system for mobile communications) and CDMA (code-division multiple access) technologies in the mobile sector. In addition to landline and mobile phones, some of the companies also provide the WLL service. The mobile tariffs in India have also become lowest in the world. A new mobile connection can be activated with a monthly commitment of US$0.15 only. In 2005 alone additions increased to around 2 million per month in 200304 and 200405.

==Sectors==
Major sectors of telecommunication industry in India are telephony, internet, Data centers and broadcasting.

===Telephony===
Market share of major operators in India as on 29 February 2012
Market share of major operators in India as on 29 February 2012
The telephony segment is dominated by private-sector and two state-run businesses. Most companies were formed by a recent revolution and restructuring launched within a decade, directed by Ministry of Communications and IT, Department of Telecommunications and Minister of Finance. Since then, most companies gained 2G, 3G and 4G licences and engaged fixed-line, mobile and internet business in India. On landlines, intra-circle calls are considered local calls while inter-circle are considered long distance calls. Foreign Direct Investment policy which increased the foreign ownership cap from 49% to 74%.Now it is 100%. Currently Government is working to integrate the whole country in one telecom circle. For long distance calls, the area code prefixed with a zero is dialled first which is then followed by the number (i.e. To call Delhi, 011 would be dialled first followed by the phone number). For international calls, "00" must be dialled first followed by the country code, area code and local phone number. The country code for India is 91. Several international fibre-optic links include those to Japan, South Korea, Hong Kong, Russia, and Germany. Some major telecom operators in India include Airtel, Vodafone, Idea, Aircel, BSNL, MTNL, Reliance Communications, TATA Teleservices, Infotel, MTS, Uninor, TATA DoCoMo, Videocon, Augere, Tikona Digital.

====Fixed telephony====
Until the New Telecom Policy was announced in 1999, only the Government-owned BSNL and MTNL were allowed to provide land-line phone services through copper wire in India with MTNL operating in Delhi and Mumbai and BSNL servicing all other areas of the country. Due to the rapid growth of the cellular phone industry in India, landlines are facing stiff competition from cellular operators. This has forced land-line service providers to become more efficient and improve their quality of service. Land-line connections are now also available on demand, even in high density urban areas. India has over 31 million main line customers.

====Mobile telephony====

Cellular phone tower atop the roof of a building
Typical signboards of STD booths (kiosks from where STD calls can be made) and internet kiosks in India
AIR Radio Tower

In August 1995, Chief Minister of West Bengal, Shri Abhishek Yadav ushered in the cellphone revolution in India by making the first call to Union Telecom Minister Sukhram. Sixteen years later 4th generation services were launched in Kolkata. 

With a subscriber base of more than 929 million, the Mobile telecommunications system in India is the second largest in the world and it was thrown open to private players in the 1990s. GSM was comfortably maintaining its position as the dominant mobile technology with 80% of the mobile subscriber market, but CDMA seemed to have stabilised its market share at 20% for the time being. By May 2012 the country had 929 million mobile subscribers, up from 350 million just 40 months earlier. The mobile market was continuing to expand at an annual rate in excess of 40% coming into 2010.

According to data provided by Minister of State for Communications and IT Milind Deora, as of 30 November 2012, India has 736,654 base transceiver stations (2G GSM & CDMA, and 3G). Of those, 96,212 base transceiver stations provide 3G mobile and data services. Out of India's 640 districts, 610 districts are covered by 3G services as of 30 November 2012. 

The country is divided into multiple zones, called circles (roughly along state boundaries). Government and several private players run local and long distance telephone services. Competition has caused prices to drop and calls across India are one of the cheapest in the world. The rates are supposed to go down further with new measures to be taken by the Information Ministry. In September 2004, the number of mobile phone connexions crossed the number of fixed-line connexions and presently dwarfs the wireline segment by a ratio of around 20:1. The mobile subscriber base has grown by a factor of over a hundred and thirty, from 5 million subscribers in 2001 to over 929 million subscribers as of May 2012. India primarily follows the GSM mobile system, in the 900 MHz band. Recent operators also operate in the 1800 MHz band. The dominant players are Airtel, Reliance Infocomm, Vodafone, Idea cellular and BSNL/MTNL. There are many smaller players, with operations in only a few states. International roaming agreements exist between most operators and many foreign carriers. The government allowed Mobile number portability (MNP) which enables mobile telephone users to retain their mobile telephone numbers when changing from one mobile network operator to another. India is divided into 22 telecom circles: 

 Telecom circle Wireline subscriber base in million(May 2012) Wireless subscriber base in million(May 2012) Teledensity (May 2012) 
 Andhra Pradesh 2.33 66.6 80.46 
 Assam 0.20 14.6 47.7 
 Bihar & Jharkhand 0.56 62.97 48.37 
 Delhi 2.9 42.95 239.91 
 Gujarat & Daman & Diu 1.82 54.32 92.56 
 Haryana 0.59 23.00 90.86 
 Himachal Pradesh 0.30 7.41 112.29 
 Jammu and Kashmir 0.20 6.57 56.92 
 Karnataka 2.48 56.63 98.22 
 Kerala & Lakshadweep 3.18 34.51 107.85 
 Kolkata 1.18 25.25 Not available 
 Madhya Pradesh & Chhattisgarh 1.13 53.30 55.38 
 Maharashtra & Goa (excluding Mumbai ) 2.64 71.00 96.71 
 Mumbai* 3.0 35.93 Not available 
 North East 0.25 8.76 64.74 
 Orissa 0.40 26.27 64.73 
 Punjab 1.44 31.17 110.22 
 Rajasthan 1.14 49.52 73.26 
 Tamil Nadu(including Chennai since 2005) 3.16 78.96 118.29 
 Uttar Pradesh(East) 1.20 77.74 62.65(Combined) 
 Uttar Pradesh(West) & Uttarakhand 0.79 55.12 62.65(Combined) 
 West Bengal(excluding Kolkata) 0.62 46.79 80.56 

Population statistics are available state-wise only.
 North east circle includes Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, & Tripura
West Bengal circle includes Andaman-Nicobar and Sikkim

===Internet===

Internet cafe in Varanasi, 2001
The history of the Internet in India started with launch of services by VSNL on 15 August 1995. They were able to add about 10,000 Internet users within 6 months. However, for the next 10 years the Internet experience in the country remained less attractive with narrow-band connections having speeds less than 56 kbit/s (dial-up). In 2004, the government formulated its broadband policy which defined broadband as "an always-on Internet connection with download speed of 256 kbit/s or above." From 2005 onward the growth of the broadband sector in the country accelerated, but remained below the growth estimates of the government and related agencies due to resource issues in last-mile access which were predominantly wired-line technologies. This bottleneck was removed in 2010 when the government auctioned 3G spectrum followed by an equally high profile auction of 4G spectrum that set the scene for a competitive and invigorated wireless broadband market. Now Internet access in India is provided by both public and private companies using a variety of technologies and media including dial-up (PSTN), xDSL, coaxial cable, Ethernet, FTTH, ISDN, HSDPA (3G), WiFi, WiMAX, etc. at a wide range of speeds and costs. The country has the world's third largest number of Internet users with over 205 million in October, 2013. http://yourstory.com/2013/11/200-million-internet-users-in-india-now/ 

According to the Internet And Mobile Association of India (IAMAI), the Internet user base in the country stood at 190 million at the end of June, 2013. As of October, 2013 report, it is over 205 million. The number of broadband subscribers at the end of May 2013 was 15.19 million. Cumulative Annual Growth rate (CAGR) of broadband during the five-year period between 2005 and 2010 was about 117 per cent. DSL, while holding slightly more than 75% of the local broadband market, was steadily losing market share to other non-DSL broadband platforms, especially to wireless broadband.

There were 161 Internet Service Providers (ISPs) offering broadband services in India as of 31 May 2013. The top five ISPs in terms subscriber base were BSNL (9.96 million), Bharti Airtel (1.40 million), MTNL (1.09 million), Hathway (0.36 million) and You Broadband (0.31 million). Cyber cafes remain the major source of Internet access. In 2009, about 37 per cent of the users access the Internet from cyber cafes, 30 per cent from an office, and 23 per cent from home. However, the number of mobile Internet users increased rapidly from 2009 on and there were about 274 million mobile users at the end of September 2010, with a majority using 2G mobile networks. Mobile Internet subscriptions as reported by the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) in March 2011 increased to 381 million.

One of the major issues facing the Internet segment in India is the lower average bandwidth of broadband connections compared to that of developed countries. According to 2007 statistics, the average download speed in India hovered at about 40 KB per second (256 kbit/s), the minimum speed set by TRAI, whereas the international average was 5.6 Mbit/s during the same period. In order to attend this infrastructure issue the government declared 2007 as "the year of broadband". To compete with international standards of defining broadband speed the Indian Government has taken the aggressive step of proposing a $13 billion national broadband network to connect all cities, towns and villages with a population of more than 500 in two phases targeted for completion by 2012 and 2013. The network was supposed to provide speeds up to 10 Mbit/s in 63 metropolitan areas and 4 Mbit/s in an additional 352 cities. Also, the Internet penetration rate in India is one of the lowest in the world and only accounts for 8.4% of the population compared to the rate in OECD counties, where the average is over 50%. Another issue is the digital divide where growth is biased in favour of urban areas; according to 2010 statistics, more than 75 per cent of the broadband connections in the country are in the top 30 cities. Regulators have tried to boost the growth of broadband in rural areas by promoting higher investment in rural infrastructure and establishing subsidized tariffs for rural subscribers under the Universal service obligation scheme of the Indian government.

====Wireless Internet====
2nd Generation Internet is the most prevalent in India. Wireless ISPs in India use both CDMA and Edge technologies for 2G.

India's wireless Internet frequencies are: India's Network bands - gsmarena 
* 2G : GSM 900 MHz, GSM 1800 MHz
* 3G : UMTS 2100 MHz
* 4G : TD-LTE 2300 MHz

=== Data centres ===
* BSNL Internet Data Centers, in collaboration with Dimension Data BSNL Internet Data Center, website, Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. and Dimension Data, retrieved 11 September 2013. 
* Sify Technologies Limited
* CtrlS Datacenters Ltd
* Tata Communications Limited
* Netmagic Solutions
* Reliance Datacenter
* Web Werks IDC
* Net4 Datacenter
* RackBank Datacenter
* GPX Global Systems Inc.

===Broadcasting===

INSAT-1B satellite: Broadcasting sector in India is highly dependent on INSAT system.
Television broadcasting began in India in 1959 by Doordarshan, a state run medium of communication, and had slow expansion for more than two decades. The policy reforms of the government in the 1990s attracted private initiatives in this sector, and since then, satellite television has increasingly shaped popular culture and Indian society. However, still, only the government owned Doordarshan has the licence for terrestrial television broadcast. Private companies reach the public using satellite channels; both cable television as well as DTH has obtained a wide subscriber base in India. In 2012, India had about 148 million TV homes of which 126 million has access to cable and satellite services. 

Following the economic reforms in the 1990s, satellite television channels from around the worldBBC, CNN, CNBC, and other private television channels gained a foothold in the country. There are no regulations to control the ownership of satellite dish antennas and also for operating cable television systems in India, which in turn has helped for an impressive growth in the viewership. The growth in the number of satellite channels was triggered by corporate business houses such as Star TV group and Zee TV. Initially restricted to music and entertainment channels, viewership grew, giving rise to several channels in regional languages, especially Hindi. The main news channels available were CNN and BBC World. In the late 1990s, many current affairs and news channels sprouted, becoming immensely popular because of the alternative viewpoint they offered compared to Doordarshan. Some of the notable ones are Aaj Tak (run by the India Today group) and STAR News, CNN-IBN, Times Now, initially run by the NDTV group and their lead anchor, Prannoy Roy (NDTV now has its own channels, NDTV 24x7, NDTV Profit and NDTV India). Over the years, Doordarshan services also have grown from a single national channel to six national and eleven regional channels. Nonetheless, it has lost the leadership in market, though it underwent many phases of modernization in order to contain tough competition from private channels. 

Today, television is the most penetrative media in India with industry estimates indicating that there are over 554 million TV consumers, 462 million with satellite connexions, compared to other forms of mass media such as radio or internet. Government of India has used the popularity of TV and radio among rural people for the implementation of many social-programmes including that of mass-education. On 16 November 2006, the Government of India released the community radio policy which allowed agricultural centres, educational institutions and civil society organisations to apply for community based FM broadcasting licence. Community Radio is allowed 100 watts of Effective Radiated Power (ERP) with a maximum tower height of 30 metres. The licence is valid for five years and one organisation can only get one licence, which is non-transferable and to be used for community development purposes.

==Next-generation networks (NGN)==
Historically, the role of telecommunication has evolved from that of plain information exchange to a multi-service field, with Value Added Services (VAS) integrated with various discrete networks like PSTN, PLMN, Internet Backbone etc. However, with decreasing ARPU and increasing demand for VAS has become a compelling reason for the service providers to think of the convergence of these parallel networks into a single core network with service layers separated from network layer. Next-generation networking is such a convergence concept which according to ITU-T is: 

Access network: The user can connect to the IP-core of NGN in various ways, most of which use the standard Internet Protocol (IP). User terminals such as mobile phones, personal digital assistants (PDAs) and computers can register directly on NGN-core, even when they are roaming in another network or country. The only requirement is that they can use IP and Session Initiation Protocol (SIP). Fixed access (e.g., Digital Subscriber Line (DSL), cable modems, Ethernet), mobile access (e.g. W-CDMA, CDMA2000, GSM, GPRS) and wireless access (e.g.WLAN, WiMAX) are all supported. Other phone systems like plain old telephone service and non-compatible VoIP systems, are supported through gateways. With the deployment of the NGN, users may subscribe to many simultaneous access-providers providing telephony, internet or entertainment services. This may provide end-users with virtually unlimited options to choose between service providers for these services in NGN environment. 

The hyper-competition in telecom market, which was effectively caused by the introduction of Universal Access Service (UAS) licence in 2003 became much tougher after 3G and 4G competitive auction. About 670,000 route-kilometer (419,000-mile) of optical fibres has been laid in India by the major operators, including in the financially nonviable rural areas and the process continues. Keeping in mind the viability of providing services in rural areas, the government of India also took a proactive role to promote the NGN implementation in the country; an expert committee called NGN eCO was constituted in order to deliberate on the licensing, interconnection and Quality of Service (QoS) issues related to NGN and it submitted its report on 24 August 2007. Telecom operators found the NGN model advantageous, but huge investment requirements have prompted them to adopt a multi-phase migration and they have already started the migration process to NGN with the implementation of IP-based core-network. 

==Recent government policies and growth targets==

* All villages shall receive telecom facilities by the end of 2002.
* A Communication Convergence Bill introduced in the Parliament on 31 August 2001 is presently before the Standing Committee of Parliament on Telecom and IT.
* National Long Distance Service (NLD) is opened for unrestricted entry.
* The International Long Distance Services (ILDS) have been opened to competition.
* The basic services are open to competition.
* In addition to the existing three, a fourth cellular operator, one each in four metros and thirteen circles, has been permitted. Cellular operators have been permitted to provide all types of mobile services including voice and non-voice messages, data services and PCOs utilising any type of network equipment, including circuit and/or package switches that meet certain required standards.
* Policies allowing private participation have been announced as per the New Telecom Policy (NTP), 1999 in several new services, which include Global Mobile Personal Communication by Satellite (GMPCS) Service, digital Public Mobile Radio Trunked Service (PMRTS) and Voice Mail/ Audiotex/ Unified Messaging Services.
* Wireless Local Loop (WLL) has been introduced to provide telephone connexions in urban, semi-urban and rural areas promptly.
* Two telecom PSUs, VSNL and HTL have been disinvested.
* Steps are being taken to fulfill Universal Service Obligation (USO), funding, and administration.
* A decision to permit Community Phone Service has been announced.
* Multiple Fixed Service Providers (FSPs) licensing guidelines were announced.
* Internet Service Providers (ISPs) have been allowed to set up International Internet Gateways, both Satellite and Landing stations for submarine optical fibre cables.
* Two categories of infrastructure providers have been allowed to provide end-to-end bandwidth and dark fibre, right of way, towers, duct space etc.
* Guidelines have been issued by the Government to open up Internet telephony (IP).
* National Optical Fibre Network (NOFN), a project aimed to ensure broadband connectivity to over two lakh (200,000) gram panchayats of India by 2016.

==Regulatory environment==
LIRNEasia's Telecommunications Regulatory Environment (TRE) index, which summarises stakeholders' perception on certain TRE dimensions, provides insight into how conducive the environment is for further development and progress. The most recent survey was conducted in July 2008 in eight Asian countries, including Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Sri Lanka, Maldives, Pakistan, Thailand, and the Philippines. The tool measured seven dimensions: i) market entry; ii) access to scarce resources; iii) interconnection; iv) tariff regulation; v) anti-competitive practices; and vi) universal services; vii) quality of service, for the fixed, mobile and broadband sectors.

The results for India, point out to the fact that the stakeholders perceive the TRE to be most conducive
for the mobile sector followed by fixed and then broadband. Other than for Access to Scarce
Resources the fixed sector lags behind the mobile sector. The fixed and mobile sectors have
the highest scores for Tariff Regulation. Market entry also scores well for the mobile sector
as competition is well entrenched with most of the circles with 45 mobile service providers.
The broadband sector has the lowest score in the aggregate. The low penetration of
broadband of mere 3.87 against the policy objective of 9 million at then end of 2007 clearly
indicates that the regulatory environment is not very conducive. 

In 2013 the home ministry stated that legislation must ensure that law enforcement agencies are empowered to intercept communications. "Home ministry objects to proposed telecom security policy", The Times of India (PTI), 15 September 2013. Retrieved 15 September 2013. 

==Revenue and growth==
The total revenue in the telecom service sector was in 200506 as against in 20042005, registering a growth of 21% with estimated revenue of FY'2011 of . The total investment in the telecom services sector reached in 200506, up from in the previous fiscal. Press Release no. 60/2006 issued on 28 June 2006 by TRAI 
Telecommunication is the lifeline of the rapidly growing Information Technology industry. Internet subscriber base has risen to more than a 121 million in 2011. Out of this 11.47 million were broadband connexions. More than a billion people use the Internet globally. Under the Bharat Nirman Programme, the Government of India will ensure that 66,822 revenue villages in the country, which have not yet been provided with a Village Public Telephone (VPT), will be connected. However doubts have been raised about what it would mean for the poor in the country. 

It is difficult to ascertain fully the employment potential of the telecom sector but the enormity of the opportunities can be gauged from the fact that there were 3.7 million Public Call Offices in December 2005 "TRAI releases Quarterly Performance Indicators of Telecom Services for the quarter ending December, 2005", Press Release No. 35/2006, Telecom Regulatory Authority of India, 10 April 2006 up from 2.3 million in December 2004.

The Total Revenue of Indian Telecom Services company is likely to exceed ( US$44 Bn approx) for FY 1112 based on FY 1011 nos and latest quarterly results. These are consolidated numbers including foreign operation of Bharti Airtel. The major contributions to this revenue are as follows: Contributed by Sanjay Banka, FCA in "Telecommunication Sector in India  An Analysis", N. Swapna, Proceedings of the MPGI National Multi Conference "Advancement in Electronics & Telecommunication Engineering 78 April 2012", International Journal of Computer Applications (IJCA), page 25 
* Airtel 
* Reliance Communications 
* Idea 
* Tata Communications 
* MTNL 
* TTML 
* BSNL 
* Vodafone India 
* TataTeleservice 
* Aircel 
* SSTL 
* Uninor 
* Loop 
* Stel 
* HFCL 
* Videocon Telecom 
* DB Etisalat/ Allianz 
* Grand Total 

==International==
* Nine satellite earth stations  8 Intelsat (Indian Ocean) and 1 Inmarsat (Indian Ocean region).Microwave
* Nine gateway exchanges operating from Mumbai, New Delhi, Kolkata, Chennai, Jalandhar, Kanpur, Gandhinagar, Hyderabad and Ernakulam.

===Submarine cables===
* LOCOM linking Chennai to Penang, Malaysia
* India-UAE cable linking Mumbai to Al Fujayrah, UAE.
* SEA-ME-WE 2 (South East Asia-Middle East-Western Europe 2)
* SEA-ME-WE 3 (South East Asia-Middle East-Western Europe 3)  Landing sites at Cochin and Mumbai. Capacity of 960 Gbit/s.
* SEA-ME-WE 4 (South East Asia-Middle East-Western Europe 4)  Landing sites at Mumbai and Chennai. Capacity of 1.28 Tbit/s.
* Fibre-Optic Link Around the Globe (FLAG-FEA) with a landing site at Mumbai (2000). Initial design capacity 10 Gbit/s, upgraded in 2002 to 80 Gbit/s, upgraded to over 1 Tbit/s (2005).
* TIISCS (Tata Indicom India-Singapore Cable System), also known as TIC (Tata Indicom Cable), Chennai to Singapore. Capacity of 5.12 Tbit/s.
* i2i  Chennai to Singapore. Capacity of 8.4 Tbit/s.
* SEACOM From Mumbai to the Mediterranean, via South Africa. It currently joins with SEA-ME-WE 4 off the west coast of Spain to carry traffic onward to London (2009). Capacity of 1.28 Tbit/s.
* I-ME-WE (India-Middle East-Western Europe) with two landing sites at Mumbai (2009). Capacity of 3.84 Tbit/s.
* EIG (Europe-India Gateway), landing at Mumbai (due Q2 2010).
* MENA (Middle East North Africa).
* TGN-Eurasia (Announced) Landing at Mumbai (due 2010?), Capacity of 1.28 Tbit/s
* TGN-Gulf (Announced) Landing at Mumbai (due 2011?), Capacity Unknown.

==See also==
* TRAI
* Indian Telecommunication Service
* List of Indian wireless communications service providers
* Telecommunications Statistics in India
* Mobile phone industry in India

==References==

==External links==

* Telecom Regulatory Authority of India
* Department of Telecommuincations, Government of India
* Wireless Planning & Coordination Wing
* Cellular Operators Association of India
* Internet Usage Stats and Telecommunications of India
* Accounting & Reporting in Telecom Industry
* Mergers & Acquisitions in Indian Telecom Industry

 
 

[[Transport in India]]

Transport in the Republic of India is an important part of India's economy. Since the economic liberalisation of the 1990s, development of infrastructure within the country has progressed at a rapid pace, and today there is a wide variety of modes of transport by land, water and air. However, India's relatively low GNP per capita has meant that access to these modes of transport has not been uniform.

In the interim, public transport remains the primary mode of transport for most of the population, and India's public transport systems are among the most heavily used in the world. India's rail network is the 4th longest and the most heavily used system in the world, transporting 8224 million passengers and over 969 million tonnes of freight annually, as of 2012. 

Motor vehicle penetration is low by international standards, with only 103 million cars on the nation's roads. In addition, only around 10% of Indian households own a motorcycle. Despite this, the number of deaths caused by traffic is amongst the highest in the world and is still increasing Number of fatalities listed in Washington post article is 196 000 which is higher than the figures of previous years, which was 142 485 More than 40 per cent of casualties in Delhi are associated with motorcycles and trucks The automobile industry in India is currently rapidly growing with an annual production of over 4.6 million vehicles, and vehicle volume is expected to rise greatly in the future. 

Despite ongoing improvements in the sector, several aspects of the transport sector are still riddled with problems due to outdated infrastructure and lack of investment in less economically active parts of the country. The demand for transport infrastructure and services has been rising by around 10% a year with the current infrastructure being unable to meet these growing demands. According to recent estimates by Goldman Sachs, India will need to spend 1.7 trillion on infrastructure projects over the next decade to boost economic growth, of which 500 billion is budgeted to be spent during the Eleventh Five-Year Plan. 

== Traditional means ==

=== Walking ===
In ancient times, people often covered long distances on foot. For instance, Adi Sankaracharya travelled all over India. Walking still constitutes an important mode of transport in urban areas. In the city of Mumbai, to further improve the transit conditions for pedestrians, the Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority, has commenced the construction of more than 50 skywalks, as part of the Mumbai Skywalk project.

=== Palanquin ===
left
Palanquins, also known as palkis, were one of the luxurious methods used by the rich and noblemen for travelling. This was primarily used in the past to carry a deity or idol of a God, and many temples have sculptures of God being carried in a palki. Later on, it was primarily used by European noblemen and ladies from the upper classes of society prior to the advent of the railways in India. Modern use of the palanquin is limited to Indian weddings and Pilgrimage.

=== Bullock cart and horse carriage ===
Bullock Cart in Ahmedabad
Bullock carts have been traditionally used for transport, especially in rural India. The arrival of the British saw drastic improvements in the horse carriages which were used for transport since early days. Today, they are used in smaller towns and are referred as Tonga or buggies. Victorias of Mumbai are still used for tourist purposes, but horse carriages are now rarely found in the metro cities of India. In recent years large cities have banned the movement of bullock carts and other slow moving vehicles on the main roads. 

=== Bicycle ===
Bicycles are a common mode of travel in much of India. More people can now afford to own a cycle than ever before. In 2005, more than 40% of Indian households owned a bicycle, with ownership rates ranging from around 30% to 70% at the state level. Along with walking, cycling accounts for 50 to 75% of the commuter trips for those in the informal sector in urban areas. 

Even though India is the second largest producer of bicycles in the world, a significant prejudice against bicycle riding for transport exists in some segments of the population, generally stemming from the status symbol aspect of the motor vehicle. In India, the word "bike" generally refers to motorcycle, and "cycle" refers to bicycle. 

Pune was the first city in India to have dedicated lanes for cycles. It was built for the 2008 Commonwealth Youth Games. However, recent developments in Delhi suggest that bicycle riding is fast becoming popular in the metro cities of India. The Delhi government has decided to construct separate bicycle lanes on all major roads to combat pollution and ease traffic congestion. 

=== Hand-pulled rickshaw ===
A human-pulled Rickshaw in Kolkata

Hand-pulled rickshaw is still available in the city of Kolkata wherein a person pulls the rickshaw by hand. The Government of West Bengal proposed a ban on these rickshaws in 2005 describing them as "inhuman". Though a bill aiming to address this issue, termed as 'Calcutta Hackney Carriage Bill', was passed by the West Bengal Assembly in 2006, it has not been implemented yet. The Government of West Bengal is working on an amendment of this bill to avoid the loopholes that got exposed when the Hand-pulled Rickshaw Owner's Association filed a petition against the bill. 

=== Cycle rickshaw ===
Cycle rickshaws were introduced in India in the 1940s. They are bigger than a tricycle where two people sit on an elevated seat at the back and a person pedals from the front. In the late 2000s, they were banned in several cities for causing traffic congestion. Cycle rickshaws have been a feature of Delhi streets since Indian independence in 1947, providing the cheapest way around the capital. The Delhi Police recently submitted an affidavit against plying of cycle rickshaws to ease traffic congestion in the city but it was dismissed by the Delhi High court. In addition, environmentalists have supported the retention of cycle rickshaws as a non-polluting and inexpensive mode of transport. 

== Public road transport ==
right
Public transport is the predominant mode of motorised local travel in cities. This is predominantly by road, since commuter rail services are available only in the seven metropolitan cities of Mumbai, Delhi, Chennai, Kolkata, Bangalore, Hyderabad and Pune, while dedicated city bus services are known to operate in at least 25 cities with a population of over one million. Intermediate public transport modes like tempos and cycle rickshaws assume importance in medium size cities. However, the share of buses is negligible in most Indian cities as compared to personalized vehicles, and two-wheelers and cars account for more than 80 percent of the vehicle population in most large cities. 

Traffic in Indian cities generally moves slowly, where traffic jams and accidents are very common. India has very poor records on road safelyaround 90,000 people die from road accidents every year. At least 13 people die every hour in road accidents in the country,also in the year 2007 road accidents claimed more than 130,000 lives, overtaking China. 
 A Reader's Digest study of traffic congestion in Asian cities ranked several Indian cities within the Top Ten for worst traffic. 

=== Bus ===

A recently acquired air conditioned public bus in Bangalore
left
The oldest Indian state transport undertaking is North Bengal State Transport Corporation founded by the Raj Darbar of Koch Bihar Kingdom regime on 1 April 1945 with three buses and three trucks. It is still vibrant and running, providing service to commuters of North Bengal region. Buses take up over 90% of public transport in Indian cities, and serve as a cheap and convenient mode of transport for all classes of society. Services are mostly run by state government owned transport corporations. However, after the economic liberalisation, many state transport corporations have introduced various facilities like low-floor buses for the disabled and air-conditioned buses to attract private car owners to help decongest roads. Bengaluru was the first city in India to introduce Volvo B7RLE intra-city buses in India in January 2006. 
Bengaluru is the first Indian city to have an air-conditioned bus stop, located near Cubbon Park. It was built by airtel. APSRTC has been acknowledged as the single corporation having the largest bus fleet in the world. http://www.apsrtc.gov.in/awards.aspx APSRTC Equals Indian Railways in Ferrying Passengers The city of Chennai houses one of Asia's largest bus terminus, the Chennai Mofussil Bus Terminus. In 2009, the Government of Karnataka and the Bangalore Metropolitan Transport Corporation flagged off a pro-poor bus service called the Atal Sarige. The service aims to provide low-cost connectivity to the economically backward sections of the society to the nearest major bus station. 

==== Bus Rapid Transit System (BRTS) ====

New initiatives like Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) systems and air conditioned buses have been taken by the various state government to improve the bus public transport systems in cities. The idea of a BRT concept in India - based on the successful system in Curitiba, Brazil - was first introduced in the year 2000 in the form of a feasibility study for Bangalore carried out by Swedish consultants but was not implemented at the time. Today, however, the concept has caught on and Bus Rapid Transit systems already exist in Pune, Delhi, Ahmedabad,Rajkot, Mumbai and Jaipur with new ones coming up in Kolkata, Hyderabad, Lucknow, Bangalore and Hubli-Dharwad. High Capacity buses can be found in cities like Mumbai, Bengaluru, Nagpur, Indore and Chennai. Urban transport in Nairobi, Kingston, Bangalore, Amman, Dakar 

=== Taxi ===

Ambassador taxis in Kolkata
Most of the traditional taxicabs in India are either Premier Padmini or Hindustan Ambassador cars. Depending on the city/state, taxis can either be hailed or hired from taxi-stands. In cities such as Bangalore, Hyderabad and Ahmedabad, taxis need to be hired over phone, whereas in cities like Kolkata and Mumbai, taxis can be hailed on the street. According to government of India regulations, all taxis are required to have a fare-meter installed. Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 : s. 74(2)(viii) There are additional surcharges for luggage, late-night rides and toll taxes are to be paid by the passenger. Since 2006, radio taxis have become increasingly popular with the public due to reasons of safety and convenience. In cities and localities where taxis are expensive or do not ply as per the government or municipal regulated fares, people use share taxis. These are normal taxis which carry one or more passengers travelling to destinations either en route to the final destination, or near the final destination. The passengers are charged according to the number of people with different destinations. A similar system exists for autorickshaws, known as share autos. The city of Mumbai will soon be the first city in India, to have an "in-taxi" magazine, titled MumBaee, which will be issued to taxis which are part of the Mumbai Taximen's Union. The magazine debuted on 13 July 2009. In Kolkata there are many no refusal taxis available with white and blue in colour. 

=== Auto Rickshaw ===

Autorickshaw in Mumbai
An auto rickshaw is a three-wheeler vehicle for hire that has both side doors and is generally characterised by a small cabin for the driver in the front and a seat for passengers in the rear. Generally it is painted in yellow, green or black colour and has a black, yellow or green canopy on the top, but designs vary considerably from place to place. The color of the autorickshaw is also determined by the fuel that it is powered by, for example Ahmedabad and Delhi have green autos indicating the use of compressed natural gas, whereas the autos of Mumbai, Kolkata, Bangalore have green or black autos indicating the use of LPG.

In Mumbai and other metropolitan cities, 'autos' or 'ricks' as they are popularly known have regulated metered fares. A recent law prohibits auto rickshaw drivers from charging more than the specified fare, or charging night-fare before midnight, and also prohibits the driver from refusing to go to a particular location. Mumbai and Kolkata are also the only two cities which prohibit auto rickshaws from entering a certain part of the city, in these cases being South Mumbai and certain parts of Downtown Kolkata. However, in cities like Chennai, it is common to see autorickshaw drivers demand more than the specified fare and refuse to use fare meter 

Airports and railway stations at many cities such as Howrah, Chennai and Bengaluru provide a facility of prepaid auto booths, where the passenger pays a fixed fare as set by the authorities for various locations. 

==Urban rail transport==

=== Suburban railway ===

 A MRTS station in the city of Chennai
Delhi Metro, operational since 2002
Purple Line of Namma Metro in central Bangalore
India's oldest metro is the Kolkata Metro
The present suburban railway services in India are limited and are operational only in Mumbai, Kolkata, Pune, Chennai, Delhi and Hyderabad . The Mumbai Suburban Railway is the first rail system in India which began services in Mumbai in 1867, transports 6.3 million passengers daily and has the highest passenger density in the world. 
The first rapid transit system in India, the Kolkata Suburban Railway, was established in Kolkata in 1854. Its first service ran between Howrah and Hooghly covering a distance of 38.6 km.

=== Urban mass rapid transit ===

The first modern rapid transit in India is the Kolkata Metro and started its operations in 1984,this is also the 17Th Zone of the Indian Railways. The Delhi Metro in New Delhi is the second conventional metro and began operations in 2002. The Namma Metro in Bengalore is India's third operational rapid transit and began operations in 2011. Currently, rapid transit systems have been deployed in these cities and more are under construction or in planning in several major cities of India.
;Cities that have a metro system
* Kolkata Metro
* Chennai Mass Rapid Transit System
* Delhi Metro
* Bangalore Metro
* Mumbai Metro
* Rapid Metro Rail Gurgaon
;Metro systems under Construction
* Jaipur Metro
* Chennai Metro
* Hyderabad Metro
* Navi Mumbai Metro
* Kochi Metro

===Monorail===
Monorail in India is generally considered as feeder system for the Metro train. Mumbai Monorail is the first operational monorail network in India (excluding the Skybus Metro Test Track in Goa) since the Patiala State Monorail Trainways closed in 1927.

Green background for the systems that are currently operational. Blue background for the systems that are currently in planning.

 System City Opening Year System length (km) No. of lines No. of lines under construction 
 Mumbai Mumbai Monorail 2 February 2014 8.26 1 
 Thiruvananthapuram Monorail Thiruvananthapuram 2015 22.50 2 1 
 Chennai Monorail Chennai 2014 57 3 
 Bangalore Monorail Bangalore 60 3 
 Delhi Monorail Delhi 90 6 
 Indore Monorail Indore 
 Kanpur Monorail Kanpur 63 6 
 Kolkata Monorail Kolkata 72 2 
 Kozhikode Monorail Kozhikode 2015 35 1 
 Navi Mumbai Monorail Navi Mumbai 2014 38 2 
 Patna Monorail Patna 32 4 
 Pune Monorail Pune 52 2 
 Aizawl Monorail Aizawl 2015 5 1 

===Light rail===

Like Monorails, Light rail is also considered as a feeder system for the Metro systems. Two Light rail projects have been proposed in Delhi and Kolkata.

 System City Opening Year System length (km) No. of lines No. of lines under construction 
 Delhi Light Rail Transit Delhi 45 3 
 Kolkata LRTS Kolkata 2 

=== Tram ===

Kolkata tram is the only remaining tram network in India

The arrival of British rule in India saw trams in addition to trains, being introduced in many cities including Bombay and Kolkata. The Kolkata tram is currently the only tram system in the country and provides an emission-free means of transport in Kolkata while the other tram systems in India were phased out. The nationalised Calcutta Tramways Company is in the process of upgrading the existing tramway network at a cost of . 
Presently the limited tram system in India is extremely slow and technologically backward, new light rail projects are being proposed rather than tram projects which have one reason or another not been very successful in the country. However, there are some proposals to reintroduce trams as a new transport avatar in some new Indian cities. There are also plans to introduce trams in medium sized cities. 

== Other local transport ==

=== Motorcycle and scooter ===

Motorised two-wheel vehicles like scooters, motorcycles and mopeds are very popular mode of transport due to their fuel efficiency and ease of use in congested roads or streets. The number of two-wheelers sold is several times that of cars. There were 47.5 million powered two-wheelers in India in 2003 compared with just 8.6 million cars. Yamaha, Hero MotoCorp, Honda, TVS Motors, Bajaj Auto and Mahindra 2 Wheelers are the largest two-wheeler companies in terms of market-share. Royal Enfield, an iconic brand name in the country, manufactures different variants of the British Bullet motorcycle which is a classic motorcycle that is still in production. 

Manufacture of scooters in India started when Automobile Products of India (API), set up at Mumbai and incorporated in 1949, began assembling Innocenti-built Lambretta scooters in India post independence. They eventually acquired licence for the Li150 series model, of which they began full-fledged production from the early sixties onwards. In 1972, Scooters India Ltd (SIL), a state-run enterprise based in Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, bought the entire manufacturing rights of the last Innocenti Lambretta model. API has infrastructural facilities at Mumbai, Aurangabad, and Chennai but has been non-operational since 2002. SIL stopped producing scooters in 1998.

Motorcycles and scooters can be rented in many cities. Wearing protective headgear is mandatory for both the rider and the pillion-rider in most cities.

=== Automobile ===
Private vehicles account for 30% of the total transport demand in urban areas of India. An average of 963 new private vehicles are registered every day in Delhi alone. The number of automobiles produced in India rose from 6.3 million (6.3 million) in 2002-03 to 11 million (11.2 million) in 2008-09. However, India still has a very low rate of car ownership. When comparing car ownership between BRIC developing countries, it is on a par with China, and exceeded by Brazil and Russia. 

Compact cars, especially hatchbacks predominate due to affordability, fuel efficiency, congestion, and lack of parking space in most cities. Maruti, Hyundai and Tata Motors are the most popular brands in the order of their market share. The Ambassador once had a monopoly but is now an icon of pre-liberalisation India, and is still used by taxi companies. Maruti 800 launched in 1984 created the first revolution in the Indian auto sector because of its low pricing. It had the highest market share until 2004, when it was overtaken by other low cost models from Maruti such as the Alto and the Wagon R, the Indica from Tata Motors and the Santro from Hyundai. Over the 20-year period since its introduction, about 2.4 million units of the Maruti 800 have been sold. However, with the launch of the Tata Nano, the least expensive production car in the world, maruti 800 lost its popularity.

India is also known for a variety of indigenous vehicles made in villages out of simple motors and vehicle spare-parts. A few of these innovations are the Jugaad, Maruta, Chhakda, peter rehda and the Fame. 

In the city of Bengaluru, Radio One and the Bangalore Traffic Police, launched a carpooling drive which has involved celebrities such as Robin Uthappa, and Rahul Dravid encouraging the public to carpool. The initiative got a good response, and by the end of May 2009, 10,000 people are said to have carpooled in the city. 

=== Utility vehicles ===
The first utility vehicle in India was manufactured by Mahindra and Mahindra. It was a copy of the original Jeep and was manufactured under licence. The vehicle was an instant hit and made Mahindra one of the top companies in India. The Indian Army and police extensively use Mahindra vehicles along with Maruti Gypsys for transporting personnel and equipment.

Tata Motors, the automobile manufacturing arm of the Tata Group, launched its first utility vehicle, the Tata Sumo, in 1994. The Sumo, owing to its then-modern design, captured a 31% share of the market within two years. The Tempo trax from Force Motors till recently was ruling the rural areas. Sports utility vehicles now form a sizeable part of the passenger vehicle market. Models from Tata, Honda, Hyundai, Ford, Chevrolet and other brands are available. 

== Long distance transport ==

=== Railway ===
Darjeeling Himalayan Railway in West Bengal is a World Heritage Site, and one of the two steam engine operated railway line in India, other being Nilgiri Mountain Railway.
Rail services in India, first introduced in 1853, are provided by the state-run Indian Railways under the supervision of the Ministry of Railways. Indian Railways provides an important mode of transport in India, transporting over 18 million passengers and more than 2 million tonnes of freight daily across one of the largest and busiest rail networks in the world. The proposal to construct to build the highest railway track in the world from Manali to Leh overtaking current record of Beijing-Lhasa Railway line has not been taken up for implementation. By 1947, the year of India's independence, there were forty-two rail systems. In 1951 the systems were nationalised as one unit, becoming one of the largest networks in the world. Indian Railways is divided into seventeen zones including the Kolkata Metro Railway. http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Kolkata-Metro-is-now-the-17th-zone-of-Indian-Railways/articleshow/7186301.cms The city of joy "Kolkata" is the Headquarters of three Railway Zones in India namely Eastern Railway zone,South Eastern Railway Zone and the Kolkata Metro.The Indian Railways are further sub-divided into sixty seven divisions, each having a divisional headquarters. 
left
The rail network traverses through the length and breadth of the country, covering more than 7,000 stations over a total route length of more than 65000 km and track length of about 115000 km. About 22224 km or 34% of the route-kilometre was electrified as on 31 March 2012. http://im1.indiarailinfo.com/506503/0/remapa309072012.jpg Indian Railways is the world's largest commercial or utility employer, with more than 1.4 million employees. As to rolling stock, IR owns over 200,000 (freight) wagons, 50,000 coaches and 8,000 locomotives. It also owns locomotive and coach production facilities. It operates both long distance and suburban rail systems on a multi-gauge network of broad, metre and narrow gauges, and is in the process of converting most of the metre gauge (5000 km at end of 2012) and narrow gauge tracks into broad gauge in a project called Project Unigauge.

The Indian Railways runs a number of special types of services which are given higher priority. The Rajdhani trains introduced in 1969 provides connectivity between the national capital, Delhi and capitals of the states. On the other hand, Shatabdi Express provides connectivity between centres of tourism, pilgrimage or business. The Shatabdi Express trains run over short to medium distances and do not have sleepers while the Rajdhani Expresses run over longer distances and have only sleeping accommodation. Both series of trains have a regular speed of 110 to 140 km/h (81 to 87 mph) but average speed of less than 100 km/h. The 12001 Bhopal Shatabdi express, however, runs at a peak speed of 150 km/h on small stretches which makes it the fastest train in India. The other specialised services operated by the Railways are the Duronto Express (without any commercial stop between the origin and the destination but with a few technical stops for crew change and food intake) and Garib Raths that provide cheap no-frill airconditioned rail travel. Besides, The Indian Railways also operates a number of luxury trains which cater to various tourist circuits. For instance, the Palace on Wheels serves the Rajasthan circuit and the The Golden Chariot serves the Karnataka and Goa circuits. There are two UNESCO World Heritage Sites on IR  the Chatrapati Shivaji Terminus and the Mountain railways of India. The latter is not a contiguous railway line but comprises the following three separate historic railway lines located in different parts of India: 
*The Darjeeling Himalayan Railway, a narrow gauge railway in West Bengal.
*The Nilgiri Mountain Railway, a railway to Ooty in the Nilgiri Hills in Tamil Nadu
*The Kalka-Shimla Railway, a narrow gauge railway in the Shivalik mountains in Himachal Pradesh.
*The Maharaja Railways (Gwalior Light Railway), a narrow gauge line from Gwalior to Sheopur of 198 km. in length is world's longest narrow gauge railway line in the UNESCO world heritage tentative list.
*The Neral-Matheran Railway, a 20 km long narrow gauge railway connecting Matheran just north of Bombay is also a historic line.

The Indian Railways has also initiated a number of highly ambitious projects to provide connectivity to the remote and inaccessible areas of the country. The 738 km long Konkan Railway with 2000 bridges and 91 tunnels is one such highly difficult project through fragile mountainous terrain of the Konkan region to connect two important port cities of Mangalore and Mumbai by a short route and was constructed in 1991-1998. Another such highly ambitious project is the Kashmir Railway, the Kashmir valley part of which was completed in 2009. 

Proposals have been made to construct high-speed railway lines in India but no concrete action has been taken. In 1999, the Konkan Railway Corporation introduced the Roll on Roll Off (RORO) service, a unique road-rail synergy system, on the section between Kolad in Maharashtra and Verna in Goa, which was extended up to Surathkal in Karnataka in 2004. The RORO service, the first of its kind in India, allowed trucks to be transported on flatbed trailers. It was highly popular, carrying about trucks and bringing in about 740 million worth of earnings to the corporation till 2007. 

As the railway tracks from Kandla, Pipavav, Mundra and other ports in Saurashtra to Ahmedabad and Palanpur and then to Rewari via Ringas are not electrified, freight trains (goods trains) with containers double-stacked ply on this route to Rewari junction and then take the containers further north from Rewari. Infringements like low road overbridges and foot overbridges that fouled with double-stacked containers were either dismantled or raised in years 2004-06 for running these freight trains. In India freight (goods) trains can carry standard containers double-stacked on flat-bed wagons with normal axle load of about 22 tonnes and do not require special low-bed wagons unlike in other countries that have (relatively narrow) standard gauge. They carry almost 4000 tonnes per rake which is almost twice the load a normal goods train can haul. Some double-stacked container freight trains on this route through Rewari station also carry "high cube" containers that are 2896 mm (9 ft 6-inch) high (higher than standard containers that are generally 8 ft or 2.438 mm high) on special low-well wagons owned by private clients. Some private logistics operators have built container storage yards north of Rewari near Garhi Harsaru for this purpose.

==== International ====
Rail links between India and neighbouring countries are not well-developed. Two trains operate to Pakistan - the Samjhauta Express between Delhi and Lahore, and the Thar Express between Jodhpur and Karachi. Bangladesh is connected by a bi-weekly train, the Maitree Express that runs from Kolkata to Dhaka. Nominal rail links to Nepal exist  passenger services between Jaynagar and Bijalpura, and freight services between Raxaul and Birganj. 

No rail link exists with Myanmar but a railway line is to be built through from Jiribam (in Manipur) to Tamu through Imphal and Moreh. The construction of this missing link, as per the feasibility study conducted by the Ministry of External Affairs through RITES Ltd, is estimated to cost . An 18 km railway link with Bhutan is being constructed from Hashimara in West Bengal to Toribari in Bhutan. No rail link exists with either China or Sri Lanka,. A railway line is being built from Siliguri to Rangpo in Sikkim but there are no plans to extend it further north towards China.

=== Road ===

The Network of National Highways in India.
India has a network of National Highways connecting all the major cities and state capitals, forming the economic backbone of the country. As of 2013, India has a total of 70934 km of National Highways, of which 1208 km are classified as expressways. Under National Highways Development Project (NHDP), work is under progress to equip some of the important national highways with four lanes; also there is a plan to convert some stretches of these roads to six lanes. However congestion and bureaucratic delays en route ensure that trucking goods from Gurgaon to the port in Mumbai can take up to 10 days. 

As per the National Highways Authority of India, about 65% of freight and 80% passenger traffic is carried by the roads. The National Highways carry about 40% of total road traffic, though only about 2% of the road network is covered by these roads. Average growth of the number of vehicles has been around 10.16% per annum over recent years. Highways have facilitated development along the route and many towns have sprung up along major highways. Road transport Benchmark Freight Index (BFI) initiative taken in India in recently by ITRANS.

All national highways are metalled, but very few are constructed of concrete, the most notable being the Mumbai-Pune Expressway. In recent years construction has commenced on a nationwide system of multi-lane highways, including the Golden Quadrilateral and North-South and East-West Corridors which link the largest cities in India. In 2000, around 40% of villages in India lacked access to all-weather roads and remained isolated during the monsoon season. 

To improve rural connectivity, Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (Prime Minister's Rural Road Program), a project funded by the Central Government with the help of World Bank, was launched in 2000 to build all-weather roads to connect all habitations with a population of 500 or above (250 or above for hilly areas). 

As per 2013 estimates, the total road length in India is 4,689,842 km; CIA World Factbook, India making the Indian road network the second largest road network in the world after the United States. At 0.66 km of highway per square kilometre of land the density of Indias highway network is higher than that of the United States (0.65) and far higher than that of China's (0.16) or Brazil's (0.20). 

 Type of Road Length 
 Expressways 1208 km as of 2011 
 National Highways 79,116 km 
 State Highways 155,716 km 
 District, Rural and Other Roads 4,455,010 km 
 Total Length 4,689,842 km (Approx) 

Buses are an important means of public transport in India, particularly in the countryside and remote areas where the rail network cannot be accessed and airline operations are few or non-existent. Due to this social significance, public bus transport is predominantly owned and operated by public agencies, and most state governments operate bus services through a State Road Transport Corporation. These corporations, introduced in the 1960s and 1970s, have proven extremely useful in connecting villages and towns across the country. 

== Aviation ==
Air India, the flag carrier of IndiaDirectorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) is the national regulatory body for the aviation industry. It is controlled by the Ministry of Civil Aviation. The ministry also controls aviation related autonomous organizations like the Airports Authority of India (AAI), Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS), Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi and Public Sector Undertakings including Air India, Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited and Hindustan Aeronautics Limited. http://www.civilaviation.gov.in/MocaEx/faces/orgsetup.jspx 

Air India is India's national flag carrier after merging with Indian in 2011 http://www.airindia.com/SBCMS/Webpages/Fleet-Details1.aspx?MID=196# and plays a major role in connecting India with the rest of the world. IndiGo, Jet Airways, Air India, Spicejet and GoAir are the major carriers in order of their market share. These airlines connect more than 80 cities across India and also operate overseas routes after the liberalization of Indian aviation. Several other foreign airlines connect Indian cities with other major cities across the globe. However, a large section of country's air transport potential remains untapped, even though the Mumbai-Delhi air corridor was ranked 10th by Amadeus in 2012 among the world's busiest routes. 

Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi is India's busiest airport in terms of passenger traffic

===History===
Air India placed orders for more than 68 jets from Boeing for 7.5 billion in 2006 while Indian placed orders for 43 jets from Airbus for 2.5 billion in 2005. Jet Airways invested millions of dollars to increase its fleet, but was later put on hold due to the recent economic slowdown. IndiGo announced orders for 100 Airbus A320s worth 6 billion during the Paris Air Show, the highest by any Asian domestic carrier. Kingfisher Airlines became the first Indian air carrier on 15 June 2005 to order Airbus A380 aircraft worth 3 billion. 

More than half a dozen low-cost carriers entered the Indian market in 2004-05. Major new entrants included Air Deccan, Air Sahara, Kingfisher Airlines, SpiceJet, GoAir, Paramount Airways and IndiGo. But Indian aviation industry struggled due to economic slowdown, rising fuel and operation costs. This led to consolidation, buy outs and discontinuations in the Indian airline industry. In 2007, Air Sahara and Air Deccan were acquired by Jet Airways and Kingfisher Airlines respectively. Paramount Airways ceased operations in 2010 and Kingfisher Airlines shut down in 2012. Etihad Airways agreed to acquire 24% stake in Jet in 2013. AirAsia India is a proposed low cost carrier scheduled to operate as a joint venture between Air Asia and Tata Sons. As of 2012-13, IndiGo is the only Indian carrier generating profits.

=== Airports ===

Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport, Mumbai is India's second busiest in terms of passenger traffic

As of 2013, there are 346 civilian airports in India - 253 with paved runways and 93 with unpaved runways. Of these, 66 are licensed by the DGCA in the public use category while 21 are licensed for private use. http://dgca.nic.in/aerodrome/aero_list.pdf Most of these are managed by the AAI while the rest are owned by State Governments and private entities. There are more than 20 international airports in India. Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi and Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport, Mumbai handle more than a half of the air traffic in the country. 
 

The operations of the major airports in India have been privatised over the past 5 years and this has resulted in better equipped and cleaner airports. The terminals have either been refurbished or expanded.

 Length of runways Airports with paved runways Airports with unpaved runways 
 3,047 m (10,000 ft) or more 21 1 
 2,438 to 3,047 m (8,000 to 10,000 ft) 59 3 
 1,524 to 2,438 m (5,000 to 8,000 ft) 76 6 
 914 to 1,524 m (3,000 to 5,000 ft) 82 38 
 Under 914 m (3,000 ft) 14 45 
 Total 253 93 

=== Heliports ===
As of 2013, there are 45 heliports in India. India also has the world's highest helipad at the Siachen Glacier a height of 6400 metre (21,000 ft) above mean sea level. 

Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited is a public sector company that provides helicopter services to ONGC to its off-shore locations, and also to various State Governments in India, particularly in North-east India. 

== Ports and shipping ==

Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust in Navi Mumbai ranks 25th in the world as per container traffic. 
There are many major ports in India. Maritime transportation in India is managed by the Shipping Corporation of India, a government-owned company that also manages offshore and other marine transport infrastructure in the country. It owns and operates about 35% of Indian tonnage and operates in practically all areas of shipping business servicing both national and international trades. 
left
It has a fleet of 79 ships of 2750,000 GT (4.8 million DWT) and also manages 53 research, survey and support vessels of 120,000 GT (060,000 DWT) on behalf of various government departments and other organisations. Personnel are trained at the Maritime Training Institute in Mumbai, a branch of the World Maritime University, which was set up in 1987. The Corporation also operates in Malta and Iran through joint ventures. 
Visakhapatnam seaport is one of the busiest ports on the East Coast of India
The ports are the main centres of trade. In India about 95% of the foreign trade by quantity and 70% by value takes place through the ports. Mumbai Port & JNPT(Navi Mumbai) handles 70% of maritime trade in India. There are twelve major ports: Navi Mumbai, Mumbai, Kochi, Kolkata (including Haldia), Paradip, Visakhapatnam, Ennore, Chennai, Tuticorin, New Mangalore, Mormugao and Kandla. Other than these, there are 187 minor and intermediate ports, 43 of which handle cargo. 

The distinction between major and minor ports is not based on the amount of cargo handled. The major ports are managed by port trusts which are regulated by the central government. They come under the purview of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963. The minor ports are regulated by the respective state governments and many of these ports are private ports or captive ports. The total amount of traffic handled at the major ports in 2005-2006 was 382.33 Mt. 

== Waterways ==
left

India has an extensive network of inland waterways in the form of rivers, canals, backwaters and creeks. The total navigable length is 14500 km, out of which about 5200 km of river and 485 km of canals can be used by mechanised crafts. Freight transport by waterways is highly underutilised in India compared to other large countries. The total cargo moved by inland waterways is just 0.15% of the total inland traffic in India, compared to the corresponding figures of 20% for Germany and 32% for Bangladesh. 

Cargo that is transported in an organised manner is confined to a few waterways in Goa, West Bengal, Assam and Kerala. The Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI) is the statutory authority in charge of the waterways in India. It does the function of building the necessary infrastructure in these waterways, surveying the economic feasibility of new projects and also administration and regulation. The following waterways have been declared as National Waterways:
Boats sailing on National Waterway 2 at Guwahati
*National Waterway 1: AllahabadHaldia stretch of the Ganga - Bhagirathi - Hooghly river system with a total length of 1620 km in October 1986. 

*National Waterway 2: SaidiyaDhubri stretch of the Brahmaputra river system with a total length of 891 km in 1988. 

*National Waterway 3: KollamKottapuram stretch of the West Coast Canal along with Champakara and Udyogmandal canals, with a total length of 205 km in 1993. 

*National Waterway 4: BhadrachalamRajahmundry and WazirabadVijaywada stretch of the KrishnaGodavari river system along with the KakinadaPondicherry canal network, with a total length of 1095 km in 2007. 

*National Waterway 5: MangalgadiParadeep and TalcherDhamara stretch of the MahanadiBrahmani river system along with the East Coast Canal, with a total length of 623 km in 2007. 

== Pipelines ==
* Length of pipelines for crude oil is 20000 km.
* Length of Petroleum products pipeline is 15000 km.
* Length of Natural gas pipelines is 1700 km.

The above information was calculated in 2008. 

== Environmental issues and impact ==
Buses on the Delhi BRTS. Delhi was one of the first cities in the World to introduce CNG powered buses
The National capital New Delhi has one of the largest CNG based transport systems as a part of the drive to bring down pollution. In spite of these efforts it remains the largest contributor to the greenhouse gas emissions in the city. The CNG Bus manufacturers in India are Ashok Leyland, Tata Motors, Swaraj Mazda and Hindustan Motors. 

In 1998, the Supreme Court of India published a Directive that specified the date of April 2001 as deadline to replace or convert all buses, three-wheelers and taxis in Delhi to compressed natural gas. 

The Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation was the first State Transport Undertaking in India to utilise bio-fuels and ethanol-blended fuels. KSRTC took an initiative to do research in alternative fuel forms by experimenting with various alternatives blending diesel with biofuels such as honge, palm, sunflower, groundnut, coconut and sesame. In 2009, the corporation decided to promote the use of biofuel buses. 

== See also ==

* Transport in Himachal Pradesh
* Transport in Delhi
* Public transport in Mumbai
* Transport in Karnataka
* Transport in Chennai
* Transport in Kolkata
* Traffic collisions in India

== References ==

== External links ==

* Follow a young commuter on her way through Mumbai, a web documentary by Deutsche Welle Global Ideas (www.dw.de/globalideas)
* Freight Benchmarking Index
* Transport Search in India
* India Transit
* Ministry of Road Transport & Highways
* India Transport Portal
* Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
* Railways Information India
* Mile by Mile, India Paves a Smoother Road to Its Future, New York Times, 4 December 2005.

*

[[Foreign relations of India]]

India has formal diplomatic relations with most nations; it is the world's second most populous country, the world's most-populous democracy and one of the fastest growing major economies. With the world's eighth largest military expenditure, third largest armed force, tenth largest economy by nominal rates and third largest economy in terms of purchasing power parity, as per data shown in 2012 on http://unstats.un.org/unsd/snaama/dnltransfer.asp?fID=2 India is a regional power, a nascent great power and a potential superpower. India's growing international influence gives it a prominent voice in global affairs. The Economist magazine argues, however, that underinvestment in diplomacy and a lack of strategic vision have minimised India's influence in the world. "Can India become a great power?" 

India is a newly industrialised country, it has a long history of collaboration with several countries and is considered one of the leaders of the developing world along with China, Brazil, Russia and South Africa (the BRICS countries). G8 SUMMIT: Developing Countries Stand Firm by Kyoto Protocol. Ipsnews.net (7 July 2005). Retrieved 12 November 2011. India was one of the founding members of several international organisations, most notably the United Nations, the Asian Development Bank, G20 industrial nations and the founder of the Non-aligned movement. India has also played an important and influential role in other international organisations like East Asia Summit, World Trade Organisation, International Monetary Fund (IMF), G8+5 and IBSA Dialogue Forum. Regionally, India is a part of SAARC and BIMSTEC. India has taken part in several UN peacekeeping missions and in 2007, it was the second-largest troop contributor to the United Nations. India is currently seeking a permanent seat in the UN Security Council, along with the G4 nations. 

==History==
Even before independence, the Government of British India maintained semi-autonomous diplomatic relations. It had colonies (such as the Aden Settlement), who sent and received full diplomatic missions, High Commission of India in Australia: India Australia Relations. Hcindia-au.org (20 April 2011). Retrieved 12 November 2011. and was a founder member of both the League of Nations First Assembly, Geneva, 15 November  18 December 1920. Indiana.edu (18 December 1920). Retrieved 12 November 2011. and the United Nations. UN list of members by admission. Un.org. Retrieved 12 November 2011. After India gained independence from the United Kingdom in 1947, it soon joined the Commonwealth of Nations and strongly supported independence movements in other colonies, like the Indonesian National Revolution. The partition and various territorial disputes, particularly that over Kashmir, would strain its relations with Pakistan for years to come. During the Cold War, India adopted a foreign policy of not aligning itself with any major power bloc. However, India developed close ties with the Soviet Union and received extensive military support from it.

The end of the Cold War significantly affected India's foreign policy, as it did for much of the world. The country now seeks to strengthen its diplomatic and economic ties with the United States, Fact Sheet: United States and India: Strategic Partnership. Georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov (22 February 2006). Retrieved 12 November 2011. the People's Republic of China, India and China. Ibef.org. Retrieved 12 November 2011. the European Union, The EU's relations with India  Overview Japan, India and Japan. Ibef.org. Retrieved 12 November 2011. Israel, India-Israel Partnership. Meria.idc.ac.il. Retrieved 12 November 2011. Mexico, Mexico International Relations and Brazil. India, Brazil ink nine agreements. Rediff.com. Retrieved 12 November 2011. India has also forged close ties with the member states of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, India & Asean. Ibef.org. Retrieved 12 November 2011. the African Union, Terral, Jim. (4 April 2008) World Report: "India 2nd largest importer of conventional weapons," Business Standard, 14 February 2008. Worldreport.cjly.net. Retrieved 12 November 2011. the Arab League Indo-Arab relations; an account of India's relations with the Arab World from ancient up to modern times. Worldcat.org. Retrieved 12 November 2011. and Iran. A special report on India: India elsewhere: An awkward neighbour in a troublesome neighbourhood 11 December 2008 The Economist 

Though India continues to have a military relationship with Russia, Prospects for India-Russia Security Relations  Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. Carnegieendowment.org. Retrieved 12 November 2011. Israel has emerged as India's second largest military partner while India has built a strong strategic partnership with the United States. 

==Policy==
States that host an Indian diplomatic mission 
India's foreign policy has always regarded the concept of neighbourhood as one of widening concentric circles, around a central axis of historical and cultural commonalities. Introduction to India's Foreign Policy, Embassy of India  Washington, DC. Indianembassy.org. Retrieved 12 November 2011. 

Pranab Mukherjee, the former Finance Minister of India and current President of India with US President George W. Bush in 2008.

As many as 21 million people of Indian origin live and work abroad and constitute an important link with the mother country. An important role of India's foreign policy has been to ensure their welfare and well being within the framework of the laws of the country where they live. India and the world-http://www.indianembassy.org/policy/30ar01.pdf 

===Role of the Prime Minister===

Jawaharlal Nehru, India's first Prime Minister, promoted a strong personal role for the Prime Minister but a weak institutional structure. Nehru served concurrently as Prime Minister and Minister of External Affairs; he made all major foreign policy decisions himself after consulting with his advisers and then entrusted the conduct of international affairs to senior members of the Indian Foreign Service. He was the main founding fathers of the Panchsheel or the five principles of peaceful co-existence.

His successors continued to exercise considerable control over India's international dealings, although they generally appointed separate ministers of external affairs. 

India's second prime minister, Lal Bahadur Shastri (196466), expanded the Prime Minister Office (sometimes called the Prime Minister's Secretariat) and enlarged its powers. By the 1970s, the Office of the Prime Minister had become the de facto coordinator and supraministry of the Indian government. The enhanced role of the office strengthened the prime minister's control over foreign policy making at the expense of the Ministry of External Affairs. Advisers in the office provided channels of information and policy recommendations in addition to those offered by the Ministry of External Affairs. A subordinate part of the officethe Research and Analysis Wing (RAW)functioned in ways that significantly expanded the information available to the prime minister and his advisers. The RAW gathered intelligence, provided intelligence analysis to the Office of the Prime Minister, and conducted covert operations abroad.

The prime minister's control and reliance on personal advisers in the Office of the Prime Minister was particularly strong under the tenures of Indira Gandhi (196677 and 198084) and her son, Rajiv (198489), who succeeded her, and weaker during the periods of coalition governments. Observers find it difficult to determine whether the locus of decision-making authority on any particular issue lies with the Ministry of External Affairs, the Council of Ministers, the Office of the Prime Minister, or the prime minister himself. 

The Prime Minister is however free to appoint advisers and special committees to examine various foreign policy options and areas of interest. In a recent instance, Manmohan Singh appointed K. Subrahmanyam in 2005 to head a special government task force to study 'Global Strategic Developments' over the next decade. The Task Force submitted its conclusions to the Prime Minister in 2006. The report has not yet been released in the public domain.

===Ministry of External Affairs===
The Ministry of External Affairs is the Indian government's agency responsible for the foreign relations of India. The Minister of External Affairs holds cabinet rank as a member of the Council of Ministers.

Sushma Swaraj is current Minister of External Affairs. The Ministry has two Ministers of State Preneet Kaur and E. Ahamed. The Indian Foreign Secretary is the head of Indian Foreign Service (IFS) and therefore, serves as the head of all Indian ambassadors and high commissioners. Ministry of External Affairs website. Meaindia.nic.in (29 October 2011). Retrieved 12 November 2011. Sujatha Singh is the current Foreign Secretary of India.

===Look East Policy===

In the post Cold War era, a significant aspect of India's foreign policy is the Look East Policy. During the cold war, India's relations with its South East Asian neighbours was not very strong. After the end of the cold war, the government of India particularly realised the importance of redressing this imbalance in India's foreign policy. Consequently, the Narsimha Rao government in the early nineties of the last century unveiled the look east policy. Initially it focused on renewing political and economic contacts with the countries of East and South-East Asia.

At present, under the Look East Policy, the Government of India is giving special emphasis on the economic development of backward north eastern region of India taking advantage of huge market of ASEAN as well as of the energy resources available in some of the member countries of ASEAN like Burma. 
Look-east policy was launched in 1992 just after the end of the cold war, following the dissolution of the Soviet Union. After the start of liberalisation, it was a very strategic policy decision taken by the government in the foreign policy. To quote Prime Minister Manmohan Singh "it was also a strategic shift in India's vision of the world and India's place in the evolving global economy".

The policy was given an initial thrust with the then Prime Minister Narasimha Rao visiting China, Japan, South Korea, Vietnam and Singapore and India becoming an important dialogue partner with ASEAN in 1992. Since the beginning of this century, India has given a big push to this policy by becoming a summit level partner of ASEAN (2002) and getting involved in some regional initiatives such as the BIMSTEC and the GangaMekong Cooperation and now becoming a member of the East Asia Summit (EAS) in December, 2005. 

==Overview==
Foreign relations of India
India's relations with the world have evolved since the British Raj (18571947), when the British Empire monopolised external and defence relations. When India gained independence in 1947, few Indians had experience in making or conducting foreign policy. However, the country's oldest political party, the Indian National Congress, had established a small foreign department in 1925 to make overseas contacts and to publicise its freedom struggle. From the late 1920s on, Jawaharlal Nehru, who had a long-standing interest in world affairs among independence leaders, formulated the Congress stance on international issues. As a member of the interim government in 1946, Nehru articulated India's approach to the world. India Foreign Relations. Indianchild.com. Retrieved 12 November 2011. 

India's international influence varied over the years after independence. Indian prestige and moral authority were high in the 1950s and facilitated the acquisition of developmental assistance from both East and West. Although the prestige stemmed from India's nonaligned stance, the nation was unable to prevent Cold War politics from becoming intertwined with interstate relations in South Asia.

In the 1960s and 1970s India's international position among developed and developing countries faded in the course of wars with China and Pakistan, disputes with other countries in South Asia, and India's attempt to balance Pakistan's support from the United States and China by signing the Indo-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation in August 1971. Although India obtained substantial Soviet military and economic aid, which helped to strengthen the nation, India's influence was undercut regionally and internationally by the perception that its friendship with the Soviet Union prevented a more forthright condemnation of the Soviet presence in Afghanistan. In the late 1980s, India improved relations with the United States, other developed countries, and China while continuing close ties with the Soviet Union. Relations with its South Asian neighbours, especially Pakistan, Sri Lanka, and Nepal, occupied much of the energies of the Ministry of External Affairs. India  Foreign Relations. Countrystudies.us. Retrieved 12 November 2011. 

Since the dissolution of the Soviet Union, India has forged a closer partnership with Western powers. Shown here are Prime Minister Manmohan Singh with US President Barack Obama in 2009.
In the 1990s, India's economic problems and the demise of the bipolar world political system forced India to reassess its foreign policy and adjust its foreign relations. Previous policies proved inadequate to cope with the serious domestic and international problems facing India. The end of the Cold War gutted the core meaning of nonalignment and left Indian foreign policy without significant direction. The hard, pragmatic considerations of the early 1990s were still viewed within the nonaligned framework of the past, but the disintegration of the Soviet Union removed much of India's international leverage, for which relations with Russia and the other post-Soviet states could not compensate. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, India improved its relations with the United States, Canada, France, Japan and Germany. In 1992, India established formal diplomatic relations with Israel and this relationship grew during the tenures of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) government and the subsequent UPA (United Progressive Alliance) governments. 

In the mid-1990s, India attracted the world attention towards the Pakistan-backed terrorism in Kashmir. The Kargil War resulted in a major diplomatic victory for India. The United States and European Union recognised the fact that Pakistani military had illegally infiltrated into Indian territory and pressured Pakistan to withdraw from Kargil. Several anti-India militant groups based in Pakistan were labeled as terrorist groups by the United States and European Union.

India has often represented the interests of developing countries at various international platforms. Shown here are Prime Minister Manmohan Singh with Dmitry Medvedev, Hu Jintao and Luiz Incio Lula da Silva during BRIC summit in June, 2009.
In 1998, India tested nuclear weapons for the second time (see Pokhran-II) which resulted in several US, Japanese and European sanctions on India. India's then-defence minister, George Fernandes, said that India's nuclear programme was necessary as it provided a deterrence to potential Chinese nuclear threat. Most of the sanctions imposed on India were removed by 2001. Beyond Pokharan II. Expressindia.com (11 May 1999). Retrieved 12 November 2011. 

After 11 September attacks in 2001, Indian intelligence agencies provided the U.S. with significant information on Al-Qaeda and related groups' activities in Pakistan and Afghanistan. India's extensive contribution to the War on Terror, coupled with a surge in its economy, has helped India's diplomatic relations with several countries. Over the past three years, India has held numerous joint military exercises with U.S. and European nations that have resulted in a strengthened U.S.-India and E.U.-India bilateral relationship. India's bilateral trade with Europe and United States has more than doubled in the last five years. PPI: U.S. Exports to India Have Doubled Since 2003 

India has been pushing for reforms in the UN and WTO with mixed results. India's candidature for a permanent seat at the UN Security Council is currently backed by several countries including France, Russia, South Asia  Putin backs India's UN seat bid. BBC News (4 December 2004). Retrieved 12 November 2011. the United Kingdom, UNSC without India unrealistic  The Economic Times. Economictimes.indiatimes.com (22 April 2008). Retrieved 12 November 2011. Germany, Japan, Brazil, India & World: "Working together for Security Council seat". The Hindu (17 April 2008). Retrieved 12 November 2011. Australia UN seat 'central' to Australian foreign policy and UAE. News National UNSC permanent seat is India's right : UAE. The Hindu (23 November 2010). Retrieved 12 November 2011. In 2004, the United States signed a nuclear co-operation agreement with India even though the latter is not a part of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. The US argued that India's strong nuclear non-proliferation record made it an exception, however this has not persuaded other Nuclear Suppliers Group members to sign similar deals with India. During a state visit to India in November 2010, US president Barack Obama announced US support for India's bid for permanent membership to UN Security Council as well as India's entry to Nuclear Suppliers Group, Wassenaar Arrangement, Australia Group and Missile Technology Control Regime. 

==Strategic partners==
India's growing economy, strategic location, friendly foreign policy and large and vibrant diaspora has won it more allies than enemies. India as an Emerging Power  By Sumit Ganguly ISBN 0-7146-5386-1 India has friendly relations with several countries in the developing world. Though India is not a part of any major military alliance, it has close strategic and military relationship with most of the fellow major powers.

Countries considered India's closest include the Russian Federation, Russia Strategic cooperation. Web.archive.org (17 October 2007). Retrieved 12 November 2011. Israel, India and Israel: Dawn of a New Era. Westerndefense.org (1 January 2011).Nepal, Bhutan, Sri Lanka, Retrieved 12 November 2011. Afghanistan, France, "Indian Maoists haven't evolved" The Times of India Bhutan Scoop: Bhutanese Refugees: Trapped, United States and Tantalized and Bangladesh. The Fish Swims Upriver. www.outlookindia.com. Retrieved 12 November 2011. Russia is the largest supplier of military equipment to India, followed by Israel and France. Biggest Air Show ends in India According to some analysts, Israel is set to overtake Russia as India's largest military and strategic partner. "Looking out for number one" Amnon Barzilai The two countries also collaborate extensively in the sphere of counter-terrorism and space technology. "India Attains Spy Satellite From Israel2. Topnews.in (21 March 2009). Retrieved 12 November 2011. India also enjoys strong military relations with several other countries, including the United Kingdom, the United States, Internet Archive Wayback Machine. Web.archive.org (9 August 2007). Retrieved 12 November 2011. Japan, Japan-India Partnership in a New Asian Era: Strategic Orientation of Japan-India Global Partnership". "MOFA. Retrieved 12 November 2011. Singapore, Brazil, South Africa and Italy. In addition, India operates an airbase in Tajikistan New Delhi looks to Asia for energy. Thenational.ae. Retrieved 12 November 2011. and signed a landmark defence accord with Qatar in 2008. "Security pact with Qatar gives India Gulf toehold". Indianexpress.com (12 November 2008). Retrieved 12 November 2011. 

India has also forged relationships with developing countries, especially South Africa, Brazil, Brazil finds a belated ally in India. International Herald Tribune (29 March 2009). Retrieved 12 November 2011. and Mexico. India looks for key to Nafta in Mexico. Bilaterals.org. Retrieved 12 November 2011. These countries often represent the interests of the developing countries through economic forums such as the G8+5, IBSA and WTO. India was seen as one of the standard bearers of the developing world and claimed to speak for a collection of more than 30 other developing nations at the Doha Development Round. India nixes WTO deal to cut tariffs. Theglobeandmail.com. Retrieved 12 November 2011. India's "Look East" Policy has helped it develop greater economic and strategic partnership with Southeast Asian countries, South Korea, Japan, and Taiwan. India also enjoys friendly relations with the Persian Gulf countries and most members of the African Union.

==Bilateral and regional relations==

===Neighbours===
India and its neighbours

====Afghanistan====

Bilateral relations between India and Afghanistan have been traditionally strong and friendly. While India was the only South Asian country to recognise the Soviet-backed Democratic Republic of Afghanistan in the 1980s, its relations were diminished during the Afghan civil wars and the rule of the Islamist Taliban in the 1990s. India aided the overthrow of the Taliban and became the largest regional provider of humanitarian and reconstruction aid. 

The new democratically elected Afghan government strengthened its ties with India in wake of persisting tensions and problems with Pakistan, which is continuing to shelter and support the Taliban. India pursues a policy of close cooperation to bolster its standing as a regional power and contain its rival Pakistan, which it maintains is supporting Islamic militants in Kashmir and other parts of India. India is the largest regional investor in Afghanistan, having committed more than US$2.2 billion for reconstruction purposes. India, Afghanistan united against terror, 4 August 2008 

====Bangladesh====

India was the first country to recognise Bangladesh as a separate and independent state, doing so on 6 December 1971, ten days before Bangladesh officially declared its independence. India fought alongside the Bangladeshis to liberate Bangladesh from West Pakistan, which was imposing its own culture upon the East Bengalis, in 1971.
Bangladesh's relationship with India has been difficult in terms of irrigation and land border disputes post 1976. However, India has enjoyed favourable relationship with Bangladesh during governments formed by the Awami League in 1972 and 1996.

At the outset India's relations with Bangladesh could not have been stronger because of India's unalloyed support for independence and opposition against Pakistan in 1971. During the independence war, many refugees fled to India. When the struggle of resistance matured in November 1971, India also intervened militarily and may have helped bring international attention to the issue through Indira Gandhi's visit to Washington, D.C. Afterwards India furnished relief and reconstruction aid. India extended recognition to Bangladesh prior to the end of the war in 1971 (the second country to do so after Bhutan) and subsequently lobbied others to follow suit. India also withdrew its military from the land of Bangladesh when Sheikh Mujibur Rahman requested Indira Gandhi to do so during the latter's visit to Dhaka in 1972.

Indo-Bangladesh relations have been somewhat less friendly since the fall of Mujib government in August 1975. For Bangladesh: India is causing trouble, International Herald Tribune, 2003-01-22 over the years over issues such as South Talpatti Island, the Tin Bigha corridor and access to Nepal, the Farakka Barrage and water sharing, border conflicts near Tripura and the construction of a fence along most of the border which India explains as security provision against migrants, insurgents and terrorists. Many Bangladeshis feel India likes to play "big brother" to smaller neighbours, including Bangladesh. Bilateral relations warmed in 1996, due to a softer Indian foreign policy and the new Awami League Government. A 30-year water-sharing agreement for the Ganges River was signed in December 1996, after an earlier bilateral water-sharing agreement for the Ganges River lapsed in 1988. Both nations also have cooperated on the issue of flood warning and preparedness. The Bangladesh Government and tribal insurgents signed a peace accord in December 1997, which allowed for the return of tribal refugees who had fled into India, beginning in 1986, to escape violence caused by an insurgency in their homeland in the Chittagong Hill Tracts. The Bangladesh Army maintains a very strong presence in the area to this day. The army is increasingly concerned about a growing problem of cultivation of illegal drugs.

There are also small pieces of land along the border region that Bangladesh is diplomatically trying to reclaim. Padua, part of Sylhet Division before 1971, has been under Indian control since the war in 1971. This small strip of land was re-occupied by the BDR in 2001, but later given back to India after Bangladesh government decided to solve the problem through diplomatic negotiations. The Indian New Moore island no longer exists, but Bangladesh repeatedly claims it http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/south_asia/8584665.stm ) as part of the Satkhira district of Bangladesh.

In recent years India has increasingly complained that Bangladesh does not secure its border properly. It fears an increasing flow of poor Bangladeshis and it accuses Bangladesh of harbouring Indian separatist groups like ULFA and alleged terrorist groups. The Bangladesh government has refused to accept these allegations. http://www.hindu.com/2007/03/04/stories/2007030402720800.htm Bangladesh promises India all help against insurgents Dhaka dismisses Mumbai bomb claim, BBC World News, 2006-07-15 India estimates that over 20 million Bangladeshis are living illegally in India. The Tribune, Chandigarh, India - Main News One Bangladeshi official responded that "there is not a single Bangladeshi migrant in India". http://www.tribuneindia.com/2003/20030217/edit.htm#3Problem of Bangladeshi migrants Since 2002, India has been constructing an India - Bangladesh Fence along much of the 2500 mile border. The failure to resolve migration disputes bears a human cost for illegal migrants, such as imprisonment and health risks (namely HIV/Aids). Fiona Samuels and Sanju Wagle 2011. Population mobility and HIV and AIDS: review of laws, policies and treaties between Bangladesh, Nepal and India. London: Overseas Development Institute 

====Bhutan====

Historically, there have been close ties with India. Both countries signed a friendship treaty in 1949, where India would assist Bhutan in foreign relations. On 8 February 2007, the Indo-Bhutan Friendship Treaty was substantially revised under the Bhutanese King, Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck. Whereas in the Treaty of 1949 Article 2 read as "The Government of India undertakes to exercise no interference in the internal administration of Bhutan. On its part the Government of Bhutan agrees to be guided by the advice of the Government of India in regard to its external relations."

In the revised treaty it now reads as, "In keeping with the abiding ties of close friendship and cooperation between Bhutan and India, the Government of the Kingdom of Bhutan and the Government of the Republic of India shall cooperate closely with each other on issues relating to their national interests. Neither government shall allow the use of its territory for activities harmful to the national security and interest of the other". The revised treaty also includes in it the preamble "Reaffirming their respect for each other's independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity", an element that was absent in the earlier version. The Indo-Bhutan Friendship Treaty of 2007 strengthens Bhutan's status as an independent and sovereign nation.

Tata Power is building a hydro-electric dam. This dam will greatly develop the Bhutanese economy by providing employment, and by selling electricity to India and fulfilling India's burgeoning energy needs. Due to this dam Bhutan's economy grew 20%, the second highest growth rate in the world.

====Burma/Myanmar====

India was one of the leading supporters of Burmese independence and established diplomatic relations after Burma's independence from Great Britain in 1948. For many years, Indo-Burmese relations were strong due to cultural links, flourishing commerce, common interests in regional affairs and the presence of a significant Indian community in Burma. Burma shows India the road to Southeast Asia. Atimes.com. Retrieved 12 November 2011. India provided considerable support when Burma struggled with regional insurgencies. However, the overthrow of the democratic government by the Military of Burma led to strains in ties. Along with much of the world, India condemned the suppression of democracy and Burma ordered the expulsion of the Burmese Indian community, increasing its own isolation from the world. Years of Isolation Produced Intensely Poor Nation. New York Times (24 July 1988). Retrieved 12 November 2011. Only China maintained close links with Burma while India supported the pro-democracy movement. Bhaumik, Subir. (26 September 2007) India-Burma ties. BBC News. Retrieved 12 November 2011. Realism in India-Burma relations. Financialexpress.com (15 September 2003). Retrieved 12 November 2011. 

However, due to geo-political concerns, India revived its relations and recognised the military Junta ruling Burma in 1993, overcoming strains over drug trafficking, the suppression of democracy and the rule of the military junta in Burma. Burma is situated to the south of the states of Mizoram, Manipur, Nagaland and Arunachal Pradesh in Northeast India. and the proximity of the People's Republic of China gives strategic importance to Indo-Burmese relations. The Indo-Burmese border stretches over 1,600 kilometres Myanmar shows India the road to Southeast Asia and some insurgents in North-east India seek refuge in Burma. Consequently, India has been keen on increasing military cooperation with Burma in its counter-insurgency activities. In 2001, the Indian Army completed the construction of a major road along its border with Burma. India has also been building major roads, highways, ports and pipelines within Burma in an attempt to increase its strategic influence in the region and also to counter China's growing strides in the Indochina peninsula. Indian companies have also sought active participation in oil and natural gas exploration in Burma.In February 2007, India announced a plan to develop the Sittwe port, which would enable ocean access from Indian Northeastern states like Mizoram, via the Kaladan River.

India is a major customer of Burmese oil and gas. In 2007, Indian exports to Burma totaled US$185 million, while its imports from Burma were valued at around US$810 million, consisting mostly of oil and gas. India has granted US$100 million credit to fund highway infrastructure projects in Burma, while US$57 million has been offered to upgrade Burmese railways. A further US$27 million in grants has been pledged for road and rail projects. India is one of the few countries that has provided military assistance to the Burmese junta. However, there has been increasing pressure on India to cut some of its military supplies to Burma. Relations between the two remain close which was evident in the aftermath of Cyclone Nargis, when India was one of the few countries whose relief and rescue aid proposals were accepted by Burma's ruling junta. 

Both India and the PRC mantain embassies in Rangoon and Consulate-Generals in Mandalay.

====China====

A Chinese container ship unloads cargo at the Jawaharlal Nehru Port in India. Bilateral trade between the two countries is expected to surpass US$60 billion by 2010 making China the single largest trading partner of India. 
Despite lingering suspicions remaining from the 1962 Sino-Indian War and continuing boundary disputes over Aksai Chin and Arunachal Pradesh, Sino-Indian relations have improved gradually since 1988. Both countries have sought to reduce tensions along the frontier, expand trade and cultural ties, and normalise relations.

A series of high-level visits between the two nations have helped improve relations. In December 1996, PRC President Jiang Zemin visited India during a tour of South Asia. While in New Delhi, he signed with the Indian Prime Minister a series of confidence-building measures for the disputed borders. Sino-Indian relations suffered a brief setback in May 1998 when the Indian Defence minister justified the country's nuclear tests by citing potential threats from the PRC. However, in June 1999, during the Kargil crisis, then-External Affairs Minister Jaswant Singh visited Beijing and stated that India did not consider China a threat. By 2001, relations between India and the PRC were on the mend, and the two sides handled the move from Tibet to India of the 17th Karmapa in January 2000 with delicacy and tact. In 2003, India formally recognised Tibet as a part of China, and China recognised Sikkim as a formal part of India in 2004.

Since 2004, the economic rise of both China and India has also helped forge closer relations between the two. Sino-Indian trade reached US$36 billion in 2007, making China the single largest trading partner of India. The increasing economic reliance between India and China has also bought the two nations closer politically, with both India and China eager to resolve their boundary dispute. They have also collaborated on several issues ranging from WTO's Doha round in 2008 to regional free trade agreement. Similar to Indo-US nuclear deal, India and China have also agreed to cooperate in the field of civilian nuclear energy. However, China's economic interests have clashed with those of India. Both the countries are the largest Asian investors in Africa and have competed for control over its large natural resources. Africa: China's Africa Overture Needs Common Touch, 16 November 2007 
India and China agreed to take bilateral trade up to US$100 billion on a recent visit by Wen Jiabao to India.

====Maldives====

India enjoys a considerable influence over Maldives' foreign policy and provides extensive security co-operation especially after the Operation Cactus in 1988 during which India repelled Tamil mercenaries who invaded the country.
As founder member in 1985 of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation, SAARC, which brings together Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka, the country plays a very active role in SAARC. The Maldives has taken the lead in calling for a South Asian Free Trade Agreement, the formulation of a Social Charter, the initiation of informal political consultations in SAARC forums, the lobbying for greater action on environmental issues, the proposal of numerous human rights measures such as the regional convention on child rights and for setting up a SAARC Human Rights Resource Centre. The Maldives is also an advocate of greater international profile for SAARC such as through formulating common positions at the UN.

India is starting the process to bring the island country into India's security grid. The move comes after the moderate Islamic nation approached New Delhi earlier this year over fears that one of its island resorts could be taken over by terrorists given its lack of military assets and surveillance capabilities. 
India also signed an agreement with the Maldives in 2011 which is centred around the following:
* India shall permanently base two helicopters in the country to enhance its surveillance capabilities and ability to respond swiftly to threats. One helicopter from the Coast Guard was handed over during Antony's visit while another from the Navy will be cleared for transfer shortly.
* Maldives has coastal radars on only two of its 26 atolls. India will help set up radars on all 26 for seamless coverage of approaching vessels and aircraft.
* The coastal radar chain in Maldives will be networked with the Indian coastal radar system. India has already undertaken a project to install radars along its entire coastline. The radar chains of the two countries will be interlinked and a central control room in India's Coastal Command will get a seamless radar picture.
* The Indian Coast Guard (ICG) will carry out regular Dornier sorties over the island nation to look out for suspicious movements or vessels. The Southern Naval Command will facillitate the inclusion of Maldives into the Indian security grid.
* Military teams from Maldives will visit the tri-services Andaman & Nicobar Command (ANC) to observe how India manages security and surveillance of the critical island chain.

====Nepal====

Relations between India and Nepal are close yet fraught with difficulties stemming from geography, economics, the problems inherent in big power-small power relations, and common ethnic and linguistic identities that overlap the two countries' borders. In 1950 New Delhi and Kathmandu initiated their intertwined relationship with the Treaty of Peace and Friendship and accompanying letters that defined security relations between the two countries, and an agreement governing both bilateral trade and trade transiting Indian soil. The 1950 treaty and letters stated that "neither government shall tolerate any threat to the security of the other by a foreign aggressor" and obligated both sides "to inform each other of any serious friction or misunderstanding with any neighbouring state likely to cause any breach in the friendly relations subsisting between the two governments". Which granted the Indian and Nepali People not mandatory to have Work permit for any economic activity such as work and business related activity. These accords cemented a "special relationship" between India and Nepal that granted Nepal preferential economic treatment and provided Nepalese in India the same economic and educational opportunities as Indian citizens.

====Pakistan====

Former Indian PM Pandit Nehru with then Pakistani PM Muhammad Ali Bogra in 1953.
Despite historical, cultural and ethnic links between them, relations between India and Pakistan have been plagued by years of mistrust and suspicion ever since the partition of India in 1947. The principal source of contention between India and its western neighbor has been the Kashmir conflict. After an invasion by Pashtun tribesmen and Pakistani paramilitary forces, the Hindu Maharaja of the Dogra Kingdom of Jammu and Kashmir, Hari Singh, and its Muslim Prime Minister, Sheikh Abdullah, signed an Instrument of Accession with New Delhi. The First Kashmir War started after the Indian Army entered Srinagar, the capital of the state, to secure the area from the invading forces. The war ended in December 1948 with the Line of Control dividing the erstwhile princely state into territories administered by Pakistan (northern and western areas) and India (southern, central and northeastern areas). Pakistan contested the legality of the Instrument of Accession since the Dogra Kingdom has signed a standstill agreement with it. The Indo-Pakistani War of 1965 started following the failure of Pakistan's Operation Gibraltar, which was designed to infiltrate forces into Jammu and Kashmir to precipitate an insurgency against rule by India. The five-week war caused thousands of casualties on both sides. It ended in a United Nations (UN) mandated ceasefire and the subsequent issuance of the Tashkent Declaration.
India and Pakistan went to war again in 1971, this time the conflict being over East Pakistan. The large-scale atrocities committed there by the Pakistan army led to millions of Bengali refugees pouring over into India. India, along with the Mukti Bahini, defeated Pakistan and the Pakistani forces surrendered on the eastern front. The war resulted in the creation of Bangladesh.

In 1998, India carried out the Pokhran-II nuclear tests which was followed by Pakistan's Chagai-I tests. Following the Lahore Declaration in February 1999, relations briefly improved. A few months later, however, Pakistani paramilitary forces and Pakistani Army, infiltrated in large numbers into the Kargil district of Indian Kashmir. This initiated the Kargil conflict after India moved in thousands of troops to successfully flush out the infiltrators. Although the conflict did not result in a full-scale war between India and Pakistan, relations between the two reached all-time low which worsened even further following the involvement of Pakistan-based terrorists in the hijacking of the Indian Airlines IC814 plane in December 1999. Attempts to normalise relations, such as the Agra summit held in July 2001, failed. An attack on the Indian Parliament in December 2001, which was blamed on Pakistan, which had condemned the attack caused a military standoff between the two countries which lasted for nearly a year raising fears of a nuclear conflict. However, a peace process, initiated in 2003, led to improved relations in the following years.

Since the initiation of the peace process, several confidence-building-measures (CBMs) between India and Pakistan have taken shape. The Samjhauta Express and DelhiLahore Bus service are two of these successful measures which have played a crucial role in expanding people-to-people contact between the two countries. The initiation of SrinagarMuzaffarabad Bus service in 2005 and opening of a historic trade route across the Line of Control in 2008 further reflects increasing eagerness between the two sides to improve relations. Although bilateral trade between India and Pakistan was a modest US$1.7 billion in March 2007, it is expected to cross US$10 billion by 2010. After the Kashmir earthquake in 2005, India sent aid to affected areas in Pakistani Kashmir and Punjab as well as Indian Kashmir. 

The 2008 Mumbai attacks seriously undermined the relations between the two countries. India alleged Pakistan of harboring militants on their soil, while Pakistan vehemently denies such claims.

====Sri Lanka====

Bilateral relations between Sri Lanka and India have been generally friendly, but were affected by the Sri Lankan civil war and by the failure of Indian intervention during the Sri Lankan civil war as well as India's support for Tamil Tiger militants. India is Sri Lanka's only neighbour, separated by the Palk Strait; both nations occupy a strategic position in South Asia and have sought to build a common security umbrella in the Indian Ocean. India's Sri Lankan scars. BBC News (4 May 2000). Retrieved 12 November 2011. 

India-Sri Lanka relations have undergone a qualitative and quantitative transformation in the recent past. Political relations are close, trade and investments have increased dramatically, infrastructural linkages are constantly being augmented, defence collaboration has increased and there is a general, broad-based improvement across all sectors of bilateral cooperation. India was the first country to respond to Sri Lanka's request for assistance after the tsunami in December 2004. In July 2006, India evacuated 430 Sri Lankan nationals from Lebanon, first to Cyprus by Indian Navy ships and then to Delhi and Colombo by special Air India flights.

There exists a broad consensus within the Sri Lankan polity on the primacy of India in Sri Lanka's external relations matrix. Both the major political parties in Sri Lanka, the Sri Lanka Freedom Party and the United Nationalist Party have contributed to the rapid development of bilateral relations in the last ten years. Sri Lanka has supported India's candidature to the permanent membership of the UN Security Council. Brief on India-Sri Lanka Relations, Ministry of External Affairs (BSM Division: Sri Lanka) 

===AsiaPacific===

====Australia====

The strongest ties between these two states is the commonwealth connexion. Cricketing and Bollywood ties also help foster relations as in the frequent travel for games, and, more importantly, the presence of Australian cricketers in India for commercial gain. This was further enhanced with the IPL, and, to a lesser degree, the ICL. Bollywood has also improved ties as with John Howard's visit to Mumbai to increase tourism to Australia. Bollywood makes minister Soni's job easier. Realbollywood.com (26 December 2007). Retrieved 12 November 2011. 
Furthermore, there is a going strategic connexion to forming an "Asian NATO" with India, Japan, the US and Australia. US, Japan, India & Australia announce military alliance against China. The Insider. Retrieved 12 November 2011. The bilateral agreements have worked out for all but the Indo-Australian angle, though this has been hurt by India's refusal to sign the NPT and Australia's consequent refusal to provide India with uranium until the latter do so. However, Australia has now cleared uranium sales to India by Labour party decision in Australian parliament and by this development the relations between both the commonwealth nations are set to improve. The Australian and Indian militaries have already worked well together. Of late the relations between the two countries were jolted, with attacks on Indian Community students in Melbourne, Australia. Indian Government lodged strong protests with the Australian Government. Australian Prime Minister Mr. Kevin Rudd said that "Australia valued its education system and International Students are valued more here in Australia." Mr. Rudd though said that his Govt. has ordered a thorough probe into the attacks and also condemned it in strongest possible terms, and whilst no significant break-through was achieved immediately, during the last couple of years the attacks have been virtually eliminated by strong police enforcement and community involvement. Under the leadership of Prime Minister of Australia Julia Gillard the relations between both the nations have significantly improved on part due to her holistic approach in relations. Australia for practical military cooperation with India. The Hindu (3 June 2008). Retrieved 12 November 2011. Indo-Australian Military Cooperation  Australia, India Go For Practical Military Cooperation. India-server.com (15 April 2011). Retrieved 12 November 2011. 

====Brunei====

Brunei has a high commission in New Delhi, and India has a high commission in Bandar Seri Begawan. Both countries are full members of the Commonwealth of Nations.

====Fiji====

Fijis relationship with the Republic of India is often seen by observers against the backdrop of the sometimes tense relations between its indigenous people and the 44 percent of the population who are of Indian descent. India has used its influence in international forums such as the Commonwealth of Nations and United Nations on behalf of ethnic Indians in Fiji, lobbying for sanctions against Fiji in the wake of the 1987 coups and the 2000 coup, both of which removed governments, one dominated and one led, by Indo-Fijians.

====Indonesia====

 Jawaharlal Nehru and his daughter Indira Gandhi with Sukarno, Megawati Sukarnoputri and Guntur, during stately visit to Indonesia in June 1950.
The ties between Indonesia and India date back to the times of the Ramayana, Ramayana to Bollywood, Indonesia Loves India. Melali-indonesia-tours.in. Retrieved 12 November 2011. "Yawadvipa" (Java) is mentioned in India's earliest epic, the Ramayana. Sugriva, the chief of Rama's army dispatched his men to Yawadvipa, the island of Java, in search of Sita. History of Ancient India Kapur, Kamlesh. Books.google.co.id. Retrieved 12 November 2011. Indonesians had absorbed many aspects of Indian culture since almost two millennia ago. The most obvious trace is the large adoption of Sanskrit into Indonesian language. Several of Indonesian toponymy has Indian parallel or origin, such as Madura with Mathura, Serayu and Sarayu rivers, Kalingga from Kalinga Kingdom, and Ngayogyakarta from Ayodhya. Indianised HinduBuddhist kingdoms, such as Kalingga, Srivijaya, Medang i Bhumi Mataram, Sunda, Kadiri, Singhasari and Majapahit were the predominant governments in Indonesia, and lasted from 200 http://daceband.com/read_blog/20112/indonesia to the 1500s, with the last remaining being in Bali. The example of profound Hindu-Buddhist influences in Indonesian history are the 9th century Prambanan and Borobudur temples.

In 1950, the first President of Indonesia  Sukarno called upon the peoples of Indonesia and India to "intensify the cordial relations" that had existed between the two countries "for more than 1000 years" before they had been "disrupted" by colonial powers. Foreign Policy of India: Text of Documents 194759 (p.54) In the spring of 1966, the foreign ministers of both countries began speaking again of an era of friendly relations. India had supported Indonesian independence and Nehru had raised the Indonesian question in the United Nations Security Council.

India has an embassy in Jakarta Embassy of India in Jakarta. Embassyofindiajakarta.org. Retrieved 12 November 2011. and Indonesia operates an embassy in Delhi. Indonesian Embassies. Indonesianembassy.org.in. Retrieved 12 November 2011. India regards Indonesia as a key member of ASEAN. Today, both countries maintain cooperative and friendly relations. India and Indonesia is one of the few (and also one of the largest) democracies in Asian region which can be projected as a real democracy. India-Indonesia Strategic Partnership. Scribd.com. Retrieved 12 November 2011. Both nations had agreed to establish a strategic partnership. Getting closer to Indonesia. Thehindubusinessline.com. Retrieved 12 November 2011. As a fellow Asian democracies that shares common value, it is natural for both countries to nurture and foster strategic alliance. Indonesia and India are member states of the G-20, the E7 (countries), the Non-aligned Movement, and the United Nations.

====Japan====

Two Japanese Naval warships took part in Malabar 2007 off India's western coast, one of the few such multilateral exercises Japan has ever taken part in symbolising close military cooperation between India and Japan.
India-Japan relations have always been strong. India has culturally influenced Japan through Buddhism. During the Indian Independence Movement, the Japanese Imperial Army helped Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose's Indian National Army. Relations have remained warm since India's independence. Japanese companies, like Sony, Toyota, and Honda, have manufacturing facilities in India, and with the growth of the Indian economy, India is a big market for Japanese firms. The most prominent Japanese company to have a big investment in India is automobiles giant Suzuki which is in partnership with Indian automobiles company Maruti Suzuki, the largest car manufacturer in India. Honda was also a partner in "Hero Honda", one of the largest motor cycle sellers in the world (the companies split in 2011 ).

According to Prime Minister Shinzo Abe's arc of freedom theory, it is in Japan's interests to develop closer ties with India, world's most populous democracy, while its relations with China remain chilly. To this end, Japan has funded many infrastructure projects in India, most notably in New Delhi's metro subway system. India Rediscovering East Asia, PINR 
In December 2006, Prime Minister Manmohan Singh's visit to Japan culminated in the signing of the "Joint Statement Towards Japan-India Strategic and Global Partnership". Japan has funded some major infrastructure projects in India, most notably the Delhi Metro subway system. Indian applicants were welcomed in 2006 to the JET Programme, starting with just one slot available in 2006 and 41 in 2007. Also, in 2007, the Japanese Self Defence Forces took part in a naval exercise in the Indian Ocean, known as Malabar 2007, which also involved the naval forces of India, Australia, Singapore and the United States.

In October 2008, Japan signed an agreement with India under which it would grant the latter a low-interest loan worth US$4.5 billion to construct a high-speed rail line between Delhi and Mumbai. This is the single largest overseas project being financed by Japan and reflects growing economic partnership between the two. India and Japan signed a security cooperation agreement in which both will hold military exercises, police the Indian Ocean and conduct military-to-military exchanges on fighting terrorism, making India one of only three countries, the other two being the United States and Australia, with which Japan has such a security pact. There are 25,000 Indians in Japan as of 2008.

====Laos====

In recent years, India has endeavoured to build relations, with this small Southeast Asian nation. They have strong military relations, and India shall be building an Airforce Academy in Laos. 

====Malaysia====

India has a high commission in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has a high commission in New Delhi. Both countries are full members of the Commonwealth of Nations and the Asian Union. India and Malaysia are also connected by various cultural and historical ties that date back to antiquity. The two countries are on friendly terms with each other and Malaysia harbours a small population of Indian immigrants. Mahathir bin Mohamad the fourth and longest serving Prime Minister of Malaysia is of Indian origin. His father Mohamad Iskandar, is a Malayalee Muslim who migrated from Kerala and his mother Wan Tampawan, is a Malay. 

====Nauru====

India and Nauru relations have been established since the island nation's independence in 1968. Leaders of both countries have been meeting on the sidelines of some of the international forums of which both the nations are part of such as the United Nations and the Non-Aligned Movement. India is one of the largest donors to the island by improving the education ministry and creating transportation and computer connections for the MP's and the Speaker of the parliament. There were numerous visits by the president of Nauru to the republic for further strengthen in ties and cooperation. http://www.mea.gov.in/Portal/ForeignRelation/Nauru-January-2012.pdf 

====North Korea====

India and North Korea have growing trade and diplomatic relations. India maintains a fully functioning embassy in Pyongyang, and North Korea has an embassy in New Delhi. India has said that it wants the "reunification" of Korea http://mea.gov.in/mystart.php?id=50049826 

====Philippines====

Through the Srivijaya and Majapahit empires, Hindu influence has been visible in Philippine history from the 10th to 14th century A.D. During the 18th century, there was robust trade between Manila and the Coromandel Coast of Bengal, involving Philippine exports of tobacco, silk, cotton, indigo, sugar cane and coffee. The Philippines established diplomatic relations with India on 16 November 1949. The first Philippine envoy to India was the late Foreign Secretary Narciso Ramos. Seven years after India's independence in 1947, the Philippines and India signed a Treaty of Friendship on 11 July 1952 in Manila to strengthen the friendly relations existing between the two countries. Soon after, the Philippine Legation in New Delhi was established and then elevated to an Embassy. Embassy of the Philippines, New Delhi, India. Newdelhipe.com. Retrieved 12 November 2011. However, due to foreign policy differences as a result of the bipolar alliance structure of the Cold War, the development of bilateral relations was stunted. It was only in 1976 that relations started to normalise when Mr. Aditya Birla, one of India's successful industrialists, met with then President Ferdinand E. Marcos to explore possibilities of setting up joint ventures in the Philippines. Today, like India, the Philippines is the leading voice-operated business process outsourcing (BPO) source in terms of revenue (US$5.7) and number of people (500,000) employed in the sector. In partnership with the Philippines, India has 20 IT/BPO companies in the Philippines. Philippines-India bilateral trade stood at US$986.60 million dollars in 2009. In 2004 it was US$600 million. Both countries aim to reach US$1 billion by 2010. There are 60,000 Indians living in the Philippines. The Philippines and India signed in October 2007 the Framework for Bilateral Cooperation which created the PH-India JCBC. It has working groups in trade, agriculture, tourism, health, renewable energy and a regular policy consultation mechanism and security dialogue.

====Singapore====

Singapore Navy frigate RSS Formidable (68) steams alongside the Indian Navy frigate INS Brahmaputra (F 31) in the Bay of Bengal. Singapore is one of India's strongest allies in South East Asia.
India and Singapore share long-standing cultural, commercial and strategic relations, with Singapore being a part of the "Greater India" cultural and commercial region. More than 300,000 people of Indian origin live in Singapore. Following its independence in 1965, Singapore was concerned with China-backed communist threats as well as domination from Malaysia and Indonesia and sought a close strategic relationship with India, which it saw as a counterbalance to Chinese influence and a partner in achieving regional security. Singapore had always been an important strategic trading post, giving India trade access to Maritime Southeast Asia and the Far East. Although the rival positions of both nations over the Vietnam War and the Cold War caused consternation between India and Singapore, their relationship expanded significantly in the 1990s; Singapore was one of the first to respond to India's "Look East" Policy of expanding its economic, cultural and strategic ties in Southeast Asia to strengthen its standing as a regional power. Singapore, and especially, the Singaporean Foreign Minister, George Yeo, have taken an interest, in re-establishing the ancient Indian university, Nalanda University.

Singapore is the 8th largest source of investment in India and the largest amongst ASEAN member nations. It is also India's 9th biggest trading partner as of 200506. Its cumulative investment in India totals US$3 billion as of 2006 and is expected to rise to US 5 billion by 2010 and US 10 billion by 2015. India's economic liberalisation and its "Look East" policy have led to a major expansion in bilateral trade, which grew from USD 2.2 billion in 2001 to US 910 billion in 2006  a 400% growth in span of five years  and to USD 50 billion by 2010. Singapore accounts for 38% of India's trade with ASEAN member nations and 3.4% of its total foreign trade. India's main exports to
Singapore in 2005 included petroleum, gemstones, jewellery, machinery and its imports from Singapore included electronic goods, organic chemicals and metals. More than half of Singapore's exports to India are basically "re-exports"  items
that had been imported from India. 

====South Korea====

The cordial relationship between the two countries extends back to 48AD, when Queen Suro, or Princess Heo, travelled from the kingdom of Ayodhya to Korea. NDTV article. Web.archive.org (29 September 2007). Retrieved 12 November 2011. According to the Samguk Yusa, the princess had a dream about a heavenly king who was awaiting heaven's anointed ride. After Princess Heo had the dream, she asked her parents, the king and queen, for permission to set out and seek the man, which the king and queen urged with the belief that god orchestrated the whole fate. Iryeon, pp. 161164. (tr. by Ha Tae-Hung & Grafton K. Mintz) (1972). Samguk Yusa. Seoul: Yonsei University Press. ISBN 89-7141-017-5. Upon approval, she set out on a boat, carrying gold, silver, a tea plant, and a stone which calmed the waters. Archeologists discovered a stone with two fish kissing each other, a symbol of the Gaya kingdom that is unique to the Mishra royal family in Ayodhya, India. This royal link provides further evidence that there was an active commercial engagements between India and Korea since the queen's arrival to Korea. Current descendants live in the city of Kimhae as well as abroad in America's state of New Jersey and Kentucky. Many of them became prominent and well-known around the world like President Kim Dae Jung, Prime Minister Jong Pil Kim.

The relations between the countries have been relatively limited, although much progress arose during the three decades. Since the formal establishment of the diplomatic ties between two countries in 1973, several trade agreements have been reached. Trade between the two nations has increased exponentially, exemplified by the $530 million during the fiscal year of 19921993, and the $10 billion during 20062007. IDSA publication. Web.archive.org (21 May 2007). Retrieved 12 November 2011. During the 1997 Asian financial crisis, South Korean businesses sought to increase access to the global markets, and began trade investments with India. The last two presidential visits from South Korea to India were in 1996 and 2006, Blue House commentary and the embassy works between the two countries are seen as needing improvements. Joong-ang Daily News article. Web.archive.org (9 March 2005). Retrieved 12 November 2011. Recently, there have been acknowledgements in the Korean public and political spheres that expanding relations with India should be a major economical and political priority for South Korea. Much of the economic investments of South Korea have been drained into China; Chosun news article. Chosun.com. Retrieved 12 November 2011. however, South Korea is currently the fifth largest source of investment in India. FICCI info. Web.archive.org (21 January 2008). Retrieved 12 November 2011. To the Times of India, President Roh voiced his opinion that cooperation between India's software and Korea's IT industries would bring very efficient and successful outcomes. The two countries agreed to shift their focus to the revision of the visa policies between the two countries, expansion of trade, and establishment of free trade agreement to encourage further investment between the two countries. Korean companies such as LG, Hyundai and Samsung have established manufacturing and service facilities in India, and several Korean construction companies won grants for a portion of the many infrastructural building plans in India, such as the "National Highway Development Project". Tata Motor's purchase of Daewoo Commercial Vehicles at the cost of $102 million highlights the India's investments in Korea, which consist mostly of subcontracting. 

Chinese Expedition Army (now Republic of China Army) boarding planes for India.

====Taiwan====

The bilateral relations between India and Taiwan (officially Republic of China) have improved since the 1990s despite both nations not maintaining official diplomatic relations, For Taiwan, India's in the slightly-less-hard basket. Atimes.com (15 February 2006). Retrieved 12 November 2011. India Taiwan Commercial Relations India recognises only the People's Republic of China and not the Republic of China's contention of being the legitimate government of territorial China  a conflict that emerged after the Chinese Civil War (194549). However, India's economic & Commercial links as well as people-to-people contacts with Taiwan have expanded in recent years. 

The most significant evidence of Taiwan-India relations warming up was provided when ROC President Ma Ying-jeou made a stopover in Mumbai en route to Africa in early April, 2012, an event that went almost unnoticed by India's media. The visit, part of a phenomenon called "refueling diplomacy," is historic because India had never allowed a serving ROC president to land on Indian soil. 

====Thailand====

India's Look East policy, saw India grow relations with ASEAN countries including Thailand, and Thailand's Look West policy, also saw it grow its relations with India. Both countries are members of BIMSTEC. Indian Prime Ministers Rajiv Gandhi, P.V. Narasimha Rao, Atal Bihari Vajpayee, and Manmohan Singh, have visited Thailand, which were reciprocated by contemporary Thai Prime Ministers Chatichai Choonhavan, Thaksin Sinawatra, and Surayud Chulanont. In 2003, a Free Trade Agreement was signed between the two countries. India, is the 13th largest investor in Thailand. The spheres of trade are in chemicals, pharmaceuticals, textiles, nylon, tyre cord, real estate, rayon fibres, paper grade pulps, steel wires, and rods. However, IT services, and manufacturing, are the main spheres. Through Buddhism, India, has culturally influenced Thailand. The Indian epics, Mahabharata, and Ramayana, are popular and are widely taught in schools as part of the curriculum in Thailand. The example can also be seen in temples around Thailand, where the story of Ramayana and renowned Indian folk stories are depicted on the temple wall. Thailand, has become a big tourist destination for Indians.

====Vietnam====

India supported Vietnam's independence from France, opposed U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War and supported unification of Vietnam. India established official diplomatic relations in 1972 and maintained friendly relations, especially in the wake of Vietnam's hostile relations with the People's Republic of China, which had become India's strategic rival. 

India granted the "Most Favoured Nation" status to Vietnam in 1975 and both nations signed a bilateral trade agreement in 1978 and the Bilateral Investment Promotion and Protection Agreement (BIPPA) on 8 March 1997. In 2007, a fresh joint declaration was issued during the state visit of the Prime Minister of Vietnam Nguyen Tan Dung. Bilateral trade has increased rapidly since the liberalisation of the economies of both Vietnam and India. India is the 13th-largest exporter to Vietnam, with exports have grown steadily from US$11.5 million in 198586 to USD 395.68 million by 2003. Vietnam's exports to India rose to USD 180 million, including agricultural products, handicrafts, textiles, electronics and other goods. Between 2001 and 2006, the volume of bilateral trade expanded at 2030% per annum to reach $1 billion by 2006. Continuing the rapid pace of growth, bilateral trade is expected to rise to $2 billion by 2008, two years ahead of the official target. India and Vietnam have also expanded cooperation in information technology, education and collaboration of the respective national space programmes. Direct air links and lax visa regulations have been established to bolster tourism. 

India and Vietnam are members of the Mekong-Ganga Cooperation, created to develop to enhance close ties between India and nations of Southeast Asia. Vietnam has supported India's bid to become a permanent member of the UN Security Council and join the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC). In the 2003 joint declaration, India and Vietnam envisaged creating an "Arc of Advantage and Prosperity" in Southeast Asia; to this end, Vietnam has backed a more important relationship and role between India and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and its negotiation of an IndoASEAN free trade agreement. India and Vietnam have also built strategic partnerships, including extensive cooperation on developing nuclear power, enhancing regional security and fighting terrorism, transnational crime and drug trafficking. 

====ASEAN====

India's interaction with ASEAN in the Cold Warera was very limited. India declined to get associated with ASEAN in the 1960s when full membership was offered even before the grouping was formed. 

It is only with the formulation of the Look East policy in the last decade (1992), India had started giving this region due importance in the foreign policy. India became a sectoral dialogue partner with ASEAN in 1992, a full dialogue partner in 1995, a member of the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) in 1996, and a summit-level partner (on par with China, Japan and Korea) in 2002.

The first IndiaASEAN Business Summit was held at New Delhi in October 2002. The then Prime Minister A. B. Vajpayee addressed this meet and since then this business summit has become an annual feature before the IndiaASEAN Summits, as a forum for networking and exchange of business experiences between policy makers and business leaders from ASEAN and India.

Four India-ASEAN Summits, first in 2002 at Phnom Penh (Cambodia), second in 2003 at Bali, Indonesia, third in 2004 at Vientiane, Laos, and the fourth in 2005 at Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, have taken place.

The following agreements have been entered into with ASEAN:
* Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation (for establishing a FTA in a time frame of 10 years) was concluded in Bali in 2003.
* An ASEAN-India Joint Declaration for Cooperation to Combat International Terrorism has been adopted.
* India has acceded to the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation (TAC) in 2003, on which ASEAN was formed initially (in 1967).
* Agreement on "India-ASEAN Partnership for Peace, Progress and Shared Prosperity" was signed at the 3rd ASEAN-India Summit in November 2004.
* Setting up of Entrepreneurship Development Centres in ASEAN member states  Cambodia, Burma, Laos, and Vietnam. (The one in Laos is already functional)

The following proposals were announced by the Prime Minister at the 4th ASEAN-India Summit:
* Setting up centres for English Language Training (ELT) in Cambodia, Laos, Burma and Vietnam.
* Setting up a tele-medicine and tele-education network for Cambodia, Burma, Laos and Vietnam.
* Organising special training courses for diplomats from ASEAN countries.
* Organising an India-ASEAN Technology Summit in 2006.
* Organising education fairs and road shows in ASEAN countries.
* Conducting an India-ASEAN IT Ministerial and Industry Forum in 2006.

The ASEAN region has an abundance of natural resources and significant technological skills. These provide a natural base for the integration between ASEAN and India in both trade and investment. The present level of bilateral trade with ASEAN of nearly US$18 billion is reportedly increasing by about 25% per year. India hopes to reach the level of US$30 billion by 2007. India is also improving its relations with the help of other policy decisions like offers of lines of credit, better connectivity through air (open skies policy), rail and road links. 

===Americas===
India's commonalities with developing nations in Latin America, especially Brazil and Mexico have continued to grow. India and Brazil continue to work together on the reform of Security Council through the G4 nations while have also increased strategic and economic cooperation through the IBSA Dialogue Forum. The process of finalising Preferential Trade Agreement (PTA) with MERCOSUR (Brazil, Argentina, Uruguay, and Paraguay) is on the itinerary and negotiations are being held with Chile. Brazilian President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva was the guest of honour at the 2004 Republic Day celebrations in New Delhi. Indian embassy. Indian embassy (30 November 2004). Retrieved 12 November 2011. 
(L-R): Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, President of Argentina, Cristina Fernndez de Kirchner and President Pratibha Patil at Rashtrapati Bhawan.

====Argentina====

Formal relations between both the countries were first established in 1949. India has an embassy in Buenos Aires and Argentina has an embassy in New Delhi. The current Indian Ambassador to Argentina (concurrently accredited to Uruguay and Paraguay) is R Viswanathan. 
According to the Ministry of External Affairs of the Government of India, "Under the 1968 Visa agreement, (Argentine)fees for transit and tourist visas have been abolished. Under the new visa agreement signed during Argentine Presidential visit in October 2009, it has been agreed that five-year multi-entry business visas would be given free of cost. The Embassy of India in Buenos Aires gives Cafe Con Visa (coffee with visa) to Argentine visitors. The applicants are invited for coffee and visa is given immediately. This has been praised by the Argentine media, public and the Foreign Minister himself. http://mea.gov.in/mystart.php?id=500410027 

====Barbados====

India and Barbados established diplomatic relations on 30 November 1966 (the date of Barbados' national independence). List of states which Barbados has diplomatic relations On that date, the government of India gifted Barbados the throne in Barbados' national House of Assembly. About The House of Assembly, Barbados India is represented in Barbados through its embassy in Suriname List of diplomatic missions accredited to Barbados Indian embassy Suriname Barbados India Relations, (Note: to view this file, convert the extension of php to pdf. and an Indian consulate in Holetown, St. James. List of Honorary Consulates in Barbados In 2011-12 the Indian-based firm Era's Lucknow Medical College and Hospital, established the American University of Barbados (AUB), as the island's first Medical School for international students.
Today around 3,000 persons from India call Barbados home. Two-thirds are from the India's Surat district of Gujarat known as Suratis. Most of the Suratis are involved in trading. The rest are mainly Sindhis.

====Brazil====

Brazilian president Dilma Rousseff with Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh.
A group called the Filhos de Gandhi (Sons of Gandhi) participates regularly in the carnival in Salvador. Private Brazilian organisations occasionally invite Indian cultural troupes.

In recent years, relations between Brazil and India have grown considerably and co-operation between the two countries has been extended to such diverse areas as science and technology, pharmaceuticals and space. The two-way trade in 2007 nearly tripled to US$3.12 billion from US$1.2 billion in 2004. India attaches tremendous importance to its relationship with this Latin American giant and hopes to see the areas of co-operation expand in the coming years.

Both countries want the participation of developing countries in the UNSC permanent membership since the underlying philosophy for both of them are: UNSC should be more democratic, legitimate and representative  the G4 is a novel grouping for this realisation.
Brazil and India are deeply committed to IBSA (South-South cooperation) initiatives and attach utmost importance to this trilateral cooperation between the three large, multi-ethnic, multi-racial and multi-religious developing countries, which are bound by the common principle of pluralism and democracy.
Flag Commander of Western Fleet of Indian Navy while briefing a press conference on a joint Indo-Canadian naval exercise.

====Canada====

Indo-Canadian relations, are the longstanding bilateral relations between India and Canada, which are built upon a "mutual commitment to democracy", "pluralism", and "people-to-people links", according to the government of Canada. In 2004, bilateral trade between India and Canada was at about C$2.45 billion. However, the botched handling of the Air India investigation and the case in general suffered a setback to Indo-Canadian relations. India's Smiling Buddha nuclear test led to connections between the two countries being frozen, with allegations that India broke the terms of the Colombo Plan. Although Jean Chrtien and Romo LeBlanc both visited India in the late 1990s, relations were again halted after the Pokhran-II tests.

Canada-India relations have been on an upward trajectory since 2005. Governments at all levels, private-sector organisations, academic institutes in two countries, and people-to-people contactsespecially diaspora networkshave contributed through individual and concerted efforts to significant improvements in the bilateral relationship. 
The two governments have agreed on important policy frameworks to advance the bilateral relationship. In particular, the Nuclear Cooperation Agreement (signed in June 2010) and the current successful negotiations of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (CEPA) constitute a watershed in Canada-India relations. 
The two governments have attempted to make up for lost time and are eager to complete CEPA negotiations by 2013 and ensure its ratification by 2014. After conclusion of CEPA, Canada and India must define the areas for their partnership which will depend on their ability to convert common interests into common action and respond effectively for steady cooperation. For example, during "pull-aside" meetings between Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and Stephen Harper at the G-20 summit in Mexico in June 2012, and an earlier meeting in Toronto between External Affairs Minister S. M. Krishna and John Baird, the leaders discussed developing a more comprehensive partnership going beyond food security and including the possibility of tie-ups in the energy sector, mainly hydrocarbon.

====Colombia====

Both countries established diplomatic ties on 19 January 1959. Since then the relationship between the two countries has been gradually increasing with more frequent diplomatic visits to promote political, commercial cultural and academic exchanges. Colombia is currently the commercial point of entry into Latin America for Indian companies. Colombian ministry of foreign affairs: Colombia-India relations Colombian Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Retrieved 14 December 2007. 

====Cuba====

Relations between India and Cuba are relatively warm. Both nations are part of the Non-Aligned Movement. Cuba has repeatedly called for a more "democratic" representation of the United Nations Security Council and supports India's candidacy as a permanent member on a reformed Security Council. http://www.indembassyhavana.org/?q=en/node/9 Fidel Castro said that "The maturity of India, its unconditional adherence to the principles which lay at the foundation of the Non-Aligned Movement give us the assurances that under the wise leadership of Indira Gandhi (the former Prime Minister of India), the non-aligned countries will continue advancing in their inalienable role as a bastion for peace, national independence and development"
 http://www.frontlineonnet.com/fl2708/stories/20100423270805500.htm 

India has an embassy in Havana, the capital of Cuba which opened in January 1960. This had particular significance as it symbolised Indian solidarity with the Cuban revolution. http://www.cubaminrex.cu/english/currentissues/Excellent%20Relations%20Between.htm India had been one of the first countries in the world to have recognised the new Cuban government after the Cuban Revolution http://mea.gov.in/mystart.php?id=50049866 

Cuba has an embassy in New Delhi, the Indian capital. http://www.cubadiplomatica.cu/india/EN/ 

====Jamaica====

Relations between India and Jamaica are generally cordial and close. There are many cultural and political connexions inherited from British colonisation, such as membership in the Commonwealth of Nations, parliamentary democracy, the English language and cricket. http://www.hcikingston.com/indjam.html http://www.mea.gov.in/Portal/ForeignRelation/Jamaica-July-2012.pdf 

Both nations are members of the Non-Aligned Movement, the United Nations and the Commonwealth, and Jamaica supports India's candidacy for permanent membership on a reformed UN Security Council.

During the British era, Indian slaves were transported to serve in Jamaica and the West Indies. This has created a considerable population of People of Indian origin in Jamaica.
India has a High Commission in Kingston, whilst Jamaica has a consulate in New Delhi http://www.congenjamaica-ny.org/jamaicancommissions/ and plans to upgrade it to a High Commission soon.

====Mexico====

Mexico is a very important and major economic partner of India. Nobel Prize laureate and ambassador to India Octavio Paz wrote is book In Light of India which is an analysis of Indian history and culture. Both nations are regional powers and members of the G-20.
* India has an embassy in Mexico City. Embassy of India in Mexico City 
* Mexico has an embassy in New Delhi. Embassy of Mexico in New Delhi 

====Panama====

Bilateral relations between Panama and India have been growing steadily, reflecting the crucial role the Panama Canal plays in global trade and commerce. Moreover, with over 15,000 Indians living in Panama, diplomatic ties have considerably increased over the past decade.

The opening of the expanded Canal in 2015 will provide new prospects for maritime connectivity. In seeking to rapidly strengthen trade relations such the flow of trade triples between the two countries, India is keen to leverage these transit trade facilities in Panama to access the wider Latin American market. Along with pursuing a free trade agreement, India wants to promote investment in various sectors of Panama's economy, including the banking and maritime industry and the multimodal center of the Coln Free Trade Zone. . Central America Data (27 February 2012). Retrieved 15 January 2014 

====Paraguay====

The bilateral relations between the Republic of India and the Paraguay have been traditionally strong due to strong commercial, cultural and strategic cooperation. India is represented in Paraguay through its embassy in Buenos Aires in Argentina. India also has an Honorary Consul General in Asuncion. Paraguay opened its embassy in India in 2005. ^ http://www.paraguayembassy.in/news.php 

====Trinidad & Tobago====

Bilateral relations between the Republic of India and the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago have considerably expanded in recent years with both nations building strategic and commercial ties. Both nations formally established diplomatic relations in 1962. http://www.hctt.net/about-br.asp?links=br 

Both nations were colonised by the British Empire; India supported independence of Trinidad and Tobago from colonial rule and established its diplomatic mission in 1962 - the year that Trinidad and Tobago officially gained independence from British rule. They possess diverse natural and economic resources and are the largest economies in their respective regions. Both are members of the Commonwealth of Nations, the United Nations, G-77 and the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).

The Republic of India operates a High Commission in Port of Spain, whilst the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago operates a High Commission in New Delhi.

====United States====

Historically, relations between India and the United States were lukewarm following Indian independence, as India took a leading position in the Non-Aligned Movement, and pursued even-handed economic and military relations with the Soviet Union, although US provided support to India in 1962 during its war with China. For most of the Cold War, the USA tended to have warmer relations with Pakistan, primarily as a way to contain Soviet-friendly India and to use Pakistan to back the Afghan Mujahideen against the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan. An Indo-Soviet twenty year friendship treaty, signed in 1971, also positioned India against the USA.

=====Cold War era=====
India played a key role in establishing the Non-Aligned Movement in 1961. Though India pursued close relations with both the US and the USSR, it decided not to join any major power bloc and refrained from joining military alliances. India, however began establishing close relations with the Soviet Union.

After the Sino-Indian War and the Indo-Pakistani War of 1965, India made considerable changes to its foreign policy. It developed a close relationship with the Soviet Union and started receiving massive military equipment and financial assistance from the USSR. This had an adverse effect on the Indo-US relationship. The United States saw Pakistan as a counterweight to pro-Soviet India and started giving the former military assistance. This created an atmosphere of suspicion between India and the US. The Indo-US relationship suffered a considerable setback when the Soviets took over Afghanistan when India overtly supported the Soviet Union.

United States President Richard Nixon and Prime Minister of India Indira Gandhi in 1971. They had a deep personal antipathy that coloured bilateral relations.
Relations between India and the United States came to an all-time low during the early 1970s. Despite reports of atrocities in East Pakistan, and being told, most notably in the Blood telegram, of genocidal activities being perpetrated by Pakistani forces, US. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger and US President Richard Nixon did nothing to discourage then Pakistani President Yahya Khan and the Pakistan Army. Kissinger was particularly concerned about Soviet expansion into South Asia as a result of a treaty of friendship that had recently been signed between India and the Soviet Union, and sought to demonstrate to the People's Republic of China the value of a tacit alliance with the United States. Gandhi, Sajit (ed.), The Tilt: The US and the South Asian Crisis of 1971: National Security Archive Electronic Briefing Book No. 79 During the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971, Indian Armed Forces, along with the Mukti Bahini, succeeded in liberating East Pakistan which soon declared independence. Richard Nixon, then USA President, feared that an Indian invasion of West Pakistan would mean total Soviet domination of the region, and that it would seriously undermine the global position of the United States and the regional position of America's new tacit ally, China. In order to demonstrate to China the bona fides of the United States as an ally, and in direct violation of the Congress-imposed sanctions on Pakistan, Nixon sent military supplies to Pakistan, routing them through Jordan and Iran, Shalom, Stephen R., The Men Behind Yahya in the Indo-Pak War of 1971 while also encouraging China to increase its arms supplies to Pakistan.

When Pakistan's defeat in the eastern sector seemed certain, Nixon sent the to the Bay of Bengal, a move deemed by the Indians as a nuclear threat. The Enterprise arrived on station on 11 December 1971. On 6 and 13 December, the Soviet Navy dispatched two groups of ships, armed with nuclear missiles, from Vladivostok; they trailed US Task Force 74 into the Indian Ocean from 18 December 1971 until 7 January 1972. The Soviets also sent nuclear submarines to ward off the threat posed by USS Enterprise in the Indian Ocean. Cold war games. Bharat-rakshak.com (12 December 1971). Retrieved 12 November 2011. 

Though American efforts had no effect in turning the tide of the war, the incident involving USS Enterprise is viewed as the trigger for India's subsequent interest in developing nuclear weapons. American policy towards the end of the war was dictated primarily by a need to restrict the escalation of war on the western sector to prevent the 'dismemberment' of West Pakistan. U.S. State Department. State.gov. Retrieved 12 November 2011. Years after the war, many American writers criticised the White House policies during the war as being badly flawed and ill-serving the interests of the United States. The Flawed Architect: Henry Kissenger and American Foreign Policy by Jussi M. Hanhimeaki Page 156, Published by Oxford University Press US India carried out nuclear tests a few years later resulting in sanctions being imposed by United States, further drifting the two countries apart. In recent years, Kissinger came under fire for comments made during the Indo-Pakistan War in which he described Indians as "bastards." Foreign Relations, 19691976, Volume E-7, Documents on South Asia, 19691972 150. Conversation Among President Nixon, the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), and the President's Chief of Staff (Haldeman), Washington 5 November 1971, 8:159:00 am Kissinger has since expressed his regret over the comments. 

=====After the Cold War=====
Since the end of the Cold War, India-USA relations have improved dramatically. This has largely been fostered by the fact that the United States and India are both democracies and have a large and growing trade relationship. During the Gulf War, the economy of India went through an extremely difficult phase. The Government of India adopted liberalised economic systems. After the breakup of the Soviet Union, India improved diplomatic relations with the members of the NATO particularly Canada, France and Germany. In 1992, India established formal diplomatic relations with Israel.

=====Pokhran tests=====
In 1998, India tested nuclear weapons which resulted in several U.S., Japanese and European sanctions on India. India's then defence minister, George Fernandes, said that India's nuclear programme was necessary as it provided a deterrence to some potential nuclear threat. Most of the sanctions imposed on India were removed by 2001. India has categorically stated that it will never use weapons first but will defend if attacked.

The economic sanctions imposed by the United States in response to India's nuclear tests in May 1998 appeared, at least initially, to seriously damage Indo-American relations. President Bill Clinton imposed wide-ranging sanctions pursuant to the 1994 Nuclear Proliferation Prevention Act. U.S. sanctions on Indian entities involved in the nuclear industry and opposition to international financial institution loans for non-humanitarian assistance projects in India. The United States encouraged India to sign the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) immediately and without condition. The United States also called for restraint in missile and nuclear testing and deployment by both India and Pakistan. The non-proliferation dialogue initiated after the 1998 nuclear tests has bridged many of the gaps in understanding between the countries.

=====Post11 September=====
India's contribution to the War on Terror has helped India's diplomatic relations with several countries. Over the past few years, India has held numerous joint military exercises with United States and European nations that have resulted in a strengthened U.S.-India and EU-India bilateral relationship. India's bilateral trade with Europe and US has more than doubled in the last five years.

However, India has not signed the CTBT, or the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, claiming the discriminatory nature of the treaty that allows the five declared nuclear countries of the world to keep their nuclear arsenal and develop it using computer simulation testing. Prior to its nuclear testing, India had pressed for a comprehensive destruction of nuclear weapons by all countries of the world in a time-bound frame. This was not favoured by the United States and by certain other countries. Presently, India has declared its policy of "no-first use of nuclear weapons" and the maintenance of a "credible nuclear deterrence". The USA, under President George W. Bush has also lifted most of its sanctions on India and has resumed military co-operation. Relations with USA have considerably improved in the recent years, with the two countries taking part in joint naval exercises off the coast of India and joint air exercises both in India as well as in the United States. Indian Troops training with U.S. Army in Hawaii,signonsandiego.com Air Force personnel fly with Indian Air Force, pacaf.af.mil Indian Soldiers with U.S. Marines, Sailors, navy.mil 

India has been pushing for reforms in the United Nations and in the World Trade Organisation with mixed results. India's candidature for a permanent seat at the UN Security Council is currently backed by several countries including United Kingdom, France, Germany, Japan, Brazil, African Union nations, United States and China. In 2005, the United States signed a nuclear cooperation agreement with India even though the latter is not a part of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. The United States agreed that India's strong nuclear non-proliferation record made it an exception and persuaded other Nuclear Suppliers Group members to sign similar deals with India.

On 2 March 2006 India and the United States signed the Indo-U.S. Nuclear Pact on co-operation in civilian nuclear field. This was signed during the four days state visit of USA President George Bush in India. On its part, India would separate its civilian and military nuclear programmes, and the civilian programmes would be brought under the safeguards of International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). The United States would sell India the reactor technologies and the nuclear fuel for setting up and upgrading its civilian nuclear programme. The U.S. Congress needs to ratify this pact since U.S. federal law prohibits the trading of nuclear technologies and materials outside the framework of the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG).

=====Indo-USA strategic partnership=====
Prime Minister Manmohan Singh with President Barack Obama at the White House.

Indo-USA relations got strategic content in the early 1960s. The rise of the People's Republic of China worried the policymakers in Washington. Chinese assertion in Tibet, its role in the Korean War and other such acts concerned Washington. As the relations between India and China were heated during the late fifties, the Americans found a golden opportunity to take advantage of this situation to promote India as a counterweight to China. Indo-USA Strategic Partnership by Rejaul Karim Laskar But any unidimensional alliance is bound to be short-lived and this alliance was no exception to this general rule. As China ceased to be a headache for the American policymakers by the late sixties, this unidimensional alliance disappeared into thin air.

The end of the Cold War necessitated as well as facilitated the infusion of strategic content to Indo-USA relationsthis time multidimensional. In the post Cold War era, the strategic objectives of India and the United States converges on a number of issues and not just oneas well as the case earlier. These issues include, inter alia, containment of terrorism, promotion of democracy, counter proliferation, freedom of navigation in the Indian Ocean, Asian balance of power, etc. 

One of the very interesting features of Indo-USA relations of recent times is the changes on the terms of engagement between the two countries on the issue of nuclear proliferation. While earlier, in the USA strategic thinking on nuclear proliferation, India figured mainly because of American concern about latter's nuclear and missile programmes, in the twenty-first century, however, American strategic thinking on the issue of nuclear proliferation has undergone major reorientation. Now, the Americans are increasingly realising the futility of insisting on a rollback of India's nuclear programme. They, rather, want to leverage India's growing power and influence in favour of their broader nonproliferation and counter proliferation objectives. http://www.assamtribune.com/scripts/details.asp?id=mar2607\edit4 

Embassy of India in Washington, D.C.
As promotion of democracy around the world is one of the most important foreign policy objective of the United States, Indiaas the largest democracy of the worldcan hardly be overlooked by the United States. This is the reason, cooperation in promotion of democracy in the world has become one of the most important facets of Indo-USA relations in recent times. India is a founding member of the "Community of Democracies"a prominent endeavour of the United States on promotion of democracy. However, India rejected the suggestion of the USA about setting up a Centre for Asian Democracy. 

Agriculture is another important area of cooperation between India and the USA in present times. Considering the fact that both the nations at present have a vast pool of human resources adept at knowledge economy, it is only natural that the best course such partnership can aim at is harnessing these human resources by concentrating on development and dissemination of agricultural knowledge through research, education and training etc. An initiative to forge such a partnership is the "India-USA Knowledge Initiative on Agriculture" (KIA). 

Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh was the guest of honor at the first state dinner, which took place on 24 November 2009, of the administration of U.S. President Barack Obama. Obama later visited India from 69 November 2010, signing numerous trade and defence agreements with India. He addressed the joint session of the Indian parliament in New Delhi, becoming only the second U.S. President to do so, and announced that the United States would lend its support to India's bid for a permanent seat in the United Nations Security Council, signifying the growing strategic dimension of the relationship between the world's two largest democracies. 

===Europe===

====European Union====

G20 Leaders Summit on Financial Markets and the World Economy in Washington, D.C.

India was one of the first countries to develop relations with the Union, signing bilateral agreements in 1973, when the United Kingdom joined. The most recent cooperation agreement was signed in 1994 and an action plan was signed in 2005. As of April 2007 the Commission is pursuing a free trade agreement with India. EU sees talks with ASEAN, India, SKorea on free-trade pacts in months eubusiness.com 

The Union is India's largest trading partner, accounting for 20% of Indian trade. However, India accounts for only 1.8% of the EU's trade and attracts only 0.3% of European Foreign Direct Investment, although still provides India's largest source. During 2005 EU-India trade grew by 20.3%. Bilateral trade relations with India ec.europa.eu 

There was controversy in 2006 when the Indian Mittal Steel Company sought to take-over the Luxembourg based steel company, Arcelor. The approach met with opposition from France and Luxembourg but was passed by the Commission who stated that were judging it on competition grounds only. Mandelson and India warn the French over Mittal news.independent.co.uk 

The European Union (EU) and India agreed on 29 September 2008 at the EU-India summit in Marseille, France's largest commercial port, to expand their cooperation in the fields of nuclear energy and environmental protection and deepen their strategic partnership. French President Nicolas Sarkozy, the EU's rotating president, said at a joint press conference at the summit that "EU welcomes India, as a large country, to engage in developing nuclear energy, adding that this clean energy will be helpful for the world to deal with the global climate change". Sarkozy also said the EU and Indian Prime Minister Manmohan pledged to accelerate talks on a free trade deal and expected to finish the deal by 2009. The Indian prime minister was also cautiously optimistic about cooperation on nuclear energy. "Tomorrow we have a bilateral summit with France. This matter will come up and I hope some good results will emerge out of that meeting", Singh said when asked about the issue. Singh said that he was "very satisfied" with the results of the summit. He added that EU and India have "common values" and the two economies are complementary to each other.

European Commission President Jos Manuel Barroso, also speaking at Monday's press conference, expounded the joint action plan on adjustments of EU's strategic partnership with India, saying the two sides will strengthen cooperation on world peace and safety, sustainable development, cooperation in science and technology and cultural exchanges.

Reviewing the two sides' efforts in developing the bilateral strategic partnership, the joint action plan reckoned that in politics, dialogue and cooperation have enhanced through regular summits and exchanges of visits and that in economy, mutual investments have increased dramatically in recent years, dialogue in macro economic policies and financial services has established and cooperation in energy, science and technology and environment has been launched. Under the joint action plan, EU and Indian would enhance consultation and dialogue on human rights within the UN framework, strengthen cooperation in world peacekeeping mission, fight against terror and non-proliferation of arms, promote cooperation and exchange in developing civil nuclear energy and strike a free trade deal as soon as possible. France, which relies heavily on nuclear power and is a major exporter of nuclear technology, is expected to sign a deal that would allow it to provide nuclear fuel to India.

Trade between India and the 27-nation EU has more than doubled from 25.6 billion euros ($36.7 billion) in 2000 to 55.6 billion euros last year, with further expansion to be seen. "We have agreed to achieve an annual bilateral trade turnover of 100 billion euros within the next five years", Singh told reporters. A joint statement issued at the end of the summit said the EU and India would work to reach an agreement on climate change by the end of 2009.

====Denmark====

Denmark has an embassy in New Delhi, and India has an embassy in Copenhagen. 

Tranquebar, a town in the southern Indian state of Tamil Nadu, was a Danish colony in India from 1620 to 1845. It is spelled Trankebar or Tranquebar in Danish, which comes from the native Tamil, Tarangambadi, meaning "place of the singing waves". It was sold, along with the other Danish settlements in mainland India, most notably Serampore (now in West Bengal), to Great Britain in 1845. The Nicobar Islands were also colonised by Denmark, until sold to the British in 1868, who made them part of their colony of British India.

After Independence in 1947, Indian prime minister Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru's visit to Denmark in 1957 laid the foundation for a friendly relationship between India and Denmark that has endured ever since. The bilateral relations between India and Denmark are cordial and friendly, based on synergies in political, economic, academic and research fields. There have been periodic high level visits between the two countries. Bilateral relations between Denmark and India 

Anders Fogh Rasmussen, former Prime Minister of Denmark, accompanied by a large business delegation, paid a State visit to India from 4 to 8 February 2008. He visited Infosys, Biocon and IIM Bangalore in Bangalore and Agra. He launched an 'India Action Plan', which called for strengthening of the political dialogue, strengthening of cooperation in trade and investments, research in science and technology, energy, climate and environment, culture, education, student exchanges and attracting skilled manpower and IT experts to Denmark for short periods. The two countries signed an Agreement for establishment of a Bilateral Joint Commission for Coopration.

In July 2012, Govt of India decided to scale down its diplomatic ties with Denmark after that country's refusal to appeal in their Supreme Court against a decision of its lower court rejecting the extradition of Purulia arms drop case prime accused Kim Davy a.k.a. Niels Holck. Agitated over Denmark's refusal to act on India's repeated requests to appeal in their apex court to facilitate Davy's extradition to India, government issued a circular directing all senior officials not to meet or entertain any Danish diplomat posted in India. 

====Vatican City & the Holy See====

Formal bilateral relations between India and the Vatican have existed since 12 June 1948. An Apostolic Delegation existed in India from 1881. The Holy See has a nunciature in New Delhi whilst India has accredited its embassy in Bern, Switzerland to the Holy See as well. India's Ambassador in Bern has traditionally been accredited to the Holy See. The present Apostolic Nuncio to India is Archbishop Salvatore Pennacchio while India's ambassador to the Holy See is Chitra Narayanan.

The connexions between the Catholic church and India can be traced back to the apostle St. Thomas, who, according to tradition, came to India in 52 CE in the 9th century, the patriarch of the Nestorians in Persia sent bishops to India. There is a record of an Indian bishop visiting Rome in the early part of the 12th century.

The diplomatic mission was established as the Apostolic Delegation to the East Indies in 1881, and included Ceylon, and was extended to Malaca in 1889, and then to Burma in 1920, and eventually included Goa in 1923. It was raised to an Internunciature by Pope Pius XII in 12 June 1948 and to a full Apostolic Nunciature by Pope Paul VI on 22 August 1967.

There have been three Papal visits to India. The first Pope to visit India was Pope Paul VI, who visited Mumbai in 1964 to attend the International Eucharistic Congress. Pope John Paul II visited India in February 1986 and November 1999. Several Indian dignitaries have, from time to time, called on the Pope in the Vatican. These include Prime Minister Indira Gandhi in 1981 and Prime Minister I.K. Gujral in September 1987. Atal Bihari Vajpayee, Prime Minister, called on the Pope in June 
2000 during his official visit to Italy. Vice-President Bhairon Singh Shekhawat represented the country at the funeral of Pope John Paul II.

====United Kingdom====

India has a high commission in London and two consulates-general in Birmingham and Edinburgh. High Commission of India in the UK The United Kingdom has a high commission in New Delhi and five deputy high commissions in Mumbai, Chennai, Bangalore, Hyderabad and Kolkata. British embassy in India Since 1947, India's relations with the United Kingdom have been through bilateral, as well as through the Commonwealth of Nations framework. Although the Sterling Area no longer exists and the Commonwealth is much more an informal forum, India and the UK still have many enduring links. This is in part due to the significant number of people of Indian origin living in the UK. The large South Asian population in the UK results in steady travel and communication between the two countries. The British Raj allowed for both cultures to imbibe tremendously from the other. The English language and cricket are perhaps the two most evident British exports, whilst in the UK food from the Indian subcontinent are very popular. The United Kingdom's favourite food is often reported to be Indian cuisine, although no official study reports this. 

Economically the relationship between Britain and India is also strong. India is the second largest investor in Britain after the US. Britain is also one of the largest investors in India. 

In 2008 Britain gave India a 825 million aid package to help India develop its health and education systems. 

====France====

India has selected 126 Dassault Rafale fighters for the Indian Air Force
France and India established diplomatic relationships soon after India's independence from the United Kingdom in 1947. India's strong diplomatic ties with France facilitated the peaceful handover of Pondicherry to India on 1 November 1954 without any opposition from France.

France, Russia and Israel were the only countries that did not condemn India's decision to go nuclear in 1998. Reaction of France to India's nuclear test In 2003, France became the largest supplier of nuclear fuel and technology to India and remains a large military and economic trade partner. India's candidacy for permanent membership in the UN Security Council has found very strong support from former French President Nicolas Sarkozy. The Indian Government's decisions to purchase French Scorpne class submarines worth US$3 billion and 43 Airbus aircraft for Air India worth US$2.5 billion have further cemented the strategic, military and economic co-operation between India and France.

France's decision to ban schoolchildren from wearing of head-dresses and veils had the unintended consequence of affecting Sikh children who have been refused entry in public schools. The Indian Government, citing historic traditions of the Sikh community, has requested French authorities to review the situation so as to not to exclude Sikh children from education.

Nicolas Sarkozy visited India in January 2008 and was the Chief Guest of the Republic Day parade in New Delhi. France was the first country to sign a nuclear energy co-operation agreement with India; this was done during Prime Minister Singh's visit, following the waiver by the Nuclear Suppliers Group. During the Bastille Day celebrations on 14 July 2009, a detachment of 400 Indian troops marched alongside the French troops and Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh was the guest of honour. 

====Italy====

Relations between India and Italy have historically been strong and cordial. Italy and India are also close economic partners and is home to a large population of Indian immigrants. Sonia Gandhi, the chief of India's leading political party, the Indian National Congress, was born in Italy and acquired Indian citizenship through marriage to former Indian PM Rajiv Gandhi.

There have, however, been occasional diplomatic flare-ups and there are ongoing issues between the two countries. The difficulty in obtaining a visas of any kind (tourist, business, employment and others) which when issued are only for very short term and after a lot of hurdles for both Indian and Italian nationals has reduced noticeably the possibility of tourism and business development between the two countries. Indian passengers of Sikh origin, have been singled out for additional screening because of their traditional turban. Italian security staff at airports have insisted that Sikhs remove the head-wear instead of following special security-check provisions which have been implemented in most western countries (especially USA, Canada and UK) with regard to Sikh air-travel passengers.

India maintains an Embassy in Rome, and a Consulate-General in Milan. Italy has an embassy in New Delhi, and Consulate-Generals in Mumbai and Calcutta.

There are around 150,000 people of Indian Origins living in Italy. Around 1,000 Italian citizens reside in India, mostly working on behalf of Italian industrial groups.

Two Italian naval guards currently face trial in India in connection with the killing of two Indian fishermen within the Indian Contiguous Zone off the Kerala coast on 15 February 2012. The Enrica Lexie incident, where Italian Marines of the San Marco Regiment are accused of shooting dead two Indian fishermen, sparked a major diplomatic row between India and Italy. In March 2013, the dispute evolved into a stand-off when Italy reneged on a sovereign undertaking given to the Indian Supreme Court regarding a conditional release accorded to the two Italian marines. Indian Supreme Court retaliated by barring the Italian Ambassador from leaving India. A major diplomatic crisis was averted when Italy backed down and complied with its undertaking to the Indian Supreme Court by returning the two Italian marines to India.

Traditionally good India-Italy relations have been severely affected in the wake of the Enrica Lexie incident and the Choppergate bribery scandal regarding the sale of AgustaWestland AW101 VVIP helicopters by Italian conglomerate Finmeccanica.

* See also Embassy of India in Rome, Indo Italian and 2012 Italian shooting in the Laccadive Sea

====Germany====

Arrival of the first Indian student to Dresden, East Germany, in 1951
During the Cold War India maintained diplomatic relations with West Germany and East Germany. Since the fall of the Berlin Wall, and the reunification of Germany, relations have further improved. The German ambassador to India, Bernd Mutzelburg, once said that India and Germany, are not just 'natural partners', but important countries in a globalised world. Germany is India's largest trade partner in Europe. German Chancellor Angela Merkel visited India recently, as did the Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh visit Germany. Both countries have been working towards gaining permanent seats in the United Nations Security Council. As both countries are strong liberal democracies, they have similar objectives. UN reforms, fighting terrorism and climate change, and promotion of science, education, technology, and human rights, are some areas of shared interests, and collaboration between these two countries. Culturally too, Indian and German writers and philosophers, have influenced each other. Recently, Germany has invested in developing education and skills amongst rural Indians. Also of note, during World War II an Indian division known as the Tiger Legion was attached to the German Wehrmacht.

====Greece====

The first contact between both civilisations dates back from Alexander the Great's invasion of India and eventual retreat. Alexander's seemingly un-stoppable eastward expansion was halted at the Kingdoms of North-Western of India. 3000 BC and earlier, the Mahabharata talks of Indian warrior Kings' conquest of Greece and the cultural exchange resulting therefrom.

In modern time, diplomatic relations between Greece and India were established in May 1950. The new Greek Embassy building in New Delhi was inaugurated on 6 February 2001.

Economically, India is one of Greece's largest debt creditors with Greece owing the Reserve Bank of India and The State Bank of India over 40 billion.

====Norway====

In 2012, Trond Giske met with Minister of Finance Pranab Mukherjee, to save http://www.dagsavisen.no/samfunn/-har-gjort-det-vi-kan/ "REDNINGSFORSK: Trond Giske mener forsket p  redde Telenors investeringer i India er "den strste saken" han noen gang har arbeidet med. " Telenor's investments to put forth Norway's "strong wish" that there must not be a waiting period between the confiscation of telecom licences and the re-sale of those. http://www.aftenposten.no/okonomi/Giske---India-kjenner-vare-argumenter-na-6802047.html "Giske et sterkt nske fra norsk side om at det ikke m vre et opphold i tid mellom nr lisenser dras inn og nr nye eventuelt lyses ut." The leader of Telenor attended the meeting.

====Spain====

Diplomatic ties with Spain started in 1956. Embajada de la India en Espaa  Embassy of India in Spain. Embassyindia.es. Retrieved 12 November 2011. The first Spanish embassy was established in Delhi in 1958. India and Spain have had cordial relationship with each other especially after the establishment of democracy in Spain in 1978. Spain has been a main tourist spot for Indians over the years. Many presidents including Prathibha Patil visited Spain.
The royal family of Spain have always liked the humble nature of the Indian government and they have thus paid several visits to India.
There was no direct flight from India to Spain but it all changed in 1986 when Iberain travels started to fly directly from Mumbai to Madrid. However, it was stopped in 22 months. In 2006 this issue of direct flight was reconsidered so as to improve the ties between India and Spain. "Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara" was shot completely in Spain in 2011. The tourism ministry of Spain are using this movie to promote tourism to Spain in India.

====Turkey====

Due to controversial issues such as Turkey's close relationship with Pakistan, relations between the two countries have often been blistered at certain times, but better at others. India and Turkey's relationship alters from unsureness to collaboration when the two nations work together to combat terrorism in Central and South Asia, and the Middle East. India and Turkey are also connected by history, seeing as they have known each other since the days of the Ottoman Empire, and seeing as India was one of the countries to send aid to Turkey following its war of independence. The Indian real estate firm GMR, has invested in and is working towards the modernisation of Istanbul's Sabiha Gken International Airport.

====Austria====

AustriaIndia relations refers to the bilateral ties between Austria and India. Indo-Austrian relations were established in May 1949 by the first Prime Minister of India Jawaharlal Nehru and the Chancellor of Austria Leopold Figl. http://www.ficci.com/international/75126/Project_docs/Austria_Profile.pdf Historically, Indo-Austrian ties have been particularly strong and India intervened in June 1953 in Austria's favour whilst negotiations were going on with Soviet Union about the Austrian State Treaty. http://www.bmeia.gv.at/en/embassy/new-delhi/bilateral-relations/india.html There is a fully functioning Indian embassy in Vienna, Austria's capital, which is concurrently accredited to the United Nations offices in the city. http://delhigate.com/in2delhi/missions.htm Austria is represented in India by its embassy and Trade commission in New Delhi, India's capital, as well as Honorary Consulates in Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai and Goa. http://www.advantageaustria.org/in/oesterreich-in-india/netzwerk/network.en.html 

====Other European countries====

 Country Formal relations began Notes 
 1992-08-31 See ArmeniaIndia relations The first contacts between both civilisations date back from 2,500 years ago, during the 5th century BC. In modern times, India recognised Armenia on 26 December 1991. * India has an embassy in Yerevan. * Since 1999, Armenia has an embassy in New Delhi and 2 honorary consulates Mumbai, and Chennai. * Armenia recognizes Kashmir to be part of India and not of Pakistan. * Armenia supports India's bid for permanent seat in the UNSC. 
 See Foreign relations of Belarus 
 1954 See BulgariaIndia relations * Bulgaria has an embassy in New Delhi and an honorary consulate in Kolkata. Bulgarian embassy in New Delhi India has an embassy in Sofia. Indian embassy in Sofia. Indembsofia.org. Retrieved 12 November 2011. 
 See Foreign relations of Croatia 
 See Foreign relations of Cyprus 
 1991-09-09 See EstoniaIndia relations India's first recognition of Estonia came on 22 September 1921 when the former had just acquired membership in the League of Nations. India re-recognised Estonia on 9 September 1991 and diplomatic relations were established on 2 December of the same year in Helsinki. Neither country has a resident ambassador. Estonia is represented in India by two honorary consulates (in Mumbai and New Delhi). India is represented in Estonia through its embassy in Helsinki (Finland) and through an honorary consulate in Tallinn. 
 See Foreign relations of Finland 
 See Foreign relations of Georgia 
 See IcelandIndia relations Iceland and India established diplomatic relations in 1972. The Embassy of Iceland in London was accredited to India and the Embassy of India in Oslo, Norway, was accredited to Iceland. However, it was only after 2003 that the two countries began close diplomatic and economic relationships. In 2003, President of Iceland lafur Ragnar Grmsson visited India on diplomatic mission. This was the first visit by an Icelandic President to India. During the visit, Iceland pledged support to New Delhi's candidature for a permanent seat in the United Nation Security Council thus becoming the first Nordic country to do so. This was followed by an official visit of President of India A. P. J. Abdul Kalam to Iceland in May 2005. Following this a new embassy of Iceland was opened in New Delhi on 26 February 2006. Soon, an Indian Navy team visited Iceland on friendly mission. Gunnar Plsson is the ambassador of Iceland to India. The Embassy's area of accreditation, apart from India includes Bangladesh, Indonesia, the Seychelles, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritius and Nepal. India appointed S. Swaminathan as the first resident ambassador to Iceland in March 2008. 
 See IndiaIreland relations Indo-Irish relations picked up steam during the freedom struggles of the respective countries against a common imperial empire in the United Kingdom. Political relations between the two states have largely been based on socio-cultural ties, although political and economic ties have also helped build relations. Indo-Irish relations were greatly strengthened by such luminaries as Pandit Nehru, amon de Valera, Rabindranath Tagore, W. B. Yeats, James Joyce, and, above all, Annie Besant. Politically, relations have not been cold or warm. Mutual benefit has led to economic ties that are fruitful for both states. Visits by government leaders have kept relations cordial at regular intervals. 
 See IndiaMalta relations Malta opened a High Commission in New Delhi in 2007. Malta also has an honorary consulate in Mumbai. India is represented in Malta through its embassy in Tripoli, Libya and an honorary consulate in Valletta. 
 See IndiaPoland relations Historically, relations have generally been close and friendly, characterised by understanding and cooperation on international front. 
 * India has an embassy in Bucharest. Indian embassy in Bucharest. Embassyofindia.ro. Retrieved 12 November 2011. * Romania has an embassy in New Delhi and an honorary consulate in Kolkata. Romanian embassy in New Delhi. Newdelhi.mae.ro. Retrieved 12 November 2011. * See also Hinduism in Romania 
 See IndiaRussia relations During the Cold War, India and the Soviet Union enjoyed a strong strategic, military, economic and diplomatic relationship. After the collapse of the USSR, India improved its relations with the West but it continued its close relations with Russia. India is the second-largest market for the Russian arms industry. In 2004, more than 70% of the Indian Military's hardware came from Russia, making Russia the chief supplier of arms. VOA News Report. Globalsecurity.org (19 January 2004). Retrieved 12 November 2011. India has an embassy in Moscow and two Consulates-General (in Saint Petersburg and Vladivostok). Russia has an embassy in New Delhi and three Consulates-General (in Chennai, Kolkata, Mumbai). Since 2000 and the visit of Vladimir Putin in India, there has been an Indo-Russian Strategic Partnership. 
 See IndiaSerbia relations * India has an embassy in Belgrade. Indian embassy in Belgrade. Embassyofindiabelgrade.org. Retrieved 12 November 2011. * Serbia has an embassy in New Delhi and an honorary consulate in Chennai. Serbian embassy in New Delhi. Embassyofserbiadelhi.net.in. Retrieved 12 November 2011. * See also Hinduism in Serbia * Serbian Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with India 
 * India has an embassy in Ljubljana. Embassy of India in Ljubljana. Indianembassy.si. Retrieved 12 November 2011. * Slovenia has an embassy in New Delhi. * See also Hinduism in Slovenia 
 1956 * Spain has an embassy in New Delhi and a consulate in Mumbai. * India has an embassy in Madrid and consulates in Barcelona and Tenerife 
 1948 * Switzerland has an embassy in New Delhi and a consulate in Bangalore and Mumbai. Embassy New Delhi. Eda.admin.ch. Retrieved 12 November 2011. * India has an embassy in Bern and consulates in Geneva and Zurich. Representations in Switzerland. Eda.admin.ch (14 October 2011). Retrieved 12 November 2011. India is one of Switzerland's most important partners in Asia. Bilateral and political contacts are constantly developing, and trade and scientific cooperation between the two countries are flourishing. http://www.dfae.ch/eda/en/home/recent/media/single.html?id=41355 Switzerland was the first country in the World to sign a Friendship treaty with India in 1947. http://www.tsr.ch/info/suisse/3433893-la-presidente-indienne-pratibha-devisingh-patil-sera-en-suisse-lundi-et-mardi-pour-une-visite-d-etat.html 
 See IndiaUkraine relations Diplomatic relations between India and Ukraine were established in January 1992. The Indian Embassy in Kiev was opened in May 1992 and Ukraine opened its mission in New Delhi in February 1993. The Consulate General of India in Odessa functioned from 1962 till its closure in March 1999. 

===West Asia===

====Arab states of the Persian Gulf====

India and the Arab states of the Persian Gulf enjoy strong cultural and economic ties. This is reflected in the fact that more than 50% of the oil consumed by India comes from the Persian Gulf countries and Indian nationals form the largest expatriate community in the Arabian peninsula. The annual remittance by Indian expatriates in the region amounted to US$20 billion in 2007. India is one of the largest trading partners of the CCASG with non-oil trade between India and Dubai alone amounting to US$19 billion in 2007. The Persian Gulf countries have also played an important role in addressing India's energy security concerns, with Saudi Arabia and Kuwait regularly increasing their oil supply to India to meet the country's rising energy demand. In 2005, Kuwait increased its oil exports to India by 10% increasing the net oil trade between the two to US$4.5 billion. In 2008, Qatar decided to invest US$5 billion in India's energy sector. 

India has maritime security arrangement in place with Oman and Qatar. In 2008, a landmark defence pact was signed, under which India committed its military assets to protect "Qatar from external threats". 
There has been progress in a proposed deep-sea gas pipeline from Qatar, via Oman, to India. 

====Bahrain====

India is a close ally of Bahrain, the Kingdom along with its GCC partners are (according to Indian officials) among the most prominent backers of India's bid for a permanent seat on the UN Security Council, 'India against Security Council membership without veto', Web India, 29 December 2004 and Bahraini officials have urged India to play a greater role in international affairs. For instance, over concerns about Iran's nuclear programme Bahrain's Crown Prince appealed to India to play an active role in resolving the crisis. Bahrain accuses Iran of nuclear weapons lie The Times, 2 November 2007 

Ties between India and Bahrain go back generations, with many of Bahrain's most prominent figures having close connexions: poet and constitutionalist Ebrahim Al-Arrayedh grew up in Bombay, while 17th century Bahraini theologians Sheikh Salih Al-Karzakani and Sheikh Ja'far bin Kamal al-Din were influential figures in the Kingdom of Golkonda Juan Cole, Sacred space and holy war: the politics, culture and history of Shi'ite Islam, IB Tauris, 2002 p. 45 and the development of Shia thought in the sub-continent.

Bahraini politicians have sought to enhance these long standing ties, with Parliamentary Speaker Khalifa Al Dhahrani in 2007 leading a delegation of parliamentarians and business leaders to meet Indian President Pratibha Patil, opposition leader L K Advani, and take part in training and media interviews. MPs on goodwill visit to India... Gulf Daily News, 29 November 2007 Politically, it is easier for Bahrain's politicians to seek training and advice from India than it is from the United States or other western alternative.

Adding further strength to the ties, Sheikh Hamad Bin Isa Al-Khalifa visited India during which MOU's and bilateral deals worth $450 million were approved. 'MOUs signed and boosted trade', web India, February 2014 India expressed its support for Bahrain's bid for a non-permanent seat in the Security council in 2026-27. 

====Egypt====

Modern Egypt-India relations go back to the contacts between Saad Zaghloul and Mohandas Gandhi on the common goals of their respective movements of independence. In 1955, Egypt under Gamal Abdul Nasser and India under Jawaharlal Nehru became the founders of the Non-Aligned Movement. During the 1956 War, Nehru stood supporting Egypt to the point of threatening to withdraw his country from the Commonwealth of Nations. In 1967, following the Arab-Israeli war, India supported Egypt and the Arabs. In 1977, New Delhi described the visit of President Anwar al-Sadat to Jerusalem as a "brave" move and considered the peace treaty between Egypt and Israel a primary step on the path of a just settlement of the Middle East problem. Major Egyptian exports to India include raw cotton, raw and manufactured fertilisers, oil and oil products, organic and non-organic chemicals, leather and iron products. Major imports into Egypt from India are cotton yarn, sesame, coffee, herbs, tobacco, lentils, pharmaceutical products and transport equipment. The Egyptian Ministry of Petroleum is also currently negotiating the establishment of a natural gas-operated fertiliser plant with another Indian company. In 2004 the Gas Authority of India Limited, bought 15% of Egypt Nat Gas distribution and marketing company. In 2008 Egyptian investment in India was worth some 750 million dollars, according to the Egyptian ambassador. Egypt State Information Service: Mubarak starts historic visit to India to boost strategic partnership between the two countries 
After Arab Spring of 2011, with ousting of Hosni Mubarak, Egypt has asked for help of India in conducting nationwide elections

====Iran====

Seen here is Rabindranath Tagore as a guest of Iran's parliament in the 1930s.

Independent India and Iran established diplomatic links on 15 March 1950. http://www.irna.ir/en/News/81006985/Politic/Iran,_India_relations_span_centuries_marked_by_meaningful_interactions 
After the Iranian Revolution of 1979, Iran withdrew from CENTO and dissociated itself from U.S.-friendly countries, including Pakistan, which automatically meant improved relationship with the Republic of India.

Currently, the two countries have friendly relations in many areas. There are significant trade ties, particularly in crude oil imports into India and diesel exports to Iran. Iran frequently objected to Pakistan's attempts to draft anti-India resolutions at international organisations such as the OIC. India welcomed Iran's inclusion as an observer state in the SAARC regional organisation. Lucknow continues to be a major centre of Shiite culture and Persian study in the subcontinent.

In the 1990s, India and Iran both supported the Northern Alliance in Afghanistan against the Taliban regime. They continue to collaborate in supporting the broad-based anti-Taliban government led by Hamid Karzai and backed by the United States.

However, one complex issue in Indo-Iran relations is the issue of Iran's nuclear programme. In this intricate issue, India tries to make a delicate balance. According to Rejaul Laskar, an Indian expert on international relations, "India's position on Iran's nuclear programme has been consistent, principled and balanced, and makes an endeavour to reconcile Iran's quest for energy security with the international community's concerns on proliferation. So, while India acknowledges and supports Iran's ambitions to achieve energy security and in particular, its quest for peaceful use of nuclear energy, it is also India's principled position that Iran must meet all its obligations under the international law, particularly its obligations under the nuclear Non Proliferation Treaty (NPT) and other such treaties to which it is a signatory" Beyond Historical Linkages, Geopolitics, January 2012; Page 71 

Following an attack on an Israeli diplomat in India in February 2012, the Delhi Police contended that the Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps had some involvement in the attack. This was subsequently confirmed in July 2012, after a report by the Delhi Police found evidence that members of Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps had been involved in the 13 February bomb attack in the capital. "Cops name Iran military arm for attack on Israeli diplomat", "Times of India", 30 July 2012 

====Iraq====

Iraq was one of the few countries in the Middle East with which India established diplomatic relations at the embassy level immediately after its independence in 1947. US-Iraq War: India's Middle East policy Both nations signed the "Treaty of Perpetual Peace and Friendship" in 1952 and an agreement of cooperation on cultural affairs in 1954. India was amongst the first to recognise the Baath Party-led government, and Iraq remained neutral during the Indo-Pakistani War of 1965. However, Iraq sided alongside other Persian Gulf states in supporting Pakistan against India during the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971, which saw the creation of Bangladesh. The eight-year long IranIraq War caused a steep decline in trade and commerce between the two nations. 

During the 1991 Persian Gulf War, India remained neutral but permitted refueling for US aircraft. It opposed UN sanctions on Iraq, but the period of war and Iraq's isolation further diminished India's commercial and diplomatic ties. From 1999 onwards, Iraq and India began to work towards a stronger relationship. Iraq had supported India's right to conduct nuclear tests following its tests of five nuclear weapons on 11 and 13 May 1998. In 2000, the then-Vice President of Iraq Taha Yassin Ramadan visited India, and on 6 August 2002 President Saddam Hussein conveyed Iraq's "unwavering support" to India over the Kashmir dispute with Pakistan. India, Iraq Agree on Cooperation. English.people.com.cn (30 November 2000). Retrieved 12 November 2011. India and Iraq established joint ministerial committees and trade delegations to promote extensive bilateral cooperation. Iraq Economic and Commercial Relations Iraq prizes ties with India: Saddam Although initially disrupted during the 2003 invasion of Iraq, diplomatic and commercial ties between India and the new democratic government of Iraq have since been normalised. 

====Israel====

Beni-Israel Family at Bombay.
The creation of Israel at the end of World War II was a complex issue. India, along with Iran and Yugoslavia had recommended a single state with Arab and Jewish majority provinces with an aim to prevent partition of historic Palestine and prevent any conflict that might follow based on its own experience during partition. However, the final UN resolution decided to partition historic Palestine into Arab and Jewish states based on religious and ethnic majority which India opposed in the final vote as it did not agree with concept of partition on the basis of religion. 

However, due to the security threat from a U.S.-backed Pakistan and its nuclear programme in the 1980s, Israel and India started a clandestine relationship that involved cooperation between their respective intelligence agencies. RAW and MOSSAD, the Secret Link,rediff.com Israel shared India's concerns about the growing danger posed by Pakistan and nuclear proliferation to Iran and other Arab states. After the end of the Cold War, formal relations with Israel started improving significantly. U.S. and India Consider 'Asian NATO'. Newsmax.com (29 May 2003). Retrieved 12 November 2011. 

Since the establishment of full diplomatic relations with Israel in 1992, India has improved its relation with the Jewish State. India is regarded as Israel's strongest ally in Asia, and Israel is India's second largest arms supplier. However, after India achieved its independence in 1947, the country has moved to support Palestinian self-determination; India recognised Palestine's statehood following Palestine's declaration on 18 November 1988 http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0008/000827/082711eo.pdf and Indo-Palestinian relations were first established in 1974. http://meaindia.nic.in/meaxpsite/foreignrelation/palestine.pdf This hasn't severely impacted India's relations with Israel, though.

India has entertained Israeli Prime Minister in a visit in 2003, Ariel Sharon's India visit,rediff.com and Israel has entertained Indian dignitaries such as Finance Minister Jaswant Singh in diplomatic visits. India and Israel collaborate in scientific and technological endeavors. Israel's Minister for Science and Technology has expressed interest in collaborating with the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) towards utilising satellites for better management of land and other resources. Israel has also expressed interest in participating in ISRO's Chandrayaan Mission involving an unmanned mission to the moon. Israel plans thrust on science and technology collaboration, The Times of India, 24 December 2003 On 21 January 2008 India successfully launched an Israeli spy satellite into orbit from Sriharikota space station in southern India. India launches Israeli satellite, BBC News Online, 21 January 2008 

Israel and India share intelligence on terrorist groups. They have developed close defence and security ties since establishing diplomatic relations in 1992. Israel is India's second-biggest arms supplier, after Russia. India has bought more than $5 billion worth of Israeli equipment since 2002. In addition, Israel is training Indian military units and discussing an arrangement to give Indian commandos instruction in counter-terrorist tactics and urban warfare. Israel says Mumbai attackers targeted its citizens, Los Angeles Times, 29 November 2008 In December 2008, Israel and India signed a memorandum to set up an Indo-Israel Legal Colloquium to facilitate discussions and exchange programmes between judges and jurists of the two countries. India, Israel set up bilateral legal colloquium. Timesofindia.indiatimes.com (31 December 2008). Retrieved 12 November 2011. 

Following the Israeli invasion of Lebanon in 2006, India came out, surprisingly, saying Israeli use of force was "disproportionate and excessive." LD Lebanon Reactions, Kuwait News Agency 

====Lebanon====

India and Lebanon enjoy cordial and friendly relations based on many complementarities 
such as political system based on parliamentary democracy, non-alignment, human rights, 
commitment to a just world order, regional and global peace, liberal market economy and a vibrant 
entrepreneurial spirit. India has a peacekeeping force as part of the UN Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). One infantry battalion is deployed in Lebanon and about 900 personnel are stationed in the Eastern part of South Lebanon. The force also provided non-patrol aid to citizens. 
India and Lebanon have very good relations since the 1950s.

====Oman====

IndiaOman relations are foreign relations between India and the Sultanate of Oman. India has an embassy in Muscat, Oman. The Indian consulate was opened in Muscat in February 1955 and five years later it was upgraded to a Consulate General and later developed into a full fledged Embassy in 1971. The first Ambassador of India arrived in Muscat in 1973. Oman established its Embassy in New Delhi in 1972 and a Consulate General in Mumbai in 1976.

====Palestine====

After India achieved its independence in 1947, the country has moved to support Palestinian self-determination following the partition of British India. In the light of a religious partition between India and Pakistan, the impetus to boost ties with Muslim states around the world was a further tie to India's support for the Palestinian cause. Though it started to waver in the late 1980s and 1990s as the recognition of Israel led to diplomatic exchanges, the ultimate support for the Palestinian cause was still an underlying concern.
Beyond the recognition for Palestinian self-determination ties have been largely dependent upon socio-cultural bonds, while economic relations were neither cold nor warm.

India recognised Palestine's statehood following its own declaration on 18 November 1988; although relations were first established in 1974. 

PNA President Abbas paid a State visit to India in September 2012, during which India pledged $10 million as aid. Indian officials said it was the third such donation, adding that New Delhi was committed to helping other development projects. India also pledged support to Palestine's bid for full and equal membership of the UN.

====Saudi Arabia====

Bilateral relations between India and the Saudi Arabia have strengthened considerably owing to cooperation in regional affairs and trade. Saudi Arabia is the one of largest suppliers of oil to India, who is one of the top seven trading partners and the 5th biggest investor in Saudi Arabia. 

India was one of the first nations to establish ties with the Third Saudi State. During the 1930s, India heavily funded Nejd through financial subsidies. 

India's strategic relations with Saudi Arabia have been affected by the latter's close ties with Pakistan. Saudi Arabia supported Pakistan's stance on the Kashmir conflict and during the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971 at the expense of its relations with India. 
 The Soviet Union's close relations with India also served as a source of consternation. During the Persian Gulf War (199091), India officially maintained neutrality. Saudi Arabia's close military and strategic ties with Pakistan have also been a source of continuing strain. 

Since the 1990s, both nations have taken steps to improve ties. Saudi Arabia has supported granting observer status to India in the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) and has expanded its cooperation with India to fight terrorism. In January 2006, King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia made a special visit to India, becoming the first Saudi monarch in 51 years to do so. The Saudi king and the Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh signed an agreement forging a strategic energy partnership that was termed the "Delhi Declaration". The pact provides for a "reliable, stable and increased volume of crude oil supplies to India through long-term contracts." Both nations also agreed on joint ventures and the development of oil and natural gas in public and private sectors. An Indo-Saudi joint declaration in the Indian capital New Delhi described the king's visit as "heralding a new era in India-Saudi Arabia relations." 

===Russia and Central Asia===
Atal Bihari Vajpayee with Russian president Vladimir Putin in 2001.
The dissolution of the Soviet Union and the emergence of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) had major repercussions for Indian foreign policy. Substantial trade with the former Soviet Union plummeted after the Soviet collapse and has yet to recover. Longstanding military supply relationships were similarly disrupted due to questions over financing, although Russia continues to be India's largest supplier of military systems and spare parts.

The relationship with USSR was tested (and proven) during the 1971 war with Pakistan, which led to the subsequent liberation of Bangladesh. Soon after the victory of the Indian Armed Forces, one of the foreign delegates to visit India was Admiral S.G. Gorshkov, Chief of the Soviet Navy. During his visit to Mumbai (Bombay) he came on board INS Vikrant. During a conversation with Vice Admiral Swaraj Prakash, Gorshkov asked the Vice Admiral, "Were you worried about a battle against the American carrier?" He answered himself: "Well, you had no reason to be worried, as I had a Soviet nuclear submarine trailing the American task force all the way into the Indian Ocean." 

====Russian Federation====

India's ties with the Russian Federation are time-tested and based on continuity, trust
and mutual understanding. There is national consensus in both the countries on the
need to preserve and strengthen India-Russia relations and further consolidate the
strategic partnership between the two countries. A Declaration on Strategic
Partnership was signed between present Russian President Vladimir Putin and former Indian Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee in October 2000.

Joint Indo-Russian BrahMos nuclear cruise missile, has a top speed of Mach 2.8, making it the one of the fastest supersonic cruise missile.
Russia and India have decided not to renew the 1971 Indo-Soviet Peace and Friendship Treaty and have sought to follow what both describe as a more pragmatic, less ideological relationship. Russian President Yeltsin's visit to India in January 1993 helped cement this new relationship. Ties have grown stronger with President Vladimir Putin's 2004 visit. The pace of high-level visits has since increased, as has discussion of major defence purchases. Russia, is working for the development of the Koodankulam Nuclear Power Plant, that will be capable of producing 1000 MW of electricity. Gazprom, is working for the development of oil and natural gas, in the Bay of Bengal. India and Russia, have collaborated extensively, on space technology. Other areas of collaboration include software, ayurveda, etc. India and Russia, have set a determination in increasing trade to $10 billion. Cooperation between clothing manufacturers of the two countries continues to strengthen. India and Russia signed an agreement on joint efforts to increase investment and trade volumes in the textile industry in both countries. In signing the document included representatives of the Russian Union of Entrepreneurs of Textile and Light Industry Council and apparel exports of India (AEPC). A cooperation agreement provides, inter alia, exchange of technology and know-how in textile production. For this purpose, a special Commission on Affairs textile (Textile Communication Committee). Counter-terrorism techniques are also in place between Russia and India. In 2007 President Vladimir Putin was guest of honour at Republic Day celebration on 26 January 2007. 2008, has been declared by both countries as the Russia-India Friendship Year. Bollywood films are quite popular in Russia. The Indian public sector oil company ONGC bought Imperial Energy in 2008. In December 2008, during President Medvedev's visit, to New Delhi, India and Russia, signed a nuclear energy co-operation agreement. In March, 2010, Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin signed an additional 19 pacts with India which included civilian nuclear energy, space and military co-operation and the final sale of Admiral Gorshkov (Aircraft Carrier) along with MiG-29K fighter jets.

During the 2014 Crimean crisis India refused to support American sanctions against Russia and one of India's national security advisers Shivshankar Menon was reported to have said "There are legitimate Russian and other interests involved and we hope they are discussed and resolved." http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Russian-interests-in-Crimea-legitimate-India/articleshow/31557852.cms 

From 7 August 2014 India and Russia will hold a joint counter-terrorism exercise near Moscow boundary with China and Mongolia. It will involve the use of tanks and armored vehicles. http://www.ndtv.com/article/india/armies-of-india-russia-to-hold-joint-counter-terror-exercise-250598 

India and Russia have so far conducted three rounds of INDRA exercises. The first exercise was carried out in 2005 in Rajasthan, followed by Prshkov in Russia. The third exercise was conducted at Chaubattia in Kumaon hills in October 2010. http://www.ndtv.com/article/india/india-russia-joint-army-exercise-underway-61987 

====Kazakhstan====

India is working towards developing strong relations with this resource rich Central Asian country. The Indian oil company, Oil and Natural Gas Corporation, has got oil exploration and petroleum development grants in Kazakhstan. The two countries are collaborating in petrochemicals, information technology, and space technology. Kazakhstan has offered India five blocks for oil and gas exploration. India and Kazakhstan, are to set up joint projects in construction, minerals and metallurgy. India also signed four other pacts, including an extradition treaty, in the presence of President Prathibha Patil and her Kazakh counterpart Nursultan Nazarbayev. Kazakhastan will provide uranium and related products under the MoU between Nuclear Power Corp. of India and KazatomProm. These MoU also opens possibilities of joint exploration of uranium in Kazakhstan, which has the worlds' second largest reserves, and India building atomic power plants in the Central Asian country.

====Mongolia====

The relations between India and Mongolia are still at a nascent stage and Indo-Mongolian cooperation is limited to diplomatic visits, provision of soft loans and financial aid and the collaborations in the IT sector.
India established diplomatic relations in December 1955. India was the first country outside the Soviet block to establish diplomatic relations with Mongolia. Since then, there have been treaties of mutual friendship and cooperation between the two countries in 1973, 1994, 2001 and 2004.

====Tajikistan====

Diplomatic relations were established India and Tajikistan following Tajikistan's independence from the 1991 dissolution of the Soviet Union, which had been friendly with India. Tajikistan occupies a strategically important position in Central Asia, bordering Afghanistan, the People's Republic of China and separated by a small strip of Afghan territory from Pakistan. India's role in fighting the Taliban and Al-Qaeda and its strategic rivalry with both China and Pakistan have made its ties with Tajikistan important to its strategic and security policies. Despite their common efforts, bilateral trade has been comparatively low, valued at USD 12.09 million in 2005; India's exports to Tajikistan were valued at USD 6.2 million and its imports at USD 5.89 million. India's military presence and activities have been significant, beginning with India's extensive support to the anti-Taliban Afghan Northern Alliance (ANA). India began renovating the Farkhor Air Base and stationed aircraft of the Indian Air Force there. The Farkhor Air Base became fully operational in 2006, and 12 MiG-29 bombers and trainer aircraft are planned to be stationed there.

====Uzbekistan====

India has an embassy in Tashkent. Uzbekistan has an embassy in New Delhi. Uzbekistan has had a great impact on Indian culture mostly due to the Mughal Empire which was founded by Babur of Ferghana (in present-day Uzbekistan) who created his empire southward first in Afghanistan and then in India.

===Africa===
Indian PM Manmohan Singh with Brazilian President Luiz Incio Lula da Silva and South African President Thabo Mbeki.

As of year 2011, India's total trade with Africa is over US$46 billion and total investment is over US$11 billion with US$5.7 billion line of credit for executing various projects in Africa. 

India has had good relationships with most sub-Saharan African nations for most of its history. In the Prime Minister's visit to Mauritius in 1997, the two countries secured a deal to a new Credit Agreement of INR 105 million (US$3 million) to finance import by Mauritius of capital goods, consultancy services and consumer durable from India. The government of India secured a rice and medicine agreement with the people of Seychelles. India continued to build upon its historically close relations with Ethiopia, Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania. Visits from political ministers from Ethiopia provided opportunities for strengthening bilateral cooperation between the two countries in the fields of education and technical training, water resources management and development of small industries. This has allowed India to gain benefits from nations that are generally forgotten by other Western Nations. The South African President, Thabo Mbeki has called for a strategic relationship between India and South Africa to avoid imposition by Western Nations. India continued to build upon its close and friendly relations with Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, Swaziland, Zambia and Zimbabwe. The Minister of Foreign Affairs arranged for the sending of Special Envoys to each of these countries during 199697 as a reaffirmation of India's assurance to strengthening cooperation with these countries in a spirit of South-South partnership. These relations have created a position of strength with African nations that other nations may not possess. 

====Ethiopia====

India and Ethiopia have warm bilateral ties based on mutual cooperation and support. India has been a partner in Ethiopia's developmental efforts, training Ethiopian personnel under its ITEC programmer, providing it with several lines of credit and launching the Pan-African e-Network Project there in 2007. The Second India-Africa Forum Summit was held in Addis Ababa in 2011. India is also Ethiopia's second largest source of Foreign Direct Investments.

====Ghana====

Relations between Ghana and India are generally close and cordial mixed with economic and cultural connections. Trade between India and Ghana amounted to US$818 million in 2010-11 and is expected to be worth US$1 billion by 2013. Ghana imports automobiles and buses from India and companies like Tata Motors and Ashok Leyland have a significant presence in the country. Ghanaian exports to India consist of gold, cocoa and timber while Indian exports to Ghana comprise pharmaceuticals, agricultural machinery, electrical equipment, plastics, steel and cement. 

The Government of India has extended $228 million in lines of credit to Ghana which has been used for projects in sectors like agro-processing, fish processing, waste management, rural electrification and the expansion of Ghana's railways. India has also offered to set up an India-Africa Institute of Information Technology (IAIIT) and a Food Processing Business Incubation Centre in Ghana under the India-Africa Forum Summit. 

India is among the largest foreign investors in Ghana's economy. At the end of 2011, Indian investments in Ghana amounted to $550 million covering some 548 projects. Indian investments are primarily in the agriculture and manufacturing sectors of Ghana while Ghanaian companies manufacture drugs in collaboration with Indian companies. The IT sector in Ghana too has a significant Indian presence in it. India and Ghana also have a Bilateral Investment Protection Agreement between them. India's Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilisers is in the process of setting up a fertiliser plant in Ghana at Nyankrom in the Shama District of the Western Region of Ghana. The project entails an investment of US$1.3 billion and the plant would have an annual production capacity of 1.1 million tonnes, the bulk of which would be exported to India. There are also plans to develop a sugar processing plant entailing an investment of US$36 million. Bank of Baroda, Bharti Airtel, Tata Motors and Tech Mahindra are amongst the major Indian companies in Ghana. 

There are about seven to eight thousand Indians and Persons of Indian Origin living in Ghana today with some of them having been there for over 70 years. Ghana is home to a growing indigenous Hindu population that today numbers 3000 families. Hinduism first came to Ghana only in the late 1940s with the Sindhi traders who migrated here following India's Partition. It has been growing in Ghana and neighbouring Togo since the mid-1970s when an African Hindu monastery was established in Accra. 

====Ivory Coast====

The bilateral relations between the Republic of India and the Republic of Ivory Coast have expanded considerably in recent years as India seeks to develop an extensive commercial and strategic partnership in the West African region. The Indian diplomatic mission in Abidjan was opened in 1979. Ivory Coast opened its resident mission in New Delhi in September 2004. Both nations are currently fostering efforts to increase trade, investments and economic cooperation. 

====Liberia====

The bilateral relations between the Republic of India and the Republic of Liberia have expanded on growing bilateral trade and strategic cooperation.
India is represented in Liberia through its embassy in Abidjan (Ivory Coast) and an active honorary consulate in Monrovia since 1984. Liberia was represented in India through its resident mission in New Delhi which subsequently closed due to budgetary constraints. 

====Mauritius====

The relations between India and Mauritius existed since 1730, diplomatic relations were established in 1948, before Mauritius became independent state. The relationship is very cordial due to cultural affinities and long historical ties that exist between the two nations. More than 68% of the Mauritian population are of Indian origin, most commonly known as Indo-Mauritian. Economic and commercial corporation has been increasing over the years. India has become Mauritius' largest source of imports since 2007 and Mauritius imported US$816 million worth of goods in the April 2010-March 2011 financial year. Mauritius has remained the largest source of FDI for India for more than a decade with FDI equity inflows totalling US$55.2 billion in the period April 2000 to April 2011. India and Mauritius cooperate in combating piracy which has emerged as a major threat in the Indian Ocean region and support India's stand against terrorism. 

The relationship between Mauritius and India date back in the early 1730, when artisans were brought from Puducherry and Tamil Nadu. Diplomatic relations between India and Mauritius were established in 1948. Mauritius maintained contacts with India through successive Dutch, French and British occupation. From the 1820s, Indian workers started coming into Mauritius to work on sugar plantations. From 1834 when slavery was abolished by the British Parliament, large numbers of Indian workers began to be brought into Mauritius as indentured labourers. On 2 November 1834 the ship named 'Atlas' docked in Mauritius carrying the first batch of Indian indentured labourers.

====Morocco====

Morocco has an embassy in New Delhi. It also has an Honorary Consul based in Mumbai. India operates an embassy in Rabat. Both nations are part of the Non-Aligned Movement. The Non-Aligned Movement: Member States 

In the United Nations, India supported the decolonisation of Morocco and the Moroccan freedom movement. India recognised Morocco on 20 June 1956 and established relations in 1957. Morocco - India Relations The Ministry of External Affairs of the Government of India states that "India and Morocco have enjoyed cordial and friendly relations and over the years bilateral relations have witnessed significant depth and growth." http://mea.gov.in/mystart.php?id=50044502 

The Indian Council for Cultural Relations promotes indian culture in Morocco. Indian Embassy in Rabat, Morocco Morocco seeks to increase its trade ties with India and is seeking Indian investment in various sectors Morocco proposes to spice up bilateral relations with India The bilateral relations between India and Morocco strengthened after the Moroccan Ambassador to India spent nearly a week in Srinagar, the capital city of Jammu & Kashmir. This showed Moroccan solidarity with India in regard to Kashmir. 

====Namibia====

Relations between India and Namibia are warm and cordial. Indo-Namibian Relations Ministry of External Affairs of India, September 2010 

India was one of SWAPO's earliest supporters during the Namibian liberation movement. The first SWAPO embassy was established in India in 1986. India's observer mission was converted to a full High Commission on Namibia's independence day of 21 March 1990. India has helped train the Namibian Air Force since its creation in 1995. The two countries work closely in mutual multilateral organisations such as the United Nations, Non-Aligned Movement and the Commonwealth of Nations. Namibia supports expansion of the United Nations Security Council to include a permanent seat for India. 

In 200809, trade between the two countries stood at approximately US$80 million. Namibia's main imports from India were drugs and pharmaceuticals, chemicals, agricultural machinery, automobile and automobile parts, glass and glassware, plastic and linoleum products. India primarily imported nonferrous metals, ores and metal scarps. Indian products are also exported to neighboring South Africa and re-imported to Namibia as South African imports. Namibian diamonds are often exported to European diamond markets before being again imported to India. In 2009, the first direct sale of Namibian diamonds to India took place. In 2008, two Indian companies won a US$105 million contract from NamPower to lay a high-voltage direct current bi-polar line from Katima Mulilo to Otjiwarongo. Namibia is a beneficiary of the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) programme for telecommunications professionals from developing countries. Pohamba Visits India New Era, 31 August 2009 

India has a high commissioner in Windhoek High Commission of India in Namibia and Namibia has a high commissioner in New Delhi. Namibia's high commissioner is also accredited for Bangladesh, the Maldives and Sri Lanka. High Commission of the Republic of Namibia in the Republic of India 

====Nigeria====

India has close relations with this oil rich West African country. Twenty percent of India's crude oil needs are met, by Nigeria. 40000 oilbbl/d of oil, is the amount of oil, that India receives from Nigeria. Trade, between these two countries stands at $875 million in 20052006. Indian companies have also invested in manufacturing, pharmaceuticals, iron ore, steel, information technology, and communications, amongst other things. Both India and Nigeria, are members of the Commonwealth of Nations, G-77, and the Non Aligned Movement. The Nigerian President, Olusegun Obasanjo was the guest of honour, at the Republic Day parade, in 1999, and the Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, visited Nigeria in 2007, and addressed the Nigerian Parliament.

====Rwanda====

Indo-Rwandan relations are the foreign relations between the Republic of India and the Republic of Rwanda. India is represented in Rwanda through its Honorary Consulate in Kigali. Rwanda has been operating its High Commission in New Delhi since 1998 and appointed its first resident High Commissioner in 2001. 

====Seychelles====

Main Article: India - Seychelles relations

IndiaSeychelles relations are bilateral relations between the Republic of India and the Republic of Seychelles. India has a High Commission in Victoria while Seychelles maintains a High Commission in New Delhi. 

====South Africa====

A meeting of G5 leaders in Berlin, Germany. From left to right: Manmohan Singh of India, Luiz Incio Lula da Silva of Brazil, Felipe Caldern of Mexico, Hu Jintao of China and Thabo Mbeki of South Africa.
India and South Africa, have always had strong relations even though India revoked diplomatic relations in protest to the apartheid regime in the mid 20th century. The history of British rule connects both lands. There is a large group of South Africans of Indian descent. Mahatma Gandhi, spent many years in South Africa, during which time, he fought for the rights of the ethnic Indians. Nelson Mandela was inspired by Gandhi. After India's independence, India strongly condemned apartheid, and refused diplomatic relations while apartheid was conducted as state policy in South Africa.

The two countries, now have close economic, political, and sports relations. Trade between the two countries grew from $3 million in 19921993 to $4 billion in 20052006, and aim to reach trade of $12 billion by 2010. One third of India's imports from South Africa is gold bullion. Diamonds, that are mined from South Africa, are polished in India. Nelson Mandela was awarded the Gandhi Peace Prize. The two countries are also members of the IBSA Dialogue Forum, with Brazil. India hopes to get large amounts of uranium, from resource rich South Africa, for India's growing civilian nuclear energy sector.

====Mozambique====

India has a high commissioner in Maputo High Commission of India in Mozambique and Mozambique has a high commissioner in New Delhi.

====South Sudan====

India recognised South Sudan on 10 July 2011, a day after South Sudan became an independent state. At the moment relations are primarily economic. Pramit Pal Chaudhuri wrote in the Hindustan Times that South Sudan "has other attractions. As the Indian Foreign Ministry's own literature notes, South Sudan 'reported to has (sic) some of the largest oil reserves in Africa outside Nigeria and Angola.'" http://www.hindustantimes.com/India-s-stake-in-South-Sudan/Article1-718966.aspx An article in the The Telegraph read that South Sudan is "one of the poorest in the world, is oil rich. Foreign ministry officials said New Delhi has keen interest in increasing its investments in the oil fields in South Sudan, which now owns over two-thirds of the erstwhile united Sudan's oil fields." 

In return for the oil resources that can be provided by South Sudan, India said it was willing to assist in developing infrastructure, training officials in health, education and rural development. "We have compiled a definite road map using (sic) which India can help South Sudan." India greets South Sudan 

====Sudan====

Indo-Sudanese relations have always been characterised as longstanding, close, and friendly, even since the early development stages of their countries.At the time of Indian independence, Sudan had contributed 70,000 pounds, which was used to build part of the National Defence Academy in Pune. The main building of NDA is called Sudan Block. The two nations established diplomatic relations shortly after India became known as one of the first Asian countries to recognise the newly independent African country. India and Sudan also share geographic and historical similarities, as well as economic interests. Both countries are former British colonies, and remotely border Saudi Arabia by means of a body of water. India and Sudan continue to have cordial relations, despite issues such as India's close relationship with Israel, India's solidarity with Egypt over border issues with Sudan, and Sudan's intimate bonds with Pakistan and Bangladesh. India had also contributed some troops as United Nations peacekeeping force in Darfur.

====Uganda====

India and Uganda established diplomatic relations in 1965 and each maintain a High Commission in the other's capital. The Indian High Commission in Kampala has concurrent accreditation to Burundi and Rwanda. Uganda hosts a large Indian community and IndiaUganda relations cover a broad range of sectors including political, economic, commercial, cultural and scientific cooperation. 

Relations between India and Uganda began with the arrival of over 30,000 Indians in Uganda in the 19th century who were brought there to construct the MombasaKampala railway line. Ugandan independence activists were inspired in their struggle for Ugandan independence by the success of the Indian freedom struggle and were also supported in their struggle by Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru. 
Indo-Ugandan relations have been good since Uganda's independence except during the regime of Idi Amin. Amin in 1972 expelled over 55,000 people of Indian origin and 5,000 Indians who had largely formed the commercial and economic backbone of the country accusing them of exploiting native Ugandans. Since the mid-1980s when President Yoweri Museveni came to power, relations have steadily improved. Today some 20,000 Indians and PIOs live or work in Uganda. Ethnic tensions between Indians and Ugandans have been a recurring issue in bilateral relations given the role of Indians in the Ugandan economy. 

==International organisations==
India participates in the following international organisations: CIA World Fact Book https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/in.html 
* AALCO - Asian-African Legal Consultative Organization
* ADB  Asian Development Bank
* AfDB  African Development Bank (non-regional members)
* ASEAN Regional Forum
* ASEAN (dialogue partner)
* BIMSTEC  Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multisectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation
* BIS  Bank for International Settlements
* Commonwealth of Nations
* CERN  European Organisation for Nuclear Research (observer)
* CP  Colombo Plan
* EAS  East Asia Summit
* FAO  Food and Agriculture Organisation
* G-15G-20
* G-24
* G-77
* IAEA  International Atomic Energy Agency
* IBRD  International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (World Bank)
* ICAO  International Civil Aviation Organisation
* ICC  International Chamber of Commerce
* ICRM  International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement
* IDA  International Development Association
* IFAD  International Fund for Agricultural Development
* IFC  International Finance Corporation
* IFRCS  International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
* IHO  International Hydrographic Organisation
* ILO  International Labour Organisation
* IMF  International Monetary Fund
* IMO  International Maritime Organisation
* IMSO  International Mobile Satellite Organization
* Interpol  International Criminal Police Organisation
* IOC  International Olympic Committee
* IOM  International Organisation for Migration (observer)
* IPU  Inter-parliamentary Union
* ISO  International Organisation for Standardisation
* ITSO  International Telecommunications Satellite Organisation
* ITU  International Telecommunication Union
* ITUC  International Trade Union Confederation (the successor to ICFTU (International Confederation of Free Trade Unions) and the WCL (World Confederation of Labour))
* LAS  League of Arab States (observer)
* MIGA  Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
* MONUC  United Nations Organisation Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
* NAM  Nonaligned Movement
* OAS  Organisation of American States (observer)
* OPCW  Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
* PCA  Permanent Court of Arbitration
* PIF  Pacific Islands Forum (partner)
* SAARC  South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
* SACEP  South Asia Co-operative Environment Programme
* SCO  Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (observer)
* UN  United Nations
* UNCTAD  United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
* UNDOF  United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
* UNESCO  United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation
* UNHCR  United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
* UNIDO  United Nations Industrial Development Organization
* UNIFIL  United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
* UNMEE  United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
* UNMIS  United Nations Mission in Sudan
* UNOCI  United Nations Operation in Cte d'Ivoire
* UNWTO  World Tourism Organisation
* UPU  Universal Postal Union
* WCL  World Confederation of Labour
* WCO  World Customs Organisation
* WFTU  World Federation of Trade Unions
* WHO  World Health Organisation
* WIPO  World Intellectual Property Organisation
* WMO  World Meteorological Organisation
* WTO  World Trade Organisation

===Non-Aligned Movement===

India played an important role in the multilateral movements of colonies and newly independent countries that developed into the Non-Aligned Movement.

Nonalignment had its origins in India's colonial experience and the nonviolent Indian independence struggle led by the Congress, which left India determined to be the master of its fate in an international system dominated politically by Cold War alliances and economically by Western capitalism and Soviet communism. The principles of nonalignment, as articulated by Nehru and his successors, were preservation of India's freedom of action internationally through refusal to align India with any bloc or alliance, particularly those led by the United States or the Soviet Union; nonviolence and international cooperation as a means of settling international disputes.
Nonalignment was a consistent feature of Indian foreign policy by the late 1940s and enjoyed strong, almost unquestioning support among the Indian elite.

The term "Non-Alignment" was coined by V K Menon in his speech at UN in 1953 which was later used by Indian Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru during his speech in 1954 in Colombo, Sri Lanka. In this speech, Nehru described the five pillars to be used as a guide for Sino-Indian relations, which were first put forth by PRC Premier Zhou Enlai. Called Panchsheel (five restraints), these principles would later serve as the basis of the Non-Aligned Movement. The five principles were:
#Mutual respect for each other's territorial integrity and sovereignty
#Mutual non-aggression
#Mutual non-interference in domestic affairs
#Equality and mutual benefit
#Peaceful co-existence

Jawaharlal Nehru's concept of nonalignment brought India considerable international prestige among newly independent states that shared India's concerns about the military confrontation between the superpowers and the influence of the former colonial powers. New Delhi used nonalignment to establish a significant role for itself as a leader of the newly independent world in such multilateral organisations as the United Nations (UN) and the Nonaligned Movement. The signing of the Treaty of Peace, Friendship, and Cooperation between India and the Soviet Union in 1971 and India's involvement in the internal affairs of its smaller neighbours in the 1970s and 1980s tarnished New Delhi's image as a nonaligned nation and led some observers to note that in practice, nonalignment applied only to India's relations with countries outside South Asia.

===United Nations===

India was among the original members of the United Nations that signed the Declaration by United Nations at Washington on 1 January 1942 and also participated in the United Nations Conference on International Organization at San Francisco from 25 April to 26 June 1945. As a founding member of the United Nations, India strongly supports the purposes and principles of the UN and has made significant contributions to implementing the goals of the Charter, and the evolution of the UN's specialized programmes and agencies. http://www.un.int/india/india%20&%20un/introduction.pdf India is a charter member of the United Nations and participates in all of its specialised agencies and organisations. India has contributed troops to United Nations peacekeeping efforts in Korea, http://ias.sagepub.com/content/13/2/21.abstract http://congress.aks.ac.kr/korean/files/2_1358402525.pdf Egypt and the Congo in its earlier years and in Somalia, Angola, Haiti, Liberia, Lebanon and Rwanda in recent years, and more recently in the South Sudan conflict. http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-25456862 India has been a member of the UN Security Council for six terms (a total of 12 years), and was a member for the term 2011-12. India is a member of the G4 group of nations who back each other in seeking a permanent seat on the security council and advocate in favour of the reformation of the UNSC. India is also part of the Group of 77.

===World Trade Organisation===
Described by WTO chief Pascal Lamy as one of the organisation's "big brothers", India was instrumental in bringing down the Doha round of talks in 2008. It has played an important role of representing as many as 100 developing nations during WTO summits. 

===SAARC===
Certain aspects of India's relations within the subcontinent are conducted through the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC). Its members are Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka. Established in 1985, SAARC encourages cooperation in agriculture, rural development, science and technology, culture, health, population control, narcotics control and anti-terrorism.

SAARC has intentionally stressed these "core issues" and avoided more divisive political issues, although political dialogue is often conducted on the margins of SAARC meetings. In 1993, India and its SAARC partners signed an agreement to gradually lower tariffs within the region. Forward movement in SAARC has come to a standstill because of the tension between India and Pakistan, and the SAARC Summit originally scheduled for, but not held in, November 1999 has not been rescheduled. The Fourteenth SAARC Summit was held during 34 April 2007 in New Delhi.

==International disputes==
India's territorial disputes with neighbouring Pakistan and People's Republic of China have played a crucial role in its foreign policy. India is also involved in minor territorial disputes with neighbouring Bangladesh, Nepal and Maldives. India currently maintains two manned stations in Antarctica but has made some unofficial territorial claims, which are yet to be clarified.

India is involved in the following international disputes:

===Bangladesh===
* 6.5 km of the border between India and Bangladesh remains to be demarcated.
* Ongoing discussions with Bangladesh to exchange 162 minuscule enclaves between the two.

===Nepal===
* Kalapani village of India is claimed by Nepal and Nawalparasi district of Nepal is claimed by India.

The dispute between India and Nepal involves about 75 km of area in Kalapani, where China, India, and Nepal meet. Indian forces occupied the area in 1962 after China and India fought their border war. Three villages are located in the disputed zone: Kuti 3019'N, 8046'E, Gunji, and Knabe. India and Nepal disagree about how to interpret the 1816 Sugauli treaty between the British East India Company and Nepal, which delimited the boundary along the Maha Kali River (Sarda River in India). The dispute intensified in 1997 as the Nepali parliament considered a treaty on hydro-electric development of the river. India and Nepal differ as to which stream constitutes the source of the river. Nepal regards the Limpiyadhura as the source; India claims the Lipu Lekh. Nepal has reportedly tabled an 1856 map from the British India Office to support its position. The countries have held several meetings about the dispute and discussed jointly surveying to resolve the issue. The Kathmandu Post, 16 July 1997, 2 July 1997, 31 May 1996; The Hindustan Times (Delhi), 9 June 1997, p. 13; Xinhua 11 April 1997 Although the Indo-Nepali dispute appears to be minor, it was aggravated in 1962 by tensions between China and India. Because the disputed area lies near the Sino-Indian frontier, it gains strategic value. International Boundary Consultants. Boundaries.com. Retrieved 12 November 2011. 

===Maldives===
* Some in the Maldives claim that Minicoy Island is Maldivian; although there is no official Maldivian claim to the atoll. Ramesh Trivedi (2007). India's Relations with her Neighbours (Isha Books, ISBN 978-81-8205-438-7) p. 177. In addition, Maldives and India have made arrangements to allow Maldivians to travel directly to Minicoy without a visa. The Framework Agreement on Cooperation for Development, which was signed by former Maldivian President Mohamed Nasheed and Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh during his recent visit to the Maldives, includes an article on establishing a transport network between the Maldives and Minicoy.

The earlier policy required Maldivians to get a visa from New Delhi before boarding a ferry en route to Minicoy from India's Kochi. The Government of the Maldives has stressed that the ferry service to be established between Kulhudhuffushi in Haa Dhaal atoll and Minicoy will also allow cargo to be transported between the Maldives and Minicoy. President Nasheed also expressed hope to start a regular passenger cargo ferry service between the Maldives and Minicoy in the near future. http://www.haveeru.com.mv/news/38688 

===Pakistan===
Indus and tributaries
* The unresolved Kashmir dispute and the status of Kashmir with Pakistan, India claims the disputed territories in Pakistan known as Azad Kashmir and Gilgit Baltistan, while Pakistan disputes India's administration of Jammu and Kashmir.
* Dispute over Sir Creek and the maritime boundary regarding the Rann of Kachchh area of India.
* Water-sharing problems with Pakistan over the Indus River (Wular Barrage). (Indus Water Treaty)
* Pakistani sponsorship of terrorism in India

===People's Republic of China===
* India claims Aksai Chin and Trans-Karakoram Tract, as part of Jammu and Kashmir.
* China claims most of Arunachal Pradesh, a contested disputed territory of north-east India by not recognising the McMahon Line.

Two regions are claimed by both India and China. Aksai Chin is in the disputed territory of Kashmir, at the junction of Jammu and Kashmir, Tibet and Azad Kashmir. India claims the 38,000-square-kilometre territory, currently administered by China. India also considers the cessation of Shaksam Valley to China by Pakistan as illegal and a part of its territory.
Arunachal Pradesh is a state of India in the country's northeast, bordering on Bhutan, Burma and China. Though it is under Indian administration, China calls the 90,000-square-kilometre area as South Tibet. Also the boundary between the North Indian states of Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand with China's Tibet is not properly demarcated with some portions under de facto administration of India. CBC News: China. Cbc.ca. Retrieved 12 November 2011. These are Kaurik, which lies in Himachal Pradesh, Shipki Pass, which lies in Himachal Pradesh, Jadh, between Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand, and Lapthal, in Uttarakhand, are disputed areas all claimed by China.

==Further reading==
* Cohen, Stephen P., and Sunil Dasgupta. Arming Without Aiming: India's Military Modernisation (2010) excerpt and text search
* Gaan, Narottam. India and the United States: from Estrangement to Engagement (2007) 
* Ganguly, Sumit. India's Foreign Policy: Retrospect and Prospect (2012)
* Guha, Ramachandra. India After Gandhi: The History of the World's Largest Democracy (2008) excerpt and text search
* Jain, B. M. Global Power: India's Foreign Policy, 1947-2006 (2009)
* Jain, Rashmi K. The United States and India: 1947-2006 A Documentary Study (2007)
* Kust, Matthew J. Foreign Enterprise in India: Laws and Policies (2011)
* Malone, David. Does the Elephant Dance?: Contemporary Indian Foreign Policy (2011) excerpt and text search
* Michael, Arndt. India's Foreign Policy and Regional Multilateralism (Palgrave Macmillan, 2013) - Chapter 2: Ideas, Norms, and the Evolution of India's Foreign Policy 1947-2012, pp. 2147.
* Muni, S. D. India's Foreign Policy: The Democracy Dimension (2009)
* Schaffer, Teresita C. India and the United States in the 21st Century: Reinventing Partnership (2009)

==See also==

* List of dignitaries to visit India
* List of state guests on Indian Republic Day (1950)
* List of diplomatic missions in India
* List of diplomatic missions of India
* Research and Analysis Wing
* Role of India in nonaligned movement

==References==

==External links==
* Foreign Relations: Ministry of external affairs, Government of India
* Harvard University homepage India's Foreign Policy, Xenia Dormandy
* List of Treaties ruling relations Argentina and India (Argentine Foreign Ministry, in Spanish)
* Indian embassy in Buenos Aires
* Indian embassy in Rome
* Italian embassy in New Delhi
* Italian general consulate in Mumbai
* Italian general consulate in Calcutta
* IBSA  India, Brazil, South Africa  News and Media

 



[[Indian religions]]

Ganesha, a deity common to Hindus, Jains, and Buddhists. Primarily a widely-worshipped Hindu deity.
A Statue of the Buddha.
A Statue of the Jain deity Bahubali.
Guru Nanak and the ten Sikh Gurus in a Tanjore-style painting from the late 19th century.

Indian religions are the religions that originated in the Indian subcontinent; namely Hinduism, Jainism, Buddhism and Sikhism. Adams, C. J., Classification of religions: Geographical, Encyclopdia Britannica, 2007. Accessed: 15 July 2010 These religions are also classified as Eastern religions. Although Indian religions are connected through the history of India, they constitute a wide range of religious communities, and are not confined to the Indian subcontinent. 

Evidence attesting to prehistoric religion in the Indian subcontinent derives from scattered Mesolithic rock paintings. The Harappan people of the Indus Valley Civilisation, which lasted from 33001300 BCE (mature period, 2600-1900 BCE), was an early urbanised culture which predates the Vedic religion. The Dravidian peoples and Dravidian languages of South India also predate the Vedic religion.

The documented history of Indian religions begins with the historical Vedic religion, the religious practices of the early Indo-Aryans, which were collected and later redacted into the Vedas. The period of the composition, redaction and commentary of these texts is known as the Vedic period, which lasted from roughly 1750 to 500 BCE.

The Reform Period between 800-200 BCE marks a "turning point between the Vedic religion and Hindu religions". The Shramana movement, an ancient Indian religious movement parallel to but separate from Vedic tradition, gave rise to Jainism and Buddhism, and was responsible for the related concepts of Yoga, sasra (the cycle of birth and death) and moksha (liberation from that cycle). This period also saw the writing of the Upanishads and the rise of Vedanta.

The Puranic Period (200 BCE - 500 CE) and Early Medieval period (500-1100 CE) gave rise to new configurations of Hinduism, especially bhakti and Shaivism, Shaktism, Vaishnavism, Smarta and much smaller groups like the conservative Shrauta.

The early Islamic period (1100-1500 CE) also gave rise to new movements. Sikhism was founded in the 15th century on the teachings of Guru Nanak and the nine successive Sikh Gurus in Northern India. The vast majority of its adherents originate in the Punjab region.

With the colonial dominance of the British a reinterpretation and synthesis of Hinduism arose, which aided the Indian independence movement.

==History==

===Periodisation===

===Prevedic religions (before c. 1750 BCE)===

====Prehistory====
"Priest King" of Indus Valley Civilisation
Evidence attesting to prehistoric religion in the Indian subcontinent derives from scattered Mesolithic rock paintings such as at Bhimbetka, depicting dances and rituals. Neolithic agriculturalists inhabiting the Indus River Valley buried their dead in a manner suggestive of spiritual practices that incorporated notions of an afterlife and belief in magic. . Other South Asian Stone Age sites, such as the Bhimbetka rock shelters in central Madhya Pradesh and the Kupgal petroglyphs of eastern Karnataka, contain rock art portraying religious rites and evidence of possible ritualised music. 

====Indus Valley Civilisation====
The Harappan people of the Indus Valley Civilisation, which lasted from 33001300 BCE (mature period, 2600-1900 BCE) and was centered around the Indus and Ghaggar-Hakra river valleys, may have worshiped an important mother goddess symbolising fertility, a concept that has recently been challenged. Sharri R. Clark, The social lives of figurines : recontextualising the third millennium BCE terracotta figurines from Harappa, Pakistan. PhD dissertation, Harvard 2007. Excavations of Indus Valley Civilisation sites show small tablets with animals and altars, indicating rituals associated with animal sacrifice.
 
Figures of nude male deities excavated at Indus Valley civilization are interpreted as Jain yogi. Various seals from Indus Valley Civilization bear resemblance to Rishabha and extensive use of the symbol of Bull might show the prevalence of Jainism in Indus Valley Civilization. The presence of Jainism in ancient India is supported by scholars like Dr. Radha Kumud Mookerji, Gustav Roth, Prof. A. Chakravarti, Prof. Ram Prasad Chanda, T. N. Ramchandran, I. Mahadevan and Kamta Prasad Jain. Recently, Acarya Vidyanadji tried to prove the prevalence of Jainism in ancient India through detailed research on various artifacts, seals and other relics from Indus Valley Civilization. 
 
Ram Prasad Chanda, who supervised Indus Valley Civilisation excavations, states In his article "Mohen-jo-Daro: Sindh 5000 Years Ago" in Modern Review (August, 1932) that, Patil, Bal In: Jaya Gommatesa, Hindi Granth Karyalay : Mumbai, 2006 ISBN 81-88769-10-X 
 
The archeological evidence are, however, problematic and can have multiple interpretations. The standing posture is too generic to be affirmatively associated with a yogic posture or any religion. The evidence is not enough to say with full conformity that Jainism existed in the Indus Valley Civilization.

====Dravidian culture====

According to Zimmer,

Dravidian religion refers to a broad range of deities and belief systems nowadays still found in South India, South West India and some parts of East India.They differ from Brahminism and Puranic Hindusim in that they were either historically or are at present non-Agamic (which is not being granted the sanction of the Vedas). Scholars like Arumuka Navalar worked to subsume native deities in the Vedic pantheon. The Dravidian worship of village deities is recognised as a survival of the pre-Brahmanic Dravidian religion. A large portion of these deities continue to be worshipped in the Village deities of Tamil Nadu and Sri Lanka, and their subsequent influence in South-east Asia examples of which include the Mariamman temples in Singapore and Vietnam. Worship of anthills, snakes and other forms of guardian deities and heroes are still worshiped in the Konkan coast, Maharashtra proper and a few other parts of India including North India which traces its origins to ancient Dravidian religion which has been influencing formation of mainstream Hinduism for thousands of years.

===Vedic period (1750 BCE-800 BCE)===

The documented history of Indian religions begins with the historical Vedic religion, the religious practices of the early Indo-Aryans, which were collected and later redacted into the Samhitas (usually known as the Vedas), four canonical collections of hymns or mantras composed in archaic Sanskrit. These texts are the central shruti (revealed) texts of Hinduism. The period of the composition, redaction and commentary of these texts is known as the Vedic period, which lasted from roughly 1750 to 500 BCE.

The Vedic Period is most significant for the composition of the four Vedas, Brahmanas and the older Upanishads (both presented as discussions on the rituals, mantras and concepts found in the four Vedas), which today are some of the most important canonical texts of Hinduism, and are the codification of much of what developed into the core beliefs of Hinduism. Stephanie W. Jamison and Michael Witzel in Arvind Sharma, editor, The Study of Hinduism. University of South Carolina Press, 2003, page 65 

Some modern Hindu scholars use the "Vedic religion" synonymously with "Hinduism." History Of Ancient India (portraits Of A Nation), 1/e By Kamlesh Kapur According to Sundararajan, Hinduism is also known as the Vedic religion. P. 382 Hindu Spirituality: Vedas Through Vedanta, Volume 1 edited by K. R. Sundararajan, Bithika Mukerji Other authors state that the Vedas contain "the fundamental truths about Hindu Dharma" Ashim Kumar Bhattacharyya declares that Vedas contain the fundamental truths about Hindu Dharma; P. 6Hindu Dharma: Introduction to Scriptures And Theology By Ashim Kumar Bhattacharyya which is called "the modern version of the ancient Vedic Dharma" P. 46 I Am Proud To Be A Hindu By J. Agarwal The Arya Samajis recognize the Vedic religion as true Hinduism. P. 41 Hinduism: An Alphabetical Guide By Roshen Dalal Nevertheless, according to Jamison and Witzel,

====Early Vedic period - early Vedic compositions (c. 1750-1200 BCE)====

The rishis, the composers of the hymns of the Rigveda, were considered inspired poets and seers.

The mode of worship was the performance of Yajna, sacrifices which involved sacrifice and sublimation of the havana smagri (herbal preparations) in the fire, accompanied by the singing of Samans and 'mumbling' of Yajus, the sacrificial mantras. The sublime meaning of the word yajna is derived from the Sanskrit verb yaj, which has a three-fold meaning of worship of deities (devapujana), unity (sagatikaraa) and charity (dna). Nigal, S.G. Axiological Approach to the Vedas. Northern Book Centre, 1986. P. 81. ISBN 81-85119-18-x. An essential element was the sacrificial fire - the divine Agni - into which oblations were poured, as everything offered into the fire was believed to reach God.

Central concepts in the Vedas are Satya and Rta. Satya is derived from Sat, the present participle of the verbal root as, "to be, to exist, to live". Sat means "that which really exists the really existent truth; the Good", and Sat-ya means "is-ness". Rta, "that which is properly joined; order, rule; truth", is the principle of natural order which regulates and coordinates the operation of the universe and everything within it. Holdrege (2004:215) "Satya (truth as being) and rita (truth as law) are the primary principles of Reality and its manifestation is the background of the canons of dharma, or a life of righteousness." "Satya is the principle of integration rooted in the Absolute, rita is its application and function as the rule and order operating in the universe." Conformity with ta would enable progress whereas its violation would lead to punishment. Panikkar remarks:

The term rta is inherited from the Proto-Indo-Iranian religion, the religion of the Indo-Iranian peoples prior to the earliest Vedic (Indo-Aryan) and Zoroastrian (Iranian) scriptures. Asha (aa) is the Avestan language term (corresponding to Vedic language ta) for a concept of cardinal importance . to Zoroastrian theology and doctrine. The term "dharma" was already used in Brahmanical thought, were it was conceived as an aspect of Rta. Day, Terence P. (1982). The Conception of Punishment in Early Indian Literature. Ontario: Wilfrid Laurier University Press. P. 42-45. ISBN 0-919812-15-5. 

Major philosophers of this era were Rishis Narayana, Kanva, Rishaba, Vamadeva, and Angiras. P. 285 Indian sociology through Ghurye, a dictionary By S. Devadas Pillai 

====Middle Vedic period (c. 1200-850 BCE)====

During the Middle Vedic period Rgveda X, the mantras of the Yajurveda and the older Brahmana texts were composed. The Brahmans became powerful intermediairies.

====Late Vedic period (from 850 BCE)====
The Vedic religion evolved into Hinduism and Vedanta, a religious path considering itself the 'essence' of the Vedas, interpreting the Vedic pantheon as a unitary view of the universe with 'God' (Brahman) seen as immanent and transcendent in the forms of Ishvara and Brahman. This post-Vedic systems of thought, along with the Upanishads and later texts like epics (namely Gita of Mahabharat), is a major component of modern Hinduism. The ritualistic traditions of Vedic religion are preserved in the conservative rauta tradition.

===Sanskritization===

Since Vedic times, "people from many strata of society throughout the subcontinent tended to adapt their religious and social life to Brahmanic norms", a process sometimes called Sanskritization. Encyclopedia Brittanica, Other sources: the process of "Sanskritization". It is reflected in the tendency to identify local deities with the gods of the Sanskrit texts. 

===Classical or reform period (c. 800-200 BCE)===
Statue of a standing Bodhisattva.
A statue of Mahavira.

During the time of the shramanic reform movements "many elements of the Vedic religion were lost". According to Michaels, "it is justified to see a turning point between the Vedic religion and Hindu religions".

====Late Vedic period - Brahmanas and Upanishads - Vedanta (850-500 BCE)====
Hindu Swastika

The late Vedic period (9th to 6th centuries BCE) marks the beginning of the Upanisadic or Vedantic period. Indiana University "India Studies Program" Passage to India, Module 10. Paul Deussen, Philosophy of the Upanishads This period heralded the beginning of much of what became classical Hinduism, with the composition of the Upanishads, later the Sanskrit epics, still later followed by the Puranas.

Upanishads form the speculative-philosophical basis of classical Hinduism and are known as Vedanta (conclusion of the Vedas). The older Upanishads launched attacks of increasing intensity on the ritual. Anyone who worships a divinity other than the Self is called a domestic animal of the gods in the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad. The Mundaka launches the most scathing attack on the ritual by comparing those who value sacrifice with an unsafe boat that is endlessly overtaken by old age and death. 

Scholars believe that Parsva, the 23rd Jain tirthankara lived during this period in 9th century BCE.

====Rise of Shramanic tradition (7th to 5th centuries BCE)====

Jainism and Buddhism belong to the sramana tradition. These religions rose into prominence in 700-500 BCE in the Magadha kingdom., reflecting "the cosmology and anthropology of a much older, pre-Aryan upper class of northeastern India", and were responsible for the related concepts of sasra (the cycle of birth and death) and moksha (liberation from that cycle).

The shramana movements challenged the orthodoxy of the rituals. The shramanas were wandering ascetics distinct from Vedism. Dr. Kalghatgi, T. G. 1988 In: Study of Jainism, Prakrit Bharti Academy, Jaipur S. Cromwell Crawford, review of L. M. Joshi, Brahmanism, Buddhism and Hinduism, Philosophy East and West (1972) Y. Masih (2000) In : A Comparative Study of Religions, Motilal Banarsidass Publ : Delhi, ISBN 81-208-0815-0 Page 18 P.S. Jaini, (1979), The Jaina Path to Purification, Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, p. 169 Mahavira, proponent of Jainism, and Buddha (c. 563-483), founder of Buddhism were the most prominent icons of this movement.

Shramana gave rise to the concept of the cycle of birth and death, the concept of samsara, and the concept of liberation. Flood, Gavin. Olivelle, Patrick. 2003. The Blackwell Companion to Hinduism. Malden: Blackwell. pg. 273-4. Gavin D. Flood (1996), An Introduction to Hinduism, Cambridge University - Press : UK ISBN 0-521-43878-0 Padmanabh S. Jaini 2001 Collected Paper on Buddhist Studies Motilal Banarsidass Publ 576 pages ISBN 81-208-1776-1 The influence of Upanishads on Buddhism has been a subject of debate among scholars. While Radhakrishnan, Oldenberg and Neumann were convinced of Upanishadic influence on the Buddhist canon, Eliot and Thomas highlighted the points where Buddhism was opposed to Upanishads. Buddhism may have been influenced by some Upanishadic ideas, it however discarded their orthodox tendencies. In Buddhist texts Buddha is presented as rejecting avenues of salvation as "pernicious views". Hajime Nakamura, A History of Early Vednta Philosophy: Part One. Reprint by Motilal Banarsidass Publ., 1990, page 139. 

=====Jainism=====

Jainism was established by a lineage of 24 enlightened beings culminating with Parsva (9th century BCE) and Mahavira (6th century BCE). Harry Oldmeadow (2007) Light from the East: Eastern Wisdom for the Modern West, World Wisdom, Inc. ISBN 1-933316-22-5 

The 24th Tirthankara of Jainism, Mahavira, stressed five vows, including ahimsa (non-violence), satya (truthfulness), asteya (non-stealing) and aparigraha (non-attachment). Jain orthodoxy believes the teachings of the Tirthankaras predates all known time and scholars believe Parshva, accorded status as the 23rd Tirthankara, was a historical figure. The Vedas are believed to have documented a few Tirthankaras and an ascetic order similar to the shramana movement. Mary Pat Fisher (1997) In: Living Religions: An Encyclopedia of the World's Faiths I.B.Tauris : London ISBN 1-86064-148-2 

=====Buddhism=====

Buddhism was historically founded by Siddhartha Gautama, a Kshatriya prince-turned-ascetic, and was spread beyond India through missionaries. It later experienced a decline in India, but survived in Nepal and Sri Lanka, and remains more widespread in Southeast and East Asia.

Gautama Buddha, who was called an "awakened one" (Buddha), was born into the Shakya clan living at Kapilavastu and Lumbini in what is now southern Nepal. The Buddha was born at Lumbini, as emperor Asoka's Lumbini pillar records, just before the kingdom of Magadha (which traditionally is said to have lasted from c. 546324 BCE) rose to power. The Shakyas claimed Angirasa and Gautama Maharishi lineage, The Life of Buddha as Legend and History, by Edward Joseph Thomas via descent from the royal lineage of Ayodhya.

====Spread of Jainism and Buddhism (500-200 BCE)====
Mahabodhi Temple, Bodh Gaya, Bihar.
Palitana temples

Both Jainism and Buddhism spread throughout India during the period of the Magadha empire.

Buddhism in India spread during the reign of Ashoka of the Maurya Empire, who patronised Buddhist teachings and unified the Indian subcontinent in the 3rd century BCE. He sent missionaries abroad, allowing Buddhism to spread across Asia. . Jainism began its golden period during the reign of Emperor Kharavela of Kalinga in the 2nd century BCE.

===Epic and Early Puranic Period (200 BCE-500 CE)===
A Statue of Lord Krishna.
Sri Ranganatha Swamy Temple in Srirangam, Tamil Nadu, India, is the largest functioning Hindu temple in the world. 
Akshardham
Tirumala Venkateswara Temple the most visited and richest Hindu temple in the world.

Flood and Muesse take the period between 200 BCE and 500 BCE as a separate period, in which the epics and the first puranas were being written. Michaels takes a greater timespan, namely the period between 200 BCE and 1100 CE, which saw the rise of so-called "Classical Hinduism", with its "golden age" during the Gupta Empire.

According to Hiltebeitel, a period of consolidation in the development of Hinduism took place between the time of the late Vedic Upanishad (c. 500 BCE) and the period of the rise of the Guptas (c. 320-467 CE), which he calls the "Hindus synthesis", "Brahmanic synthesis", or "orthodox synthesis". It develops in interaction with other religions and peoples:

The end of the Vedantic period around the 2nd century CE spawned a number of branches that furthered Vedantic philosophy, and which ended up being seminaries in their own right. Prominent amongst these developers were Yoga, Dvaita, Advaita and the medieval Bhakti movement.

====Smriti====
The Hinduist smriti texts of the period between 200 BCE-100 CE proclaim the authority of the Vedas, and acceptance of the Vedas becomes a central criterium for defining Hinduism over and against the heterodoxies, which rejected the Vedas. Of the six Hindu darsanas, the Mimamsa and the Vedanta "are rooted primarily in the Vedic sruti tradition and are sometimes called smarta schools in the sense that they develop smarta orthodox current of thoughts that are based, like smriti, directly on sruti. According to Hiltebeitel, "the consolidation of Hinduism takes place under the sign of bhakti". It is the Bhagavadgita that seals this achievement. The result is an "universal achievement" that may be called smarta. It views Shiva and Vishnu as "complementary in their functions but ontologically identical".

====Vedanta - Brahma sutras (200 BCE)====

In earlier writings, Sanskrit 'Vednta' simply referred to the Upanishads, the most speculative and philosophical of the Vedic texts. However, in the medieval period of Hinduism, the word Vednta came to mean the school of philosophy that interpreted the Upanishads. Traditional Vednta considers scriptural evidence, or shabda pramna, as the most authentic means of knowledge, while perception, or pratyaksa, and logical inference, or anumana, are considered to be subordinate (but valid).

The systematisation of Vedantic ideas into one coherent treatise was undertaken by Badaryana in the Brahma Sutras which was composed around 200 BCE. The cryptic aphorisms of the Brahma Sutras are open to a variety of interpretations. This resulted in the formation of numerous Vedanta schools, each interpreting the texts in its own way and producing its own sub-commentaries.

====Indian philosophy====

After 200 CE several schools of thought were formally codified in Indian philosophy, including Samkhya, Yoga, Nyaya, Vaisheshika, Mims and Advaita Vedanta. . Hinduism, otherwise a highly polytheistic, pantheistic or monotheistic religion, also tolerated atheistic schools. The thoroughly materialistic and anti-religious philosophical Crvka school that originated around the 6th century BCE is the most explicitly atheistic school of Indian philosophy. Crvka is classified as a nstika ("heterodox") system; it is not included among the six schools of Hinduism generally regarded as orthodox. It is noteworthy as evidence of a materialistic movement within Hinduism. . Our understanding of Crvka philosophy is fragmentary, based largely on criticism of the ideas by other schools, and it is no longer a living tradition. . Other Indian philosophies generally regarded as atheistic include Samkhya and Mims.

====Hindu literature====
The Golden Temple of Mahalakshmi at Vellore.

Two of Hinduism's most revered epics, the Mahabharata and Ramayana were compositions of this period. Devotion to particular deities was reflected from the composition of texts composed to their worship. For example the Ganapati Purana was written for devotion to Ganapati (or Ganesh). Popular deities of this era were Shiva, Vishnu, Durga, Surya, Skanda, and Ganesh (including the forms/incarnations of these deities.)

In the latter Vedantic period, several texts were also composed as summaries/attachments to the Upanishads. These texts collectively called as Puranas allowed for a divine and mythical interpretation of the world, not unlike the ancient Hellenic or Roman religions. Legends and epics with a multitude of gods and goddesses with human-like characteristics were composed.

====Jainism and Buddhism====

The Gupta period marked a watershed of Indian culture: the Guptas performed Vedic sacrifices to legitimize their rule, but they also patronized Buddhism, which continued to provide an alternative to Brahmanical orthodoxy. Buddhism continued to have a significant presence in some regions of India until the 12th century.

There were several Buddhistic kings who worshiped Vishnu, such as the Gupta Empire, Pala Empire, Malla Empire, Somavanshi, and Sattvahana. Durga Prasad, P. 116, History of the Andhras up to 1565 A. D. Buddhism survived followed by Hindus. National Geographic January 2008, VOL. 213, #1 

====Tantra====

Tantrism originated in the early centuries CE and developed into a fully articulated tradition by the end of the Gupta period. According to Michaels this was the "Golden Age of Hinduism" (c. 320650 CE), which flourished during the Gupta Empire (320 to 550 CE) until the fall of the Harsha Empire (606 to 647 CE). During this period, power was centralised, along with a growth of far distance trade, standardizarion of legal procedures, and general spread of literacy. Mahayana Buddhism flourished, but the orthodox Brahmana culture began to be rejuvenated by the patronage of the Gupta Dynasty. The position of the Brahmans was reinforced, and the first Hindu temples emerged during the late Gupta age.

===Medieval and Late Puranic Period (5001500 CE)===

====Late-Classical Period (c. 650-1100 CE)====
:See also Late-Classical Age and Hinduism Middle Ages

After the end of the Gupta Empire and the collapse of the Harsha Empire, power became decentralised in India. Several larger kingdoms emerged, with "countless vasal states". The kingdoms were ruled via a feudal system. Smaller kingdoms were dependent on the protection of the larger kingdoms. "The great king was remote, was exalted and deified", as reflected in the Tantric Mandala, which could also depict the king as the centre of the mandala.

The disintegration of central power also lead to regionalisation of religiosity, and religious rivalry. Local cults and languages were enhanced, and the influence of "Brahmanic ritualistic Hinduism" was diminished. Rural and devotional movements arose, along with Shaivism, Vaisnavism, Bhakti and Tantra, though "sectarian groupings were only at the beginning of their development". Religious movements had to compete for recognition by the local lords. Buddhism lost its position, and began to disappear in India.

=====Vedanta=====

In the same period Vedanta changed, incorporating Buddhist thought and its emphasis on consciousness and the working of the mind. Buddhism, which was supported by the ancient Indian urban civilisation lost influence to the traditional religions, which were rooted in the countryside. In Bengal, Buddhism was even prosecuted. But at the same time, Buddhism was incorporated into Hinduism, when Gaudapada used Buddhist philosophy to reinterpret the Upanishads. This also marked a shift from Atman and Brahman as a "living substance" to "maya-vada", where Atman and Brahman are seen as "pure knowledge-consciousness". According to Scheepers, it is this "maya-vada" view which has come to dominate Indian thought.

=====Buddhism=====

Between 400 CE and 1000 CE Hinduism expanded as the decline of Buddhism in India continued. Buddhism subsequently became effectively extinct in India but survived in Nepal and Sri Lanka.

=====Bhakti=====

The Bhakti movement began with the emphasis on the worship of God, regardless of one's status - whether priestly or laypeople, men or women, higher social status or lower social status. The movements were mainly centered around the forms of Vishnu (Rama and Krishna) and Shiva. There were however popular devotees of this era of Durga. The best-known devotees are the Nayanars from southern India. The most popular Shaiva teacher of the south was Basava, while of the north it was Gorakhnath. Female saints include figures like Akkamadevi, Lalleshvari and Molla.

The "alwar" or "azhwars" (, zvrka , those immersed in god) were Tamil poet-saints of south India who lived between the 6th and 9th centuries CE and espoused "emotional devotion" or bhakti to Visnu-Krishna in their songs of longing, ecstasy and service. The most popular Vaishnava teacher of the south was Ramanuja, while of the north it was Ramananda.

Several important icons were women. For example, within the Mahanubhava sect, the women outnumbered the men, Ramaswamy, P. 204 Walking Naked and administration was many times composed mainly of women. Ramaswamy, P. 210 Walking Naked Mirabai is the most popular female saint in India.

Sri Vallabha Acharya (14791531) is a very important figure from this era. He founded the Shuddha Advaita (Pure Non-dualism) school of Vedanta thought.

According to The Centre for Cultural Resources and Training,

====Early Islamic rule (c. 1100-1500 CE)====

In the 12th and 13th centuries, Turks and Afghans invaded parts of northern India and established the Delhi Sultanate in the former Rajput holdings. Battuta's Travels: Delhi, capital of Muslim India The subsequent Slave dynasty of Delhi managed to conquer large areas of northern India, approximately equal in extent to the ancient Gupta Empire, while the Khilji dynasty conquered most of central India but were ultimately unsuccessful in conquering and uniting the subcontinent. The Sultanate ushered in a period of Indian cultural renaissance. The resulting "Indo-Muslim" fusion of cultures left lasting syncretic monuments in architecture, music, literature, religion, and clothing.

=====Bhakti movement=====

During the 14th to 17th centuries, a great Bhakti movement swept through central and northern India, initiated by a loosely associated group of teachers or sants. Ramananda, Ravidas, Srimanta Sankardeva, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, Vallabhacharya, Surdas, Meera Bai, Kabir, Tulsidas, Namdev, Dnyaneshwar, Tukaram and other mystics spearheaded the Bhakti movement in the North while Annamacharya, Bhadrachala Ramadas, Tyagaraja among others propagated Bhakti in the South. They taught that people could cast aside the heavy burdens of ritual and caste, and the subtle complexities of philosophy, and simply express their overwhelming love for God. This period was also characterized by a spate of devotional literature in vernacular prose and poetry in the ethnic languages of the various Indian states or provinces.

=====Lingayathism=====

Lingayatism is a distinct Shaivite tradition in India, established in the 12th century by the philosopher and social reformer Basavanna.
The adherents of this tradition are known as Lingayats. The term is derived from Lingavantha in Kannada, meaning 'one who wears Ishtalinga on their body' (Ishtalinga is the representation of the God). In Lingayat theology, Ishtalinga is an oval-shaped emblem symbolising Parasiva, the absolute reality. Contemporary Lingayatism follows a progressive reformbased theology propounded, which has great influence in South India, especially in the state of Karnataka. M. R. Sakhare, History and Philosophy of the Lingayat Religion, Prasaranga, Karnataka University, Dharwad 

=====Unifying Hinduism=====
According to Nicholson, already between the 12th and 16th century,

The tendency of "a blurring of philosophical distinctions" has also been noted by Burley. Lorenzen locates the origins of a distinct Hindu identity in the interaction between Muslims and Hindus, and a process of "mutual self-definition with a contrasting Muslim other", which started well before 1800. Both the Indian and the European thinkers who developed the term "Hinduism" in the 19th century were influenced by these philosophers.

=====Sikhism (15th century)=====
Harmandir Sahib or The Golden Temple of the Sikhs.

Sikhism originated in 15th-century Northern India with the teachings of Nanak and nine successive gurus. The principal belief in Sikhism is faith in Vhigur represented by the sacred symbol of one god. Sikhism's traditions and teachings are distinctly associated with the history, society and culture of the Punjab. Adherents of Sikhism are known as Sikhs (students or disciples) and number over 27 million across the world.

===Modern period (1500 - present)===

====Early modern period====

According to Gavin Flood, the modern period in India begins with the first contacts with western nations around 1500. The period of Mughal rule in India saw the rise of new forms of religiosity.

====Modern India (after 1800)====
Mahamagam Festival is a holy festival celebrated once in twelve years in Tamil Nadu. Mahamagam Festival, which is held at Kumbakonam. This festival is also called as Kumbamela of South. 
The largest religious gathering ever held on Earth, the 2001 Maha Kumbh Mela held in Prayag attracted around 70 million Hindus from around the world.

=====Hinduism=====

In the 19th century, under influence of the colonial forces, a synthetic vision of Hinduism was formulated by Raja Ram Mohan Roy, Swami Vivekananda, Sri Aurobindo, Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan and Mahatma Gandhi. These thinkers have tended to take an inclusive view of India's religious history, emphasising the similarities between the various Indian religions.

The modern era has given rise to dozens of Hindu saints with international influence. For example, Brahma Baba established the Brahma Kumaris, one of the largest new Hindu religious movements which teaches the discipline of Raja Yoga to millions. Representing traditional Gaudiya Vaishnavism, Prabhupada founded the Hare Krishna movement, another organisation with a global reach. In late 18th-century India, Swaminarayan founded the Swaminarayan Sampraday. Anandamurti, founder of the Ananda Marga, has also influenced many worldwide. Through the international influence of all of these new Hindu denominations, many Hindu practices such as yoga, meditation, mantra, divination, and vegetarianism have been adopted by new converts.

=====Jainism=====
Jainism continues to be an influential religion and Jain communities live in Indian states Gujarat, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. Jains authored several classical books in different Indian languages for a considerable period of time.

=====Buddhism=====

The Dalit Buddhist movement (dubbed as Navayana by certain Ambedkerites) Omvedt, Gail. Buddhism in India : Challenging Brahmanism and Caste. 3rd ed. London/New Delhi/Thousand Oaks: Sage, 2003. pages: 2, 37, 8, 1415, 19, 240, 266, 271 is a 19th- and 20th-century Buddhist revival movement in India. It received its most substantial impetus from B. R. Ambedkar's call for the conversion of Dalits to Buddhism, to escape a caste-based society that considered them to be the lowest in the hierarchy. 

==Similarities and differences==
Aum
Map showing the prevalence of Abrahamic (pink) and Indian religions (yellow) in each country.

According to Tilak, the religions of India can be interpreted "differentially" or "integrally", that is by either highlighting the differences or the similarities. According to Sherma and Sarma, western Indologists have tended to emphasise the differences, while Indian Indologists have tended to emphasise the similarities.

===Similarities===
Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism share certain key concepts, which are interpreted differently by different groups and individuals. Until the 19th century, adherents of those various religions did not tend to label themselves as in opposition to each other, but "perceived themselves as belonging to the same extended cultural family."

====Soteriology====
Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism share the concept of moksha, liberation from the cycle of rebirth. They differ however on the exact nature of this liberation.

====Ritual====
Common traits can also be observed in ritual. The head-anointing ritual of abhiseka is of importance in three of these distinct traditions, excluding Sikhism (in Buddhism it is found within Vajrayana). Other noteworthy rituals are the cremation of the dead, the wearing of vermilion on the head by married women, and various marital rituals. In literature, many classical narratives and purana have Hindu, Buddhist or Jain versions. c.f. Encyclopdia Britannica, s.v. "Jainism > Jainism, Hinduism, and Buddhism" All four traditions have notions of karma, dharma, samsara, moksha and various forms of Yoga.

====Mythology====
Rama is a heroic figure in all of these religions. In Hinduism he is the God-incarnate in the form of a princely king; in Buddhism, he is a Bodhisattva-incarnate; in Jainism, he is the perfect human being. Among the Buddhist Ramayanas are: Vessantarajataka, Pollock, P. 661 Literary Cultures in History: Reamker, Ramakien, Phra Lak Phra Lam, Hikayat Seri Rama etc. There also exists the Khamti Ramayana among the Khamti tribe of Asom wherein Rama is an Avatar of a Bodhisattva who incarnates to punish the demon king Ravana (B.Datta 1993). The Tai Ramayana is another book retelling the divine story in Asom.

===Differences===
Critics point out that there exist vast differences between and even within the various Indian religions. All major religions are composed of innumerable sects and subsects.

====Dharma====
For a Hindu, dharma is his duty. For a Jain, dharma is righteousness, his conduct. For a Buddhist, dharma is usually taken to be the Buddha's teachings.

====Mythology====
Indian mythology also reflects the competition between the various Indian religions. A popular story tells how Vajrapani kills Mahesvara, a manifestation of Shiva depicted as an evil being. The story occurs in several scriptures, most notably the Sarvatathagatatattvasamgraha and the Vajrapany-abhiseka-mahatantra. According to Kalupahana, the story "echoes" the story of the conversion of Ambattha. It is to be understood in the context of the competition between Buddhist institutions and Shaivism.

==stika and nstika categorisation==

stika and nstika are variously-defined terms sometimes used to categorise Indian religions. The traditional definition, followed by Adi Shankara, classifies religions and persons as stika and nstika according to whether they accept the authority of the main Hindu texts, the Vedas, as supreme revealed scriptures, or not. By this definition, Nyaya, Vaisheshika, Samkhya, Yoga, Purva Mimamsa and Vedanta are classified as stika schools, while Charvaka is classified as a nstika school. Buddhism and Jainism are also thus classified as nstika religions since they do not accept the authority of the Vedas.

Another set of definitionsnotably distinct from the usage of Hindu philosophyloosely characterise stika as "theist" and nstika as "atheist". By these definitions, Skhya can be considered a nstika philosophy, though it is traditionally classed among the Vedic stika schools. From this point of view, Buddhism and Jainism remain nstika religions.

Buddhists and Jains have disagreed that they are nastika and have redefined the phrases stika and nstika in their own view. Jains assign the term nastika to one who is ignorant of the meaning of the religious texts, Page i, Forms of Indian Philosophical Literature and Other Papers by V.S. Kambi or those who deny the existence of the soul was well-known to the Jainas. P. 163 Mahvra: His Life and Teachings by Bimala Churn Law 

=="Dharmic religions"==

Frawley and Malhotra use the term "Dharmic traditions" to highlight the similarities between the various Indian religions. According to Frawley, "all religions in India have been called the Dharma", and can be

According to Paul Hacker, as described by Halbfass, the term "dharma"

The emphasis on the similarities and integral unity of the dharmic faiths has been criticised for neglecting the vast differences between and even within the various Indian religions and traditions. According to Richard E. King it is typical of the "inclusivist appropriation of other traditions" of Neo-Vedanta: 

==Status of non-Hindus in the Republic of India==

The inclusion of Buddhists, Jains and Sikhs within Hinduism is part of the Indian legal system. The 1955 Hindu Marriage Act " as Hindus all Buddhists, Jains, Sikhs and anyone who is not a Christian, Muslim, Parsee or Jew". And the Indian Constitution says that "reference to Hindus shall be construed as including a reference to persons professing the Sikh, Jaina or Buddhist religion".

In a judicial reminder, the Indian Supreme Court observed Sikhism and Jainism to be sub-sects or special faiths within the larger Hindu fold, Supreme Court observation, Bal Patil vs. Union of India, Dec 2005 and that Jainism is a denomination within the Hindu fold. Supreme court of India, in the judgement of Bal Patil vs. Union of India, Dec. 2005. Although the government of British India counted Jains in India as a major religious community right from the first Census conducted in 1873, after independence in 1947 Sikhs and Jains were not treated as national minorities. Court observation, Bal Patil vs. Union of India, December 2005 http://www.judis.nic.in/supremecourt/qrydisp.asp?tfnm=27098 In 2005 the Supreme Court of India declined to issue a writ of Mandamus granting Jains the status of a religious minority throughout India. The Court however left it to the respective states to decide on the minority status of Jain religion. Supreme court of India, in the judgement of Bal Patil vs. Union of India, Dec. 2005. 

However, some individual states have over the past few decades differed on whether Jains, Buddhists and Sikhs are religious minorities or not, by either pronouncing judgments or passing legislation. One example is the judgment passed by the Supreme Court in 2006, in a case pertaining to the state of Uttar Pradesh, which declared Jainism to be indisputably distinct from Hinduism, but mentioned that, "The question as to whether the Jains are part of the Hindu religion is open to debate. (para 25, Committee of Management Kanya Junior High School Bal Vidya Mandir, Etah, U.P. v. Sachiv, U.P. Basic Shiksha Parishad, Allahabad, U.P. and Ors., Per Dalveer Bhandari J., Civil Appeal No. 9595 of 2003, decided On: 21.08.2006, Supreme Court of India) However, the Supreme Court also noted various court cases that have held Jainism to be a distinct religion.

Another example is the Gujarat Freedom of Religion Bill, that is an amendment to a legislation that sought to define Jains and Buddhists as denominations within Hinduism. Gujarat Freedom of religions Act, 2003 Ultimately on 31 July 2007, finding it not in conformity with the concept of freedom of religion as embodied in Article 25 (1) of the Constitution, Governor Naval Kishore Sharma returned back the Gujarat Freedom of Religion (Amendment) Bill, 2006 citing the widespread protests by the Jains as well as Supreme Court's extrajudicial observation that Jainism is a "special religion formed on the basis of quintessence of Hindu religion by the Supreme Court" The Times of India, 11 Mar, 2008 In his letter dated 27 July 2007 he had said Jainism has been regarded as "special religion formed on the basis of quintessence of Hindu religion by the Supreme Court". 

==See also==

* Ayyavazhi and Hinduism
* Buddhism and Jainism
* History of Yoga
* Indian philosophy
* Indology
* Religion in India
* Jainism and Hinduism

==Notes==

==References==

==Sources==

===Printed sources===

* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

===Web-sources===

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
;Statistics
* 

;Constitution and law
* 

;Reports
* 

 
*


[[Infusion (disambiguation)]]

Infusion refers to the process of extracting chemical compounds or flavors from plant material in a solvent by allowing the material to remain suspended in the solvent over time.

Infusion may also refer to:

* Intravenous infusion, the infusion of liquid substances directly into a vein for medical purposes
* Infusion (band), an Australian dance-music act
* Tea infuser, a device in which loose tea leaves are placed for brewing
* A medical treatment in which liquid substances are delivered through various routes of administration
* Infusion (roller coaster), a roller coaster at Pleasure Beach, Blackpool, UK
*INFUSION, a type of basketball produced by Spalding (sports equipment)
* Infusion(s), the name of extensions made to the core functionality of PHP-Fusion, an open-source content management system

== See also ==
* Affusion, a form of Christian baptism where water is poured over the head



[[Idaho]]

Digitally colored elevation map of Idaho.
Shoshone Fallsin south central Idaho.
Sixty percent of Idaho's land is held by the National Forest Service or the Bureau of Land Management, and it leads the nation in forest service land as a percentage of total area. 
Reynolds Creek Experimental Watershed in the Owyhee Mountains, about 50 mi southwest of Boise, Idaho
The Palouse regionof north central Idaho.

Idaho () is a state in the northwestern region of the United States. Idaho is the 14th largest, the 39th most populous, and the 7th least densely populated of the 50 United States. The state's largest city and capital is Boise. Residents are called "Idahoans". Idaho was admitted to the Union on July 3, 1890, as the 43rd state.

Idaho is a mountainous state with an area larger than that of all of New England. It is surrounded by the states of Washington, Oregon, Nevada, Utah, Wyoming, Montana, and the Canadian province of British Columbia. The network of dams and locks on the Columbia River and Snake River make the city of Lewiston the farthest inland seaport on the Pacific coast of the contiguous United States.

Idaho's nickname is the "Gem State", because nearly every known type of gemstone has been found there. Just, Rick. "Star Garnet." Idaho Snapshots. Meridian, Idaho: Radio Idaho, 1990. 9. In addition, Idaho is one of only two places in the world where star garnets can be found in any significant quantities, the other being India. Idaho is sometimes called the "Potato State" owing to its popular and widely distributed crop. The state motto is Esto Perpetua (Latin for "Let it be forever"). 
==Etymology==
The exact origin of the name remains a mystery. In the early 1860s, when the United States Congress was considering organizing a new territory in the Rocky Mountains, eccentric lobbyist George M. Willing suggested the name "Idaho," which he claimed was derived from a Shoshone language term meaning "the sun comes from the mountains" or "gem of the mountains". Willing later claimed that he had simply invented the name. Congress ultimately decided to name the area Colorado Territory when it was created in February 1861. Thinking they would get a jump on the name, locals named a community in Colorado "Idaho Springs".

However, the name "Idaho" did not go away. The same year Congress created Colorado Territory, a county called Idaho County was created in eastern Washington Territory. The county was named after a steamship named Idaho, which was launched on the Columbia River in 1860. It is unclear whether the steamship was named before or after Willing's claim was revealed. Regardless, a portion of Washington Territory, including Idaho County, was used to create Idaho Territory in 1863. . 

Despite this lack of evidence for the origin of the name, many textbooks well into the 20th century repeated as fact Willing's account that the name "Idaho" derived from the Shoshone term "ee-da-how".

The name "Idaho" may be derived from the Plains Apache word "daah" which means "enemy." The Comanches used this word to refer to the Idaho Territory. . 

An excerpt from a 1956 Idaho history textbook:
:"Idaho" is a Shoshoni Indian exclamation. The word consists of three parts. The first is "Ee", which in English conveys the idea of "coming down". The second is "dah" which is the Shoshoni stem or root for both "sun" and "mountain". The third syllable, "how", denotes the exclamation and stands for the same thing in Shoshoni that the exclamation mark (!) does in the English language. The Shoshoni word is "Ee-dah-how", and the Indian thought thus conveyed when translated into English means, "Behold! the sun coming down the mountain". 

According to local knowledge, the name Idaho originated from the Nez Perce language and stands for "the Land of many Waters", a kidney shaped drainage area in north central Idaho in which a multitude of rivers come together. These rivers include the Snake, the Salmon, the Clearwater, North Fork Clearwater, the Selway, and more. The famed steamboat was probably named Idaho because it voyaged along the Columbia river to "the Land of many Waters".

==Geography==
Map of Idaho
Idaho borders six states and one Canadian province. The states of Washington and Oregon are to the west, Nevada and Utah are to the south, and Montana and Wyoming are to the east. Idaho also shares a short border with the Canadian province of British Columbia to the north. The landscape is rugged with some of the largest unspoiled natural areas in the United States. For example, at 2.3 million acres (930,000 ha), the Frank Church-River of No Return Wilderness Area is the largest contiguous area of protected wilderness in the continental United States. Idaho is a Rocky Mountain state with abundant natural resources and scenic areas. The state has snow-capped mountain ranges, rapids, vast lakes and steep canyons. The waters of the Snake River rush through Hells Canyon, the deepest gorge in the United States. Shoshone Falls plunges down rugged cliffs from a height greater than that of Niagara Falls. The major rivers in Idaho are the Snake River, the Clark Fork/Pend Oreille River, the Clearwater River, the Salmon River. Other significant rivers include the Coeur d'Alene River, the Spokane River, the Boise River, and the Payette River. The Salmon River empties into the Snake in Hells Canyon and forms the southern boundary of Nez Perce County on its north shore, of which Lewiston is the county seat. The Port of Lewiston, at the confluence of the Clearwater and the Snake Rivers is the farthest inland seaport on the West Coast at 465 river miles from the Pacific at Astoria, Oregon. 

Idaho's highest point is Borah Peak, 12662 ft, in the Lost River Range north of Mackay. Idaho's lowest point, 710 ft, is in Lewiston, where the Clearwater River joins the Snake River and continues into Washington. The Sawtooth Range is often considered Idaho's most famous mountain range. Other mountain ranges in Idaho include the Bitterroot Range, the White Cloud Mountains, the Lost River Range, the Clearwater Mountains, and the Salmon River Mountains.

Idaho has two time zones, with the dividing line approximately midway between Canada and Nevada. Southern Idaho, including the Boise metropolitan area, Idaho Falls, Pocatello, and Twin Falls, are in the Mountain Time Zone. A legislative error ( 264) theoretically placed this region in the Central Time Zone, but this was corrected with a 2007 amendment. Areas north of the Salmon River, including Coeur d'Alene, Moscow, Lewiston, and Sandpoint, are in the Pacific Time Zone, which contains less than a quarter of the state's population and land area.

===Climate===
Idaho has much variation in its climate. Although the state's western border is located about from the Pacific Ocean, the maritime influence is still felt in Idaho, especially in the winter when cloud cover, humidity, and precipitation are at their maximum extent. This influence has a moderating effect in the winter where temperatures are not as low as would otherwise be expected for a northern state with predominantly high elevations. The maritime influence is least prominent in the eastern part of the state where the precipitation patterns are often reversed, with wetter summers and drier winters, and seasonal temperature differences more extreme, showing a more semi-arid continental climate.

Climate in Idaho can be hot, although extended periods over 98 F for the maximum temperature are rare, except for the lowest point in elevation, Lewiston, which correspondingly sees very little snow. Hot summer days are tempered by the low relative humidity and cooler evenings during summer months since, for most of the state, the highest diurnal difference in temperature is often in the summer. Winters can be cold, although extended periods of bitter cold weather below zero are unusual. This is what led the railroad tycoon Harriman family to develop the famous ski resort, Sun Valley. Idaho's all-time highest temperature of 118 F was recorded at Orofino on July 28, 1934; the all-time lowest temperature of -60 F was recorded at Island Park Dam on January 18, 1943.

Monthly normal high and low temperatures for various Idaho cities. (F) 
 City Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
 Boise 38/24 45/27 55/33 62/38 72/46 81/53 91/59 90/59 79/50 65/40 48/31 38/23 
 Lewiston 42/30 47/31 55/36 62/41 71/47 79/54 89/60 89/60 78/51 63/41 48/34 40/28 
 Pocatello 33/16 38/19 49/27 59/33 68/40 78/46 88/52 88/51 76/42 62/33 45/24 33/16 
 . 

===Lakes/Rivers===
Lake Coeur d'Alene in North Idaho
Redfish Lake in central Idaho.
* Alturas Lake
* Bear Lake (Idaho-Utah)
* Clearwater River
* Dierkes Lake
* Hayden Lake
* Henry's Lake
* Hidden Lake
* Lake Cascade
* Lake Cleveland
* Lake Coeur d'Alene
* Lake Lowell
* Lake Ruvet
* Lake Walcott
* Payette Lake, (McCall)
* Pend Oreille
* Little Redfish Lake
* Lucky Peak Lake
* Pettit Lake
* Priest Lake
* Redfish Lake
* Sawtooth Lake
* Stanley Lake
* Warm Lake
* Williams Lake(Salmon)
* Snake River

==History==

Humans may have been present in the Idaho area as long as 14,500 years ago. Excavations at Wilson Butte Cave near Twin Falls in 1959 revealed evidence of human activity, including arrowheads, that rank among the oldest dated artifacts in North America. American Indian peoples predominant in the area included the Nez Perc in the north and the Northern and Western Shoshone in the south.

An early presence of French-Canadian trappers is visible in names and toponyms that have survived to this day: Nez Perc, Cur d'Alne, Bois, Payette, some preexisting the Lewis and Clark and Astorian expeditions which themselves included significant numbers of French and Metis guides recruited for their familiarity with the terrain.

Idaho, as part of the Oregon Country, was claimed by both the United States and Great Britain until the United States gained undisputed jurisdiction in 1846. From 1843 to 1849 present-day Idaho was under the de facto jurisdiction of the Provisional Government of Oregon. When Oregon became a state, what is now Idaho was in what was left of the original Oregon Territory not part of the new state, and designated as the Washington Territory.

Between then and the creation of the Idaho Territory on July 4, 1863, at Lewiston, parts of the present-day state were included in the Oregon, Washington, and Dakota Territories. The new territory included present-day Idaho, Montana, and most of Wyoming. The Lewis and Clark expedition crossed Idaho in 1805 on the way to the Pacific and in 1806 on the return, largely following the Clearwater River both directions. The first non-indigenous settlement was Kullyspell House, established on the shore of Lake Pend Oreille for fur trading in 1809 by David Thompson of the North West Company. In 1812 Donald Mackenzie, working for the Pacific Fur Company at the time, established a post on the lower Clearwater River near present-day Lewiston. This post, known as "MacKenzie's Post" or "Clearwater", operated until the Pacific Fur Company was bought out by the North West Company in 1813, after which it was abandoned. The first attempts at organized communities, within the present borders of Idaho, were established in 1860. The first permanent, substantial incorporated community was Lewiston in 1861.

After some tribulation as a territory, including the chaotic transfer of the territorial capital from Lewiston to Boise, disenfranchisement of Mormon polygamists upheld by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1877, and a federal attempt to split the territory between Washington Territory which gained statehood in 1889, a year before Idaho, and the state of Nevada which had been a state since 1863, Idaho achieved statehood in 1890. The economy of the state, which had been primarily supported by metal mining, shifted towards agriculture, forest products and tourism.

Idaho was one of the hardest hit of the Pacific Northwest states during the Great Depression. Prices plummeted for Idaho's major crops: in 1932 a bushel of potatoes brought only $.10 compared to $1.51 in 1919, while Idaho farmers saw their annual income of $686 in 1929 drop to $250 by 1932. 

In recent years, Idaho has expanded its commercial base as a tourism and agricultural state to include science and technology industries. Science and technology have become the largest single economic center (over 25% of the state's total revenue) within the state and are greater than agriculture, forestry and mining combined. 

The Idaho State Historical Society and numerous local historical societies and museums preserve and promote Idahos cultural heritage.

==Demographics==
There are large numbers of Americans of German and English ancestry in Idaho
Idaho population density map.

The United States Census Bureau estimates that the population of Idaho was 1,612,136 on July 1, 2013, a 2.8% increase since 2010. 

At the 2010 Census,
* 89.1% of the population was White American
* 0.6% Black or African American
* 1.4% American Indian and Alaska Native
* 1.2% Asian American
* 0.1% Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander
* 2.5% of two or more races.

11.2% of Idaho's population was of Hispanic, Latino, or Spanish origin (they may be of any race). . As of 2011, 27.2% of Idaho's children under the age of 1 belonged to minority groups (figure includes white hispanic children into minority figure. )

 Idaho Racial Breakdown of Population 
 Racial composition 1990 Historical Census Statistics on Population Totals By Race, 1790 to 1990, and By Hispanic Origin, 1970 to 1990, For The United States, Regions, Divisions, and States 2000 Population of Idaho: Census 2010 and 2000 Interactive Map, Demographics, Statistics, Quick Facts 2010 2010 Census Data 
 White 94.4% 90.1% 89.1% 
 Native 1.4% 1.4% 1.4% 
 Asian 0.9% 0.9% 1.2% 
 Black 0.3% 0.4% 0.6% 
 Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander - 0.1% 0.1% 
 Other race 3.0% 4.2% 5.1% 
 Two or more races - 2.0% 2.5% 

Idaho had an estimated population of 1429096 in 2005, which was an increase of 33956, or 2.4%, from the prior year and an increase of 135140, or 10.4%, since 2000. This includes a natural increase since the last census of 58884 people (that is 111131 births minus 52247 deaths) and an increase due to net migration of 75795 people into the state. There are large numbers of Americans of English and German ancestry in Idaho. Immigration from outside the United States resulted in a net increase of 14522 people, and migration within the country produced a net increase of 61273 people.

This made Idaho the sixth fastest-growing state after Arizona, Nevada, Florida, Georgia, and Utah. From 2004 to 2005, Idaho grew the third-fastest, surpassed only by Nevada and Arizona.

Nampa, about west of downtown Boise, became the state's second largest city in the late 1990s, passing Pocatello and Idaho Falls. Nampa's population was under 29000 in 1990 and grew to over 81000 by 2010. Located between Nampa and Boise, Meridian also experienced high growth, from under 10000 residents in 1990 to over 75000 in 2010 and is now Idaho's third largest city. Growth of 5% or more over the same period has also been observed in Caldwell, Coeur d'Alene, Post Falls, and Twin Falls. 

From 1990 to 2010, Idaho's population increased by over 560000 (55%).

The Boise Metropolitan Area (officially known as the Boise City-Nampa, ID Metropolitan Statistical Area) is Idaho's largest metropolitan area. Other metropolitan areas in order of size are Coeur d'Alene, Idaho Falls, Pocatello and Lewiston.

As of 2006, six official micropolitan statistical areas are based in Idaho. Twin Falls is the largest of these.

The center of population of Idaho is located in Custer County, in the town of Stanley. 

The most common reported ancestries in the state are: German (18.9%), English (18.1%), Irish (10%), American (8.4%), Norwegian (3.6%), and Swedish (3.5%).

===Religion===
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Idaho Falls Temple.
According to a report produced by the Pew Forum on Religion & Public Life the self-identified religious affiliations of Idahoans over the age of 18 as of 2008 are: 

 Denomination % 
 Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints 23 
 Evangelical Protestant 22 
 Catholic 18 
 Unaffiliated 18 
 Mainline Protestant 16 
 Other Faiths 2 
 Jehovah's Witnesses 1 
 Eastern Orthodox < 0.5 
 Other Christian < 0.5 
 Jewish < 0.5 
 Muslim < 0.5 
 Buddhist < 0.5 
 Hindu < 0.5 
 Other World < 0.5 
 Don't know/refused < 0.5 

The largest denominations by number of members in 2010 were The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints with 409265; the Catholic Church with 123400; the non-denominational Evangelical Protestant with 62637; and the Assemblies of God with 22183. 

==Economy==

Idaho State Quarter.
American Falls Dam
Gross state product for 2012 was $58.2 billion, and the per capita income based on 2012 GDP and 2012 population estimates was $36,472. 
Idaho is an important agricultural state, producing nearly one-third of the potatoes grown in the United States. All three varieties of wheat, Dark Northern Spring, Hard Red, and Soft White are grown in the state. Nez Perce County is considered a premier Soft White growing locale.

Important industries in Idaho are food processing, lumber and wood products, machinery, chemical products, paper products, electronics manufacturing, silver and other mining, and tourism. The world's largest factory for barrel cheese, the raw product for processed cheese is located in Gooding, Idaho. It has a capacity of 120,000 metric tons per year of barrel cheese and belongs to the Glanbia group. . The Idaho National Laboratory (INL), a government lab for nuclear energy research, is also an important part of the eastern Idaho economy. Idaho also is home to three facilities of Anheuser-Busch which provide a large part of the malt for breweries located across the nation.

Locally, a variety of industries are important. Outdoor recreation is a common example ranging from numerous snowmobile and downhill and cross-country ski areas in winter to the evolution of Lewiston as a retirement community based on mild winters, dry, year-round climate and one of the lowest median wind velocities anywhere, combined with the rivers for a wide variety of activities. Other examples would be ATK Corporation, which operates three ammunition and ammunition components plants in Lewiston. Two are sporting and one is defense contract. The Lewis-Clark valley has an additional independent ammunition components manufacturer and the Chipmunk rifle factory until it was purchased in 2007 by Keystone Sporting Arms and production was moved to Milton, Pennsylvania. Four of the world's six welded aluminum jet boat (for running river rapids) manufacturers are in the Lewiston-Clarkston, WAvalley. Wine grapes were grown between Kendrick and Juliaetta in the Idaho Panhandle by the French Rothschilds until Prohibition. In keeping with this, while there are no large wineries or breweries in Idaho, there are numerous and growing numbers of award winning boutique wineries and microbreweries in the northern part of the state.

Today, the largest industry in Idaho is the science and technology sector. It accounts for over 25% of the state's total revenue and over 70% of the state's exports. Idaho's industrial economy is growing, with high-tech products leading the way. Since the late 1970s, Boise has emerged as a center for semiconductor manufacturing. Boise is the home of Micron Technology, the only U.S. manufacturer of dynamic random access memory (DRAM) chips. Micron at one time manufactured desktop computers, but with very limited success. Hewlett-Packard has operated a large plant in Boise since the 1970s, which is devoted primarily to LaserJet printers production. ON Semiconductor, whose worldwide headquarters in Pocatello, is a widely recognized innovator in modern integrated mixed-signal semiconductor products, mixed-signal foundry services, and structured digital products. Coldwater Creek, a women's clothing retailer, is headquartered in Sandpoint. Sun Microsystems (now a part of Oracle Corporation) has two offices in Boise and a parts depot in Pocatello. Sun brings $4 million in annual salaries and over $300 million of revenue to the state each year.
Wheat harvest on the Palouse
A number of Fortune 500 companies started in or trace their roots to Idaho, including JC Penney (as The Golden Rule) in Twin Falls, Safeway in American Falls, Albertsons in Boise, JR Simplot across southern Idaho, and Potlatch Corp. in Lewiston. Zimmerly Air Transport in Lewiston-Clarkston was one of the five companies in the merger centered around Varney Air Lines of Pasco, Washington, which became United Airlines and subsequently Varney Air Group that became Continental Airlines.

The state personal income tax ranges from 1.6% to 7.8% in eight income brackets. Idahoans may apply for state tax credits for taxes paid to other states, as well as for donations to Idaho state educational entities and some nonprofit youth and rehabilitation facilities.

The state sales tax is 6% with a very limited, selective local option up to 6.5%. Sales tax applies to the sale, rental or lease of tangible personal property and some services. Food is taxed, but prescription drugs are not. Hotel, motel, and campground accommodations are taxed at a higher rate (7% to 11%). Some jurisdictions impose local option sales tax.

The sales tax was introduced at 3% in 1965, easily approved by voters, where it remained until 1983. 

Idaho has a state gambling lottery which contributed $333.5 million in payments to all Idaho public schools and Idaho higher education from 1990 to 2006. 

==Energy==
Electricity generation in Idaho.
The energy landscape of Idaho is favorable to the development of renewable energy systems. The state is rich in renewable energy resources but has limited fossil fuel resources. The Snake River Plain and smaller river basins provide Idaho with some of the best hydroelectric power resources in the nation and its geologically active mountain areas have significant geothermal power and wind power potential. These realities have shaped much of the states current energy landscape.

Most of the energy consumed in Idaho is imported from other states. Imports account for more than 80% of total energy consumption, including all of Idaho's natural gas and petroleum supplies and more than half of its electricity. Of the electricity consumed in Idaho in 2005, 48% came from hydroelectricity, 42% was generated by burning coal and 9% was generated by burning natural gas. The remainder came from other renewable sources such as wind. 

The states numerous river basins allow hydroelectric power plants to provide 556,000 MWh, which amounts to about three-fourths of Idahos electricity generated in the state. Washington State provides most of the natural gas used in Idaho through one of the two major pipeline systems supplying the state. Although the state relies on out-of-state sources for its entire natural gas supply, it uses natural gas-fired plants to generate 127,000 MWh, or about ten percent of its output. Coal-fired generation and the states small array of wind turbines supplies the remainder of the states electricity output. The state produces 739,000 MWh but still needs to import half of its electricity from out-of-state to meet demand. 

While Idahos 515 trillion BTU total energy consumption is low compared with other states and represents just 0.5% of United States consumption, the state also has the nations 11th smallest population, 1.5 million, so its per capita energy consumption of 352 million Btu is currently just above the national average of 333 million Btu. As the 13thlargest state in terms of land area (83,570sq. mi=53,485,000ac), distance creates the additional problem of "line loss". When the length of an electrical transmission line is doubled, the resistance to an electric current passing through it is also doubled.

In addition, Idaho also has the 6th fastest growing population in the United States with the population expected to increase by 31% from 2008 to 2030. This projected increase in population will contribute to a 42% increase in demand by 2030, further straining Idahos finite hydroelectric resources. 

Idaho has an upper-boundary estimate of development potential to generate 44,320 GWh/year from 18,076 MW of wind power, and 7,467,000 GWh/year from solar power using 2,061,000 MW of photovoltaics (PV), including 3,224 MW of rooftop photovoltaics, and 1,267,000 MW of concentrated solar power. . 

 Idaho Wind Generation (GWh, Million kWh) 
 Year Capacity(MW) Total Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec 
 2009 147 313 21 18 25 24 22 17 14 19 21 33 34 38 
 2010 353 441 29 24 35 43 36 28 24 26 26 57 69 78 
 2011 618 1,308 90 120 132 140 120 112 83 78 71 118 145 105 
 2012 191 133 197 155 148 
 Source: . 

 Idaho Grid-Connected PV Capacity (MW) 
 Year Capacity Installed % Growth 
 2010 0.4 0.2 100% 
 2011 0.4 0 0% 

==Transportation==

The current state license plate design, modified since its introduction in 1991.
The Idaho Transportation Department is the government agency responsible for Idaho's transportation infrastructure, including operations and maintenance as well as planning for future needs. The agency is also responsible for overseeing the disbursement of federal, state, and grant funding for the transportation programs of the state. 

===Highways===
I-15 shield
US-95 shield
Idaho is among the few states in the nation without a major freeway linking the two largest metropolitan areas of Boise in the south and Coeur d'Alene in the north. U.S. Route 95 (US-95) links the two ends of the state, but like many other highways in Idaho, it is badly in need of repair and upgrade. In 2007, the Idaho Transportation Department stated that the state's highway infrastructure faces a $200 million per year shortfall in maintenance and upgrades. I-84 is the main highway linking the southeast and southwest portions of the state, along with I-86 and I-15.

Major federal aid highways in Idaho:

===Airports===
Major airports include the Boise Airport serving the southwest region of Idaho, and the Spokane International Airport (located in Spokane, Washington), which serves northern Idaho. Other airports with scheduled service are the Pullman-Moscow Regional Airport serving the Palouse; the Lewiston-Nez Perce County Airport, serving the Lewis-Clark Valley and north central and west central Idaho; The Magic Valley Regional Airport in Twin Falls; the Idaho Falls Regional Airport; and the Pocatello Regional Airport.

===Railroads===
Idaho is served by three transcontinental railroads. The Burlington Northern Santa Fe (BNSF) connects the Idaho Panhandle with Seattle, Portland, and Spokane to the west, and Minneapolis and Chicago to the east. The BNSF travels through Kootenai, Bonner, and Boundary counties. The Union Pacific Railroad crosses North Idaho entering from Canada through Boundary and Bonner, and proceeding to Spokane. Canadian Pacific Railway uses Union Pacific Railroad tracks in North Idaho carrying products from Alberta to Spokane and Portland, Oregon. Amtrak's Empire Builder crosses northern Idaho, with its only stop being in Sandpoint. Montana Rail Link also operates between Billings, Montana and Sandpoint, Idaho. The Idaho Panhandle remains the railway center of the Northwest.

The Union Pacific Railroad also crosses southern Idaho traveling between Portland, Oregon, Green River, Wyoming, and Ogden, Utah and serves Boise, Nampa, Twin Falls, and Pocatello. There has been a recent call to return Amtrak service to southern Idaho.

===Ports===
The Port of Lewiston is the farthest inland Pacific port on the west coast. A series of dams and locks on the Snake River and Columbia River facilitate barge travel from Lewiston to Portland, where goods are loaded on ocean-going vessels.

==Law and government==
The Idaho State Capitol building in Boise.

===State Constitution===
The Constitution of Idaho is roughly modeled on the national constitution with several additions. The constitution defines the form and functions of the state government, and may be amended through plebiscite. Notably, the state constitution presently requires the state government to maintain a balanced budget. As result, Idaho has limited debt (construction bonds, etc.).

===Idaho Code===
All of Idaho's state laws are contained in the Idaho Code. The code is amended through the Legislature with the approval of the Governor. Idaho still operates under its original (1889) state constitution.

===State government===
The constitution of Idaho provides for three branches of government: the executive, legislative and judicial branches. Idaho has a bicameral legislature, elected from 35 legislative districts, each represented by one senator and two representatives.

Since 1946, statewide elected constitutional officers have been elected to four-year terms. They include: Governor, Lieutenant Governor, Secretary of State, Controller (Auditor before 1994), Treasurer, Attorney General, and Superintendent of Public Instruction.

Last contested in 1966, Inspector of Mines was an original elected constitutional office. Afterward it was an appointed position and ultimately done away with entirely in 1974.

Idaho's government has an alcohol monopoly.

====Executive Branch====

The governor of Idaho serves a four-year term, and is elected during what is nationally referred to as midterm elections. As such, the governor is not elected in the same election year as the president of the United States. The current governor is Republican CL "Butch" Otter, who was elected in 2006 and re-elected in 2010.

====Legislative Branch====

Idaho's legislature is part-time. However, the session may be extended if necessary, and often is. Because of this, Idaho's legislators are considered "citizen legislators", meaning that their position as a legislator is not their main occupation.

Terms for both the Senate and House of Representatives are two years. Legislative elections occur every even numbered year.

The Idaho Legislature has been continuously controlled by the Republican Party since the late 1950s, although Democratic legislators are routinely elected from Boise, Pocatello, Blaine County and the northern Panhandle.

See also List of Idaho senators and representatives

====Judicial Branch====

The highest court in Idaho is the Idaho Supreme Court. There is also an intermediate appellate court, the Idaho Court of Appeals, which hears cases assigned to it from the Supreme Court. The state's District Courts serve seven judicial districts. 

====Counties====
Map of all Idaho's counties.
Idaho is divided into political jurisdictions designated as counties. Since 1919 there are 44 counties in the state, ranging in size from 410 to 8502 square miles (1062 to 22020 square kilometers).

 County County seat LicensePlateCode Yearfounded Population(2008 est.) PopulationPercentage Area (sq.mi.) Area % 
 Ada Boise 1A 1864 380920 25.00% 1060 1.21% 
 Adams Council 2A 1911 3499 0.23% 1,370 1.57 % 
 Bannock Pocatello 1B 1893 80,812 05.30 % 1,147 1.31 % 
 Bear Lake Paris 2B 1893 5,798 00.38 % 1,049 1.20 % 
 Benewah St. Maries 3B 1915 9,352 00.61 % 784 0.90 % 
 Bingham Blackfoot 4B 1885 43,903 02.88 % 2,120 2.42 % 
 Blaine Hailey 5B 1895 21,731 01.43 % 2,661 3.04 % 
 Boise Idaho City 6B 1864 7,504 00.49 % 1,907 2.18 % 
 Bonner Sandpoint 7B 1907 41,168 02.70 % 1,920 2.19 % 
 Bonneville Idaho Falls 8B 1911 99,135 06.51 % 1,901 2.17 % 
 Boundary Bonners Ferry 9B 1915 10,962 00.72 % 1,278 1.46 % 
 Butte Arco 10B 1917 2,751 00.18 % 2,234 2.55 % 
 Camas Fairfield 1C 1917 1,126 00.07 % 1,079 1.23 % 
 Canyon Caldwell 2C 1891 183,939 12.07 % 604 0.69 % 
 Caribou Soda Springs 3C 1919 6,826 00.45 % 1,799 2.06 % 
 Cassia Burley 4C 1879 21,348 01.40 % 2,580 2.95 % 
 Clark Dubois 5C 1919 910 00.06 % 1,765 2.02 % 
 Clearwater Orofino 6C 1911 8,176 00.54 % 2,488 2.84 % 
 Custer Challis 7C 1881 4,254 00.28 % 4,937 5.64 % 
 Elmore Mountain Home E 1889 28,997 01.90 % 3,101 3.54 % 
 Franklin Preston 1F 1913 12,454 00.82 % 668 0.76 % 
 Fremont St. Anthony 2F 1893 12,551 00.82 % 1,896 2.17 % 
 Gem Emmett 1G 1915 16,513 01.08 % 566 0.65 % 
 Gooding Gooding 2G 1913 14,295 00.94 % 734 0.84 % 
 Idaho Grangeville I 1861/1864 15,448 01.01 % 8,502 9.71 % 
 Jefferson Rigby 1J 1913 23,860 01.57 % 1,106 1.26 % 
 Jerome Jerome 2J 1919 20,468 01.34 % 602 0.69 % 
 Kootenai Coeur d'Alene K 1864 137,475 09.02 % 1,316 1.50 % 
 Latah Moscow 1L 1888 35,906 02.36 % 1,077 1.23 % 
 Lemhi Salmon 2L 1869 7,808 00.51 % 4,570 5.22 % 
 Lewis Nezperce 3L 1911 3,594 00.24 % 480 0.55 % 
 Lincoln Shoshone 4L 1895 4,503 00.30 % 1,206 1.38 % 
 Madison Rexburg 1M 1914 37,456 02.46 % 473 0.54 % 
 Minidoka Rupert 2M 1913 18,645 01.22 % 763 0.87 % 
 Nez Perce Lewiston N 1861/1864 38,975 02.56 % 856 0.98 % 
 Oneida Malad City 1O 1864 4,130 00.27 % 1,202 1.37 % 
 Owyhee Murphy 2O 1863 10,877 00.71 % 7,697 8.79 % 
 Payette Payette 1P 1917 22,966 01.51 % 410 0.47 % 
 Power American Falls 2P 1913 7,683 00.50 % 1,443 1.65 % 
 Shoshone Wallace S 1861/64 12913 0.85% 2636 3.01% 
 Teton Driggs 1T 1915 8833 0.58% 451 0.52% 
 Twin Falls Twin Falls 2T 1907 74284 4.87% 1928 2.20% 
 Valley Cascade V 1917 8862 0.58% 3734 4.27% 
 Washington Weiser W 1879 10206 0.67% 1474 1.68% 

Total Counties: 44. Total 2008 Population Est.: 1523816. Total Area: .

Three counties were first designated as such by the Washington Territorial Legislature in 1861; they were subsequently redesignated as Idaho counties in 1864. The 1861 Nez Perc county has since been broken up into Nez Perc, Lewis, Boundary, Benewah, Latah, Kootenai, and Clearwater counties.

Idaho license plates begin with a county designation based on the first letter of the county's name. Where a letter is at the beginning of more than one name, a number accompanies precedingly in alphabetical order. This reflects an anomalous coincidental situation wherein 10 counties begin with B, seven with C and four with L, which is 21 of the 44 counties.

====Politics====

 Presidential elections results 
 Year Republican Democratic 
 2012 64.5% 420390 32.6% 212699 
 2008 61.5% 403012 36.1% 236440 
 2004 68.38% 409235 30.26% 181098 
 2000 67.17% 336937 27.64% 138637 
 1996 52.18% 256595 33.65% 165,443 
 1992 42.03% 202,645 28.42% 137,013 
 1988 62.08% 253,881 36.01% 147,272 
 1984 72.36% 297,523 26.39% 108,510 
 1980 66.46% 290,699 25.19% 110,192 
 1976 59.88% 204,151 37.12% 126,549 
 1972 64.24% 199,384 26.04% 80,826 
 1968 56.79% 165,369 30.66% 89,273 
 1964 49.08% 143,557 50.92% 148,920 
 1960 53.78% 161,597 46.22% 138,853 

After the Civil War, many Midwestern and Southern Democrats moved to the Idaho Territory. As a result, the early territorial legislatures were solidly Democrat-controlled. In contrast, most of the territorial governors were appointed by Republican presidents and were Republicans themselves. This led to sometimes-bitter clashes between the two parties, including a range war with the Democrats backing the sheepherders and the Republicans the cattlemen. That ended with the "Diamondfield" Jack Davis murder trial. In the 1880s, Republicans became more prominent in local politics.

Since statehood, the Republican Party has usually been the dominant party in Idaho, as there was a polar shift in social and political stance between the two parties, when the Democrats became more liberal and the Republicans more conservative. At one time, Idaho had two Democratic parties, one being the mainstream and the other called the Anti-Mormon Democrats, lasting into the early 20th century. In the 1890s and early 1900s, the Populist Party enjoyed prominence while the Democratic Party maintained a brief dominance in the 1930s during the Great Depression. Since World War II, most statewide elected officials have been Republicans. The last time the Democratic Party held a majority in either house of the state legislature was the House of Representatives in 1958 by one seat. However, Democrats did hold the governorship from 1971 to 1995, despite the state's Republican tilt.

Idaho Congressional delegations have also been generally Republican since statehood. Several Idaho Democrats have had electoral success in the House over the years, but the Senate delegation has been a Republican stronghold for decades. Several Idaho Republicans, including current Senator Mike Crapo, have won reelection to the Senate, but only Frank Church has won reelection as a Democrat. Church was the last Idaho Democrat to win a U.S. Senate race, in 1974. Walt Minnick's 2008 win in the First Congressional District was the state's first Democratic Congressional victory in 16 years.

In modern times, Idaho has been a reliably Republican state in presidential politics as well. It has not supported a Democrat for president since 1964. Even in that election, Lyndon Johnson defeated Barry Goldwater in the state by fewer than two percentage points, compared to a landslide nationally. In 2004, Republican George W. Bush carried Idaho by a margin of 38 percentage points and with 68.4% of the vote, winning in 43 of 44 counties. Only Blaine County, which contains the Sun Valley ski resort, supported John Kerry, who owns a home in the area. In 2008 Barack Obama's 36.1 percent . showing was the best for a Democratic presidential candidate in Idaho since 1976. However, Republican margins were narrower in 1992 and 1996.

In the 2006 elections, Republicans, led by gubernatorial candidate CL "Butch" Otter, won all the state's constitutional offices and retained both of the state's seats in the United States House of Representatives. However, Democrats picked up several seats in the Idaho Legislature, notably in the Boise area. 

Republicans lost one of the House seats in 2008 to Minnick, but Republican Jim Risch retained Larry Craig's Senate seat for the GOP by a comfortable margin. . 

==Important cities and towns==

 Sunset in Coeur d'Alene 
Pocatello
Post Falls
Idaho Falls

; Population > 100,000 (urbanized area)

* Boise (state capital)

; Population > 50,000 (urbanized area)

* Idaho Falls  Location of the main offices of the Idaho National Laboratory
* Nampa  Home of Northwest Nazarene University
* Pocatello  Home of Idaho State University
* Meridian  Suburb of Boise, Fastest growing city in Idaho

; Population > 30,000 (urbanized area)

* Caldwell  Home of the College of Idaho
* Coeur d'Alene  Home of North Idaho College, major tourist hub
* Lewiston  Home of Lewis-Clark State College, Seaport
* Twin Falls  Home of College of Southern Idaho, BASE jumping

; Population > 10,000 (urbanized area)

; Smaller Towns and Cities

==National Parks, Reserves, Monuments and Historic sites==
150px
150px

*California National Historic Trail
*City of Rocks National Reserve
*Craters of the Moon National Monument
*Hagerman Fossil Beds National Monument
*Lewis and Clark National Historic Trail
*Minidoka National Historic Site
*Nez Perce National Historical Park
*Oregon National Historic Trail
*Yellowstone National Park

==National Recreation Areas==
*Hells Canyon National Recreation Area
*Sawtooth National Recreation Area

==National Wildlife Refuges==
*Bear Lake National Wildlife Refuge
*Camas National Wildlife Refuge
*Deer Flat National Wildlife Refuge
*Grays Lake National Wildlife Refuge
*Kootenai National Wildlife Refuge
*Minidoka National Wildlife Refuge

==National Conservation Areas==
*Snake River Birds of Prey National Conservation Area

===State parks===
Bear Lake viewed from Bear Lake State Park.

==Education==

===Colleges and universities===
The Jacob Spori Building at Brigham Young University-Idahoin Rexburg.
Idaho State University in Pocatello
University of Idaho Arboretumin Moscow
Bronco Stadium at Boise State University in Boise
The Idaho State Board of Education oversees three comprehensive universities. The University of Idaho in Moscow was the first university in the state (founded in 1889). It opened its doors in 1892 and is the land-grant institution and primary research university of the state. Idaho State University in Pocatello opened in 1901 as the Academy of Idaho, attained four-year status in 1947 and university status in 1963. Boise State University is the most recent school to attain university status in Idaho. The school opened in 1932 as Boise Junior College and became Boise State University in 1974. Lewis-Clark State College in Lewiston is the only public, non-university 4-year college in Idaho. It opened as a normal school in 1893.

Idaho has three regional community colleges: North Idaho College in Coeur d'Alene; College of Southern Idaho in Twin Falls; and College of Western Idaho in Nampa, which opened in 2009. A public technical college, Eastern Idaho Technical College, operates in Idaho Falls.

Private institutions in Idaho are Boise Bible College, affiliated with congregations of the Christian churches and churches of Christ; Brigham Young University-Idaho in Rexburg, which is affiliated with the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and a sister college to Brigham Young University; The College of Idaho in Caldwell, which still maintains a loose affiliation with the Presbyterian Church; Northwest Nazarene University in Nampa; and New Saint Andrews College in Moscow, of reformed Christian theological background.

==Sports==
Central Idaho is home to one of North America's oldest ski resorts, Sun Valley, where the world's first chairlift was installed in 1936. Other noted outdoor sites include Hell's Canyon, the Salmon River, and its embarkation point of Riggins.

 Club Sport League 
 Boise Hawks Baseball Northwest - (Class A) 
 Boise State Broncos NCAA Div I FBS  MWC 
 Idaho Vandals NCAA Div I FBS  WAC 
 Idaho State Bengals NCAA Div I FCS  Big Sky 
 Idaho Falls Chukars Baseball Pioneer - (Rookie) 
 Idaho Stampede Basketball NBA D-League 
 Idaho Steelheads Ice hockey ECHL 

Boise is the host to the largest 5 km run for women, the St. Luke's Women's Fitness Celebration.

High school sports are overseen by the Idaho High School Activities Association (IHSAA).

==Official state emblems==

*State Amphibian: Tiger salamander
*State Bird: Mountain Bluebird 
*State Dance: Square Dance
*State Fish: Cutthroat trout
*State Flower: Syringa (Philadelphus lewisii)
*State Fossil: Hagerman Horse (Equus simplicidens)
*State Fruit: Huckleberry
*State Gem: Idaho star garnet
*State Horse: Appaloosa
*State Motto: Esto perpetua ("Let it be perpetual") 
*State Insect: Monarch butterfly
*State Raptor: Peregrine falcon
*State Song: Here We Have Idaho
*State Tree: Western White Pine
*State Vegetable: Potato

==Idahoans==

==See also==

*Outline of Idaho &ndash; organized list of topics about Idaho
*Index of Idaho-related articles
* List of companies based in Idaho

==References==

==External links==

* .
*
* .
* .
* .
*  Annotated list of searchable databases produced by Idaho state agencies.
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .
*

 



[[Italian]]

Italian may refer to:
* Anything of, from, or related to the country and nation of Italy
** Italian people, an ethnic group
** Italian language, a Romance language
*** Regional Italian, regional variants of the Italian language
** Languages of Italy, languages and dialects spoken in Italy
** Italian cuisine, traditional foods
** Folklore of Italy, the folklore and urban legends of Italy
** Mythology of Italy, traditional religion

== Chess ==
* Italian Game, a family of chess openings
* Italian Gambit, a chess opening

==Other uses==
* Italian dressing, a vinaigrette-type salad dressing
* Italian or Italian-A, alternative names for the Ping-Pong virus, an extinct computer virus

== See also ==
* The Italian (disambiguation)
* Italia (disambiguation)
* Italic (disambiguation)
* 
* 



[[Interrogatories]]

In law, interrogatories (also known as requests for further information) are a formal set of written questions propounded by one litigant and required to be answered by an adversary, in order to clarify matters of fact and help to determine in advance what facts will be presented at any trial in the case.

In civil cases, the issues to be decided can potentially be more complex than in criminal cases. For example if a person is charged with speeding, in a hypothetical case the prosecution has to prove that the person was the driver of the motor vehicle and that it was being driven in excess of the proper speed without any lawful excuse.

==Example==
One example is compensation arising out of a road accident. In reality, a road traffic accident is rarely complicated. However to demonstrate the concept, this section assumes there is a car accident in a Common Law jurisdiction that does use complicated concepts ...

In this hypothetical claim the injured person would usually rely on the fact that the driver to be held responsible has (in the injured person's opinion) committed the tort of negligence. If they did that, the law requires the injured person to show that the driver owed them a duty of care and breached it. In practical reality, the courts accept that drivers owe other road users and pedestrians a duty of care, and the case would come down to whether the driver drove in accordance with the standard of a reasonable driver, and whether the injured person's injuries are a foreseeable consequence of the driving.

However, the manner in which the injured person could seek to prove those things is quite variable. In the simplest case the injured person could allege that the driver went too fast, failed to control the car properly or failed to keep lookout. The driver may have a defense to those allegations, perhaps if the accident occurred at low speed, and was unavoidable (maybe due to some third party intervention). The injured person may, however, argue that the driver was still responsible (perhaps the driver should have used the horn of the vehicle to alert the third party), or there may be other allegations.

The pleadings of the parties are intended to let the other parties know what each side will seek to prove at trial, and what case they have to answer.

However, in a complicated case, the pleadings may not give enough information. In the above example, the pleading may allege:
:The driver drove negligently. The details of the negligence are,
::#failing to drive carefully
::#driving too fast
::#failing to make proper use of the car's controls
::#failing to take reasonable steps to alert the third party so as to avoid the accident.

The driver is told the broad outlines of the case, but still does not know what allegation is being made regarding alerting the third party.

The driver can therefore issue an interrogatory to require the injured party to state exactly what it is that the driver did not do and should have done.

In the hypothetical example, this would assist the litigation process, because for example, if the injured person states that the driver ought to have alerted the third party, the driver may be aware that the law imposes no such duty, and can issue a motion (or application) to the court to have that part of the claim dismissed.

==Specific jurisdictions==
===England and Wales===
In England and Wales, this procedure is governed by Part 18 of the Civil Procedure Rules 1998. It is known as a Request for Further Information

In the Request for Further Information procedure, use of standard pre-printed forms is not common, and any such request would almost certainly be looked upon critically by the courts, as use of standard forms rather than requests tailored specifically to the case is likely to offend against the 'Overriding Objective' in that it is unlikely to be proportionate to the case, and instead result in the parties or their lawyers having to spend time, money and resources in answering the questions. The way the rules work, this could easily result in the party making the request having to pay both their own costs and the costs of the opponent - even if they win the case at the end.

In England and Wales, firstly the person wanting to know the information requests it in writing, either in letter form or, more usually, on a blank document with the questions on one side of the page and space for the answers on the other side. A deadline is set for the opponent to answer the request. If they fail to answer, the person requesting can make an Application on Notice to the court and ask the procedural judge to make an order compelling the opponent to answer the questions. Whether the judge will make an order is discretionary and will be determined in accordance with the overriding objective, and in the context of the questions asked.

In particular, the procedure is not intended to be used to ask questions that would ordinarily be dealt with at trial.

===United States===
In the United States, use of interrogatories is governed by the law where the case has been filed. All federal courts operate under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, which places various limitations on the use of this device, permitting individual jurisdictions to limit interrogatories to twenty-five questions per party. Interrogatories are typically "verified", meaning that the response will include an affidavit and will therefore be under oath (required for example under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 33 Rule 33. Interrogatories to Parties. Cornell Legal Information Institute. ); the affidavit may distinguish interrogatories from requests for admission, which may not be under oath. Interrogatories. 

California, on the other hand, operates under the Civil Discovery Act of 1986 (a revision of an older 1957 act), which is codified in the California Code of Civil Procedure. The statutes allow up to thirty-five special interrogatories per party, but this limit may be exceeded simply by filing a declaration of necessity. However, because the declaration of necessity must be executed under penalty of perjury, it can expose an attorney to personal sanctions for propounding an excessive number of harassing and burdensome interrogatories. 

In nearly all U.S. jurisdictions, interrogatories are called just that and are supposed to be custom-written, although many questions can be reused from one case to the next. In the U.S. states of California, New Jersey, and Florida, the courts have promulgated standard "form" interrogatories. In California these come on an official court form and a party may ask another party to answer any of them by checking the appropriate boxes. The advantage of the California form interrogatories is that they do not count against the limit of 35; the disadvantage is that they are written in a very generic fashion, so about half of the questions are useful only in the simplest cases. In turn, California calls custom-written interrogatories "specially prepared interrogatories."

Because interrogatories are so heavily used in American discovery, there are two major compilations of generic interrogatories covering almost every conceivable type of legal case: Bender's Forms of Discovery: Interrogatories (published by LexisNexis) and Pattern Discovery (published by West).

==See also==
* Subpoena duces tecum
* Subpoena ad testificandum
* Request for admissions

== References ==



[[List of infectious diseases]]

Infectious diseases arranged by name.

There are 215 entries in this list, though some entries such as 'Common cold' include a number of distinct pathogens.

 DISEASE SOURCE OF DISEASE 
 Acinetobacter infections Acinetobacter baumannii 
 Actinomycosis Actinomyces israelii, Actinomyces gerencseriae and Propionibacterium propionicus 
 African sleeping sickness (African trypanosomiasis) Trypanosoma brucei 
 AIDS (Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) HIV (Human immunodeficiency virus) 
 Amebiasis Entamoeba histolytica 
 Anaplasmosis Anaplasma genus 
 Anthrax Bacillus anthracis 
 Arcanobacterium haemolyticum infection Arcanobacterium haemolyticum 
 Argentine hemorrhagic fever Junin virus 
 Ascariasis Ascaris lumbricoides 
 Aspergillosis Aspergillus genus 
 Astrovirus infection Astroviridae family 
 Babesiosis Babesia genus 
 Bacillus cereus infection Bacillus cereus 
 Bacterial pneumonia multiple bacteria 
 Bacterial vaginosis (BV) multiple bacteria 
 Bacteroides infection Bacteroides genus 
 Balantidiasis Balantidium coli 
 Baylisascaris infection Baylisascaris genus 
 BK virus infection BK virus 
 Black piedra Piedraia hortae 
 Blastocystis hominis infection Blastocystis hominis 
 Blastomycosis Blastomyces dermatitidis 
 Bolivian hemorrhagic fever Machupo virus 
 Borrelia infection Borrelia genus 
 Botulism (and Infant botulism) Clostridium botulinum; Note: Botulism is not an infection by Clostridium botulinum but caused by the intake of botulinum toxin. 
 Brazilian hemorrhagic fever Sabia 
 Brucellosis Brucella genus 
 Bubonic plague the bacterial family Enterobacteriaceae 
 Burkholderia infection usually Burkholderia cepacia and other Burkholderia species 
 Buruli ulcer Mycobacterium ulcerans 
 Calicivirus infection (Norovirus and Sapovirus) Caliciviridae family 
 Campylobacteriosis Campylobacter genus 
 Candidiasis (Moniliasis; Thrush) usually Candida albicans and other Candida species 
 Cat-scratch disease Bartonella henselae 
 Cellulitis usually Group A Streptococcus and Staphylococcus 
 Chagas Disease (American trypanosomiasis) Trypanosoma cruzi 
 Chancroid Haemophilus ducreyi 
 Chickenpox Varicella zoster virus (VZV) 
 Chlamydia Chlamydia trachomatis 
 Chlamydophila pneumoniae infection (Taiwan acute respiratory agent or TWAR) Chlamydophila pneumoniae 
 Cholera Vibrio cholerae 
 Chromoblastomycosis usually Fonsecaea pedrosoi 
 Clonorchiasis Clonorchis sinensis 
 Clostridium difficile infection Clostridium difficile 
 Coccidioidomycosis Coccidioides immitis and Coccidioides posadasii 
 Colorado tick fever (CTF) Colorado tick fever virus (CTFV) 
 Common cold (Acute viral rhinopharyngitis; Acute coryza) usually rhinoviruses and coronaviruses. 
 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) PRNP 
 Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus 
 Cryptococcosis Cryptococcus neoformans 
 Cryptosporidiosis Cryptosporidium genus 
 Cutaneous larva migrans (CLM) usually Ancylostoma braziliense; multiple other parasites 
 Cyclosporiasis Cyclospora cayetanensis 
 Cysticercosis Taenia solium 
 Cytomegalovirus infection Cytomegalovirus 
 Dengue fever Dengue viruses (DEN-1, DEN-2, DEN-3 and DEN-4)  Flaviviruses 
 Dientamoebiasis Dientamoeba fragilis 
 Diphtheria Corynebacterium diphtheriae 
 Diphyllobothriasis Diphyllobothrium 
 Dracunculiasis Dracunculus medinensis 
 Ebola hemorrhagic fever Ebolavirus (EBOV) 
 Echinococcosis Echinococcus genus 
 Ehrlichiosis Ehrlichia genus 
 Enterobiasis (Pinworm infection) Enterobius vermicularis 
 Enterococcus infection Enterococcus genus 
 Enterovirus infection Enterovirus genus 
 Epidemic typhus Rickettsia prowazekii 
 Erythema infectiosum (Fifth disease) Parvovirus B19 
 Exanthem subitum (Sixth disease) Human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6) and Human herpesvirus 7 (HHV-7) 
 Fasciolopsiasis Fasciolopsis buski 
 Fasciolosis Fasciola hepatica and Fasciola gigantica 
 Fatal familial insomnia (FFI) PRNP 
 Filariasis Filarioidea superfamily 
 Food poisoning by Clostridium perfringens Clostridium perfringens 
 Free-living amebic infection multiple 
 Fusobacterium infection Fusobacterium genus 
 Gas gangrene (Clostridial myonecrosis) usually Clostridium perfringens; other Clostridium species 
 Geotrichosis Geotrichum candidum 
 Gerstmann-Strussler-Scheinker syndrome (GSS) PRNP 
 Giardiasis Giardia intestinalis 
 Glanders Burkholderia mallei 
 Gnathostomiasis Gnathostoma spinigerum and Gnathostoma hispidum 
 Gonorrhea Neisseria gonorrhoeae 
 Granuloma inguinale (Donovanosis) Klebsiella granulomatis 
 Group A streptococcal infection Streptococcus pyogenes 
 Group B streptococcal infection Streptococcus agalactiae 
 Haemophilus influenzae infection Haemophilus influenzae 
 Hand, foot and mouth disease (HFMD) Enteroviruses, mainly Coxsackie A virus and Enterovirus 71 (EV71) 
 Hantavirus Pulmonary Syndrome (HPS) Sin Nombre virus 
 Heartland virus disease Heartland virus 
 Helicobacter pylori infection Helicobacter pylori 
 Hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS) Escherichia coli O157:H7, O111 and O104:H4 
 Hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS) Bunyaviridae family 
 Hepatitis A Hepatitis A Virus 
 Hepatitis B Hepatitis B Virus 
 Hepatitis C Hepatitis C Virus 
 Hepatitis D Hepatitis D Virus 
 Hepatitis E Hepatitis E Virus 
 Herpes simplex Herpes simplex virus 1 and 2 (HSV-1 and HSV-2) 
 Histoplasmosis Histoplasma capsulatum 
 Hookworm infection Ancylostoma duodenale and Necator americanus 
 Human bocavirus infection Human bocavirus (HBoV) 
 Human ewingii ehrlichiosis Ehrlichia ewingii 
 Human granulocytic anaplasmosis (HGA) Anaplasma phagocytophilum 
 Human metapneumovirus infection Human metapneumovirus (hMPV) 
 Human monocytic ehrlichiosis Ehrlichia chaffeensis 
 Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection Human papillomavirus (HPV) 
 Human parainfluenza virus infection Human parainfluenza viruses (HPIV) 
 Hymenolepiasis Hymenolepis nana and Hymenolepis diminuta 
 Epstein-Barr Virus Infectious Mononucleosis (Mono) Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) 
 Influenza (flu) Orthomyxoviridae family 
 Isosporiasis Isospora belli 
 Kawasaki disease unknown; evidence supports that it is infectious 
 Keratitis multiple 
 Kingella kingae infection Kingella kingae 
 Kuru PRNP 
 Lassa fever Lassa virus 
 Legionellosis (Legionnaires' disease) Legionella pneumophila 
 Legionellosis (Pontiac fever) Legionella pneumophila 
 Leishmaniasis Leishmania genus 
 Leprosy Mycobacterium leprae and Mycobacterium lepromatosis 
 Leptospirosis Leptospira genus 
 Listeriosis Listeria monocytogenes 
 Lyme disease (Lyme borreliosis) usually Borrelia burgdorferi and other Borrelia species 
 Lymphatic filariasis (Elephantiasis) Wuchereria bancrofti and Brugia malayi 
 Lymphocytic choriomeningitis Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) 
 Malaria Plasmodium genus 
 Marburg hemorrhagic fever (MHF) Marburg virus 
 Measles Measles virus 
 Melioidosis (Whitmore's disease) Burkholderia pseudomallei 
 Meningitis multiple 
 Meningococcal disease Neisseria meningitidis 
 Metagonimiasis usually Metagonimus yokagawai 
 Microsporidiosis Microsporidia phylum 
 Molluscum contagiosum (MC) Molluscum contagiosum virus (MCV) 
 Monkeypox Monkeypox virus 
 Mumps Mumps virus 
 Murine typhus (Endemic typhus) Rickettsia typhi 
 Mycoplasma pneumonia Mycoplasma pneumoniae 
 Mycetoma numerous species of bacteria (Actinomycetoma) and fungi (Eumycetoma) 
 Myiasis parasitic dipterous fly larvae 
 Neonatal conjunctivitis (Ophthalmia neonatorum) most commonly Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae 
 (New) Variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (vCJD, nvCJD) PRNP 
 Nocardiosis usually Nocardia asteroides and other Nocardia species 
 Onchocerciasis (River blindness) Onchocerca volvulus 
 Paracoccidioidomycosis (South American blastomycosis) Paracoccidioides brasiliensis 
 Paragonimiasis usually Paragonimus westermani and other Paragonimus species 
 Pasteurellosis Pasteurella genus 
 Pediculosis capitis (Head lice) Pediculus humanus capitis 
 Pediculosis corporis (Body lice) Pediculus humanus corporis 
 Pediculosis pubis (Pubic lice, Crab lice) Phthirus pubis 
 Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) multiple 
 Pertussis (Whooping cough) Bordetella pertussis 
 Plague Yersinia pestis 
 Pneumococcal infection Streptococcus pneumoniae 
 Pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP) Pneumocystis jirovecii 
 Pneumonia multiple 
 Poliomyelitis Poliovirus 
 Prevotella infection Prevotella genus 
 Primary amoebic meningoencephalitis (PAM) usually Naegleria fowleri 
 Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy JC virus 
 Psittacosis Chlamydophila psittaci 
 Q fever Coxiella burnetii 
 Rabies Rabies virus 
 Rat-bite fever Streptobacillus moniliformis and Spirillum minus 
 Respiratory syncytial virus infection Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) 
 Rhinosporidiosis Rhinosporidium seeberi 
 Rhinovirus infection Rhinovirus 
 Rickettsial infection Rickettsia genus 
 Rickettsialpox Rickettsia akari 
 Rift Valley fever (RVF) Rift Valley fever virus 
 Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF) Rickettsia rickettsii 
 Rotavirus infection Rotavirus 
 Rubella Rubella virus 
 Salmonellosis Salmonella genus 
 SARS (Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome) SARS coronavirus 
 Scabies Sarcoptes scabiei 
 Schistosomiasis Schistosoma genus 
 Sepsis multiple 
 Shigellosis (Bacillary dysentery) Shigella genus 
 Shingles (Herpes zoster) Varicella zoster virus (VZV) 
 Smallpox (Variola) Variola major or Variola minor 
 Sporotrichosis Sporothrix schenckii 
 Staphylococcal food poisoning Staphylococcus genus 
 Staphylococcal infection Staphylococcus genus 
 Strongyloidiasis Strongyloides stercoralis 
 Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis Measles virus 
 Syphilis Treponema pallidum 
 Taeniasis Taenia genus 
 Tetanus (Lockjaw) Clostridium tetani 
 Tinea barbae (Barber's itch) usually Trichophyton genus 
 Tinea capitis (Ringworm of the Scalp) usually Trichophyton tonsurans 
 Tinea corporis (Ringworm of the Body) usually Trichophyton genus 
 Tinea cruris (Jock itch) usually Epidermophyton floccosum, Trichophyton rubrum, and Trichophyton mentagrophytes 
 Tinea manum (Ringworm of the Hand) Trichophyton rubrum 
 Tinea nigra usually Hortaea werneckii 
 Tinea pedis (Athletes foot) usually Trichophyton genus 
 Tinea unguium (Onychomycosis) usually Trichophyton genus 
 Tinea versicolor (Pityriasis versicolor) Malassezia genus 
 Toxocariasis (Ocular Larva Migrans (OLM)) Toxocara canis or Toxocara cati 
 Toxocariasis (Visceral Larva Migrans (VLM)) Toxocara canis or Toxocara cati 
 Trinochccliasis Toxoplasma gondii 
 Trichinlosis Trichinella spiralis 
 Trichomoniasis Trichomonas vaginalis 
 Trichuriasis (Whipworm infection) Trichuris trichiura 
 Tuberculosis usually Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
 Tularemia Francisella tularensis 
 Ureaplasma urealyticum infection Ureaplasma urealyticum 
 Valley fever Coccidioides immitis or Coccidioides posadasii. 
 Venezuelan equine encephalitis Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus 
 Venezuelan hemorrhagic fever Guanarito virus 
 Viral pneumonia multiple viruses 
 West Nile Fever West Nile virus 
 White piedra (Tinea blanca) Trichosporon beigelii 
 Yersinia pseudotuberculosis infection Yersinia pseudotuberculosis 
 Yersiniosis Yersinia enterocolitica 
 Yellow fever Yellow fever virus 
 Yu Tian Disease Yung-Chia Ma 
 Zygomycosis Mucorales order (Mucormycosis) and Entomophthorales order (Entomophthoramycosis) 

...
.
.
.
.
..
.
.
.
.
.
.

==References==

*Chin J. B., ed. Control of Communicable Diseases Manual. 17th ed. APHA Public Health Association Press; 2000. ISBN 978-0-87553-189-2
*Red Book|Red Book: 2009 Report of the Committee on Infectious Diseases]. 2009. American Academy of Pediatrics. 28th ed. ISBN 978-1-58110-306-9
*Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. http://www.cdc.gov. Retrieved on August 4, 2009.

 

[[Intel]]

Intel Corporation is an American multinational semiconductor chip maker corporation headquartered in Santa Clara, California. Intel is one of the world's largest and highest valued semiconductor chip makers, based on revenue. It is the inventor of the x86 series of microprocessors, the processors found in most personal computers.

Intel Corporation, founded on July 18, 1968, is a portmanteau of Integrated Electronics (the fact that "intel" is the term for intelligence information also made the name appropriate). Intel also makes motherboard chipsets, network interface controllers and integrated circuits, flash memory, graphic chips, embedded processors and other devices related to communications and computing. Founded by semiconductor pioneers Robert Noyce and Gordon Moore and widely associated with the executive leadership and vision of Andrew Grove, Intel combines advanced chip design capability with a leading-edge manufacturing capability. Though Intel was originally known primarily to engineers and technologists, its "Intel Inside" advertising campaign of the 1990s made it a household name, along with its Pentium processors.

Intel was an early developer of SRAM and DRAM memory chips, and this represented the majority of its business until 1981. Although Intel created the world's first commercial microprocessor chip in 1971, it was not until the success of the personal computer (PC) that this became its primary business. During the 1990s, Intel invested heavily in new microprocessor designs fostering the rapid growth of the computer industry. During this period Intel became the dominant supplier of microprocessors for PCs, and was known for aggressive and sometimes illegal tactics in defense of its market position, particularly against Advanced Micro Devices (AMD), as well as a struggle with Microsoft for control over the direction of the PC industry. 

The 2013 rankings of the world's 100 most valuable brands published by Millward Brown Optimor showed the company's brand value at number 61. 

Intel has also begun research into electrical transmission and generation. Intel has recently introduced a 3-D transistor that improves performance and energy efficiency. Intel has begun mass-producing this 3-D transistor, named the Tri-Gate transistor, with their 22 nm process, which is currently used in their 3rd generation core processors initially released on April 29, 2012. Charlie Demerjian, Semi Accurate. "Intel moves transistors from 2D to 3D and more." Aug 18, 2011. Retrieved Aug 24, 2011. In 2011, SpectraWatt Inc., a solar cell spinoff of Intel, filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 11. EE Times. "Intel's solar spinoff files for bankruptcy." August 23, 2011. Retrieved August 25, 2011. In June 2013, Intel unveiled its fourth generation of Intel Core processors (Haswell) in an event named Computex in Taipei. 

The Open Source Technology Center at Intel hosts PowerTOP and LatencyTOP, and supports other open-source projects such as Wayland, Intel Array Building Blocks, Threading Building Blocks (TBB), and Xen. 
"What is 01.org?"
 
Less Watts: "About the Intel Open Source Technology Center"
 

==Corporate history==

=== Origins ===
Andy Grove, Robert Noyce and Gordon Moore in 1978
The old Intel logo used from July 18, 1968 until December 2005
Intel was originally founded in Mountain View, California in 1968 by Gordon E. Moore (of "Moore's Law" fame, a chemist and physicist), Robert Noyce (a physicist and co-inventor of the integrated circuit), Arthur Rock (investor and venture capitalist), and Max Palevsky. Moore and Noyce came from Fairchild Semiconductor and were Intel's first two employees. Rock was not an employee, but he was an investor and Chairman of the Board. The total initial investment in Intel was $2.5 million convertible debentures and $10,000 from Rock. Just 2 years later, Intel completed their initial public offering (IPO), raising $6.8 million ($23.50 per share). Intel's third employee was Andy Grove, The Andrew Grove article explains how a clerical error exchanged the employee ID numbers of Grove and the fourth employee, Leslie L. Vadsz, whom Grove had hired. a chemical engineer, who later ran the company through much of the 1980s and the high-growth 1990s.

Moore and Noyce initially wanted to name the company "Moore Noyce". homophone for "more noise"  an ill-suited name for an electronics company, since noise in electronics is usually very undesirable and typically associated with bad interference. Instead they used the name NM Electronics for almost a year, before deciding to call their company Integrated Electronics or "Intel" for short. Since "Intel" was already trademarked by the hotel chain Intelco, they had to buy the rights for the name. 

===Early history===
At its founding, Intel was distinguished by its ability to make semiconductors. Its first product, in 1969, was the 3101 Schottky TTL bipolar 64-bit static random-access memory (SRAM), which was nearly twice as fast as earlier Schottky diode implementations by Fairchild and the Electrotechnical Laboratory in Tsukuba, Japan. 1969  Schottky-Barrier Diode Doubles the Speed of TTL Memory & Logic Computer History Museum. Retrieved September 23, 2011. Schottky Bipolar 3101, 3101A RAMs Google Docs. In the same year Intel also produced the 3301 Schottky bipolar 1024-bit read-only memory (ROM) Schottky Bipolar 3301A ROM Google Docs. and the first commercial metaloxidesemiconductor field-effect transistor (MOSFET) silicon gate SRAM chip, the 256-bit 1101. Silicon Gate MOS 1101A RAM Google Docs. Intel's business grew during the 1970s as it expanded and improved its manufacturing processes and produced a wider range of products, still dominated by various memory devices.
Federico Faggin, the designer of Intel 4004. 
While Intel created the first commercially available microprocessor (Intel 4004) in 1971 and one of the first microcomputers in 1972, by the early 1980s its business was dominated by dynamic random-access memory chips. However, increased competition from Japanese semiconductor manufacturers had, by 1983, dramatically reduced the profitability of this market, and the sudden success of the IBM personal computer convinced then-CEO Andrew Grove to shift the company's focus to microprocessors, and to change fundamental aspects of that business model.

By the end of the 1980s this decision had proven successful. Buoyed by its fortuitous position as microprocessor supplier to IBM and IBM's competitors within the rapidly growing personal computer market, Intel embarked on a 10-year period of unprecedented growth as the primary (and most profitable) hardware supplier to the PC industry. By launching its Intel Inside marketing campaign in 1991, Intel was able to associate brand loyalty with consumer selection, so that by the end of the 1993s, its line of Pentium processors had become a household name.

===Slowing demand and challenges to dominance===
After 2000, growth in demand for high-end microprocessors slowed. Competitors, notably AMD (Intel's largest competitor in its primary x86 architecture market), garnered significant market share, initially in low-end and mid-range processors but ultimately across the product range, and Intel's dominant position in its core market was greatly reduced. In the early 2000s then-CEO Craig Barrett attempted to diversify the company's business beyond semiconductors, but few of these activities were ultimately successful.

Intel had also for a number of years been embroiled in litigation. US law did not initially recognize intellectual property rights related to microprocessor topology (circuit layouts), until the Semiconductor Chip Protection Act of 1984, a law sought by Intel and the Semiconductor Industry Association (SIA). The Senate Report on the bill (S.Rep. No. 425, 98th Cong., 2d Sess. (1984)) stated: "In the semiconductor industry, innovation is indispensable; research breakthroughs are essential to the life and health of the industry. But research and innovation in the design of semiconductor chips are threatened by the inadequacies of existing legal protection against piracy and unauthorized copying. This problem, which is so critical to this essential sector of the American economy, is addressed by the Semiconductor Chip Protection Act of 1984. ...bill would prohibit "chip piracy"--the unauthorized copying and distribution of semiconductor chip products copied from the original creators of such works." Quoted in Brooktree Corp. v. Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., 977 F.2d 1555, 17 (Fed. Cir. 1992). See also Brooktree, 2122 (copyright and patent law ineffective). During the late 1980s and 1990s (after this law was passed) Intel also sued companies that tried to develop competitor chips to the 80386 CPU. "Bill Gates Speaks", page 29. ISBN 978-0-471-40169-8 The lawsuits were noted to significantly burden the competition with legal bills, even if Intel lost the suits. Antitrust allegations had been simmering since the early 1990s and had been the cause of one lawsuit against Intel in 1991. In 2004 and 2005, AMD brought further claims against Intel related to unfair competition.

In 2005, CEO Paul Otellini reorganized the company to refocus its core processor and chipset business on platforms (enterprise, digital home, digital health, and mobility).

===Regaining of momentum===
In 2007, Intel unveiled its Core microarchitecture to widespread critical acclaim;  citing CNET, Anandtech, Sharky's Extreme and PC Mag as publishing similar conclusions. the product range was perceived as an exceptional leap in processor performance that at a stroke regained much of its leadership of the field. In 2008, Intel had another "tick," when it introduced the Penryn microarchitecture, which was 45 nm. Later that year, Intel released a processor with the Nehalem architecture. Nehalem had positive reviews. 

===Sale of XScale processor business===
On June 27, 2006, the sale of Intel's XScale assets was announced. Intel agreed to sell the XScale processor business to Marvell Technology Group for an estimated $600 million and the assumption of unspecified liabilities. The move was intended to permit Intel to focus its resources on its core x86 and server businesses, and the acquisition completed on November 9, 2006. 

===Acquisitions===
On August 19, 2010, Intel announced that it planned to purchase McAfee, a manufacturer of computer security technology. The purchase price was $7.68 billion, and the companies said that if the deal were approved, new products would be released early in 2011. On January 26, 2011, the European Union approved the acquisition, after Intel agreed to provide rival security firms with all necessary information that would allow their products to use Intel's chips and personal computers. After the acquisition, Intel had about 90,000 employees, including about 12,000 software engineers. "Microsoft Alliance With Intel Shows Age", January 4, 2011 Wall Street Journal article 

On August 30, 2010, Intel and Infineon Technologies announced that Intel would acquire Infineon's Wireless Solutions business. Intel buys Infineon's wireless wing for 4G lift-off, a August 31, 2010, ZDNet Intel planned to use Infineon's technology in laptops, smart phones, netbooks, tablets and embedded computers in consumer products, eventually integrating its wireless modem into Intel's silicon chips. Intel CFO Talks About Acquisition Strategy, Institutional Investor 

In March 2011, Intel bought most of the assets of Cairo-based SySDSoft. Dean Takahashi, VentureBeat. "Intel buys 4G wireless software firm SySDSoft." March 14, 2011. Retrieved March 17, 2011. 

In July 2011, Intel announced that it had agreed to acquire Fulcrum Microsystems Inc., a company specializing in network switches. Dylan McGrath, EE Times. "Fulcrum buy could signal shift for Intel." July 19, 2011. Retrieved July 20, 2011. The company was previously included on the EE Times list of 60 Emerging Startups. 

On October 1, 2011, Intel reached a deal to acquire Telmap, an Israeli-based navigation software company. The purchase price was not disclosed, but Israeli media reported values around $300 million to $350 million. . The New York Times. Retrieved October 2, 2011. 

In July 2012, Intel Corporation agreed to buy 10 percent shares of ASML Holding NV for $2.1 billion and another $1 billon for 5 percent shares that need shareholder approval to fund relevant research and development efforts, as part of a EUR3.3 billion ($4.1 billion) deal to accelerate the development of 450-millimeter wafer technology and extreme ultra-violet lithography by as much as two years. 

In July 2013, Intel confirmed the acquisition of Omek Interactive, an Israeli company that makes technology for gesture-based interfaces, without disclosing the monetary value of the deal. An official statement from Intel read: "The acquisition of Omek Interactive will help increase Intel's capabilities in the delivery of more immersive perceptual computing experiences." One report estimated the value of the acquisition between US$30 million and $50 million. 

The acquisition of a Spanish natural language recognition startup named Indisys was announced on September 13, 2013. The terms of the deal were not disclosed but an email from an Intel representative stated: "Intel has acquired Indisys, a privately held company based in Seville, Spain. The majority of Indisys employees joined Intel. We signed the agreement to acquire the company on May 31 and the deal has been completed." Indysis explains that its artificial intelligence (AI) technology "is a human image, which converses fluently and with common sense in multiple languages and also works in different platforms." 

==Acquisition Table==

 Number Acquisition date Company Business Country Price Used as or integrated with Ref(s). 
 1 Wind River Systems Embedded Systems USA $884M Software 
 2 McAfee Security USA $7.6B Software 
 3 Infineon Wireless Germany $1.4B Mobile CPUs 
 4 Silicon Hive DSP Netherlands N/A Mobile CPUs 
 5 Telmap Software Israel N/A Location Services Intel to acquire Telmap, dole out easy to implement location APIs to AppUp developers. Engadget.com. Retrieved on 2013-12-09. 
 6 Mashery Cloud Software USA $180M Software 
 7 Aepona SDN Ireland N/A Software 
 8 StoneSoft Security Finland $389M Software 
 9 Omek Interactive Gesture Israel N/A Software 
 10 Indisys Natural language processing Spain N/A Software 
 11 Basis Wearable USA N/A New Devices http://newsroom.intel.com/community/intel_newsroom/blog/2014/03/25/intel-completes-acquisition-of-basis-science-inc 

===Expansions===

In 2008, Intel spun off key assets of a solar startup business effort to form an independent company, SpectraWatt Inc. However, as of 2011, SpectraWatt has filed for bankruptcy. 

February 2011: Intel announced plans to build a new microprocessor manufacturing facility in Chandler, Arizona, which is expected to be completed in 2013, at a cost of $5 billion. Intel to Invest More Than $5 billion to Build New Factory in Arizona. Business Wire (February 18, 2011). Retrieved on July 8, 2011. It will accommodate 4,000 employees. The company produces three-quarters of their products in the United States, although three-quarters of their revenue comes from overseas. King, Ian. (February 18, 2011) "Intel Plans to Build $5 billion Chip Plant in Arizona". Bloomberg. Retrieved on July 8, 2011. 

April 2011: Intel began a pilot project with ZTE Corporation to produce smartphones using the Intel Atom processor for China's domestic market. This project is intended to challenge the domination of ARM processors in mobile phones. "Intel Is Said to Design Phone for ZTE for Sale in China". Bloomberg. Retrieved on July 8, 2011. 

December 2011: Intel announced that it reorganized several of its business units to form a new mobile and communications group. Sylvie Barak, EE Times. "Intel announces mobile and wirelss reorganization." December 14, 2011. Retrieved December 14, 2011. This group will be responsible for the company's smartphone, tablet and wireless efforts, and will be headed by Hermann Eul and Mike Bell.

=== Opening up the foundries ===
Finding itself with excess fab capacity after the failure of the Ultrabook to gain market traction and with PC sales declining, in 2013 Intel reached a foundry agreement to produce chips for Altera using 14-nm process. General Manager of Intel's custom foundry division Sunit Rikhi indicated that Intel would pursue further such deals in the future. "Intel throws open chip ovens to Altera - but who's next: Apple?" This was after poor sales of Windows 8 hardware caused a major retrenchment for most of the major semiconductor manufacturers, except for Qualcomm, which continued to see healthy purchases from its largest customer, Apple. "Intel and pals shrink their semis by $600m as demand droops." 

As of July 2013, five companies will use Intel's fabs via the Intel Custom Foundry division: Achronix, Tabula, Netronome, Microsemi, and Alteramost are FPGA makers, but Netronome designs network processors. Only Achronix began shipping chips made by Intel using the 22-nm Tri-Gate process. Intel dabbles in contract manufacturing, weighing tradeoffs // The Oregonian, July 27, 2013 Intel to make 22-nm chips for Microsemi // EETimes, 5/2/2013: "Microsemi...becomes Intel's fifth publicly disclosed foundry customer, joining network processor provider Netronome and FPGA vendors Altera, Achronix and Tabula. " Several other customers also exist but were not announced at the time. Microsemi Emerges As Another Intel Manufacturing Customer // WSJ, May 1, 2013: " Paul Otellini ... also reiterated that Intel has other foundry customers it has not announced." 

The Alliance for Affordable Internet (A4AI) was launched in October 2013 and Intel is part of the coalition of public and private organisations that also includes Facebook, Google, and Microsoft. Led by Sir Tim Berners-Lee, the A4AI seeks to make Internet access more affordable so that access is broadened in the developing world, where only 31% of people are online. Google will help to decrease internet access prices so that they fall below the UN Broadband Commission's worldwide target of 5% of monthly income. 

==Product and market history==

=== SRAMS and the microprocessor ===
Intel's first products were shift register memory and random-access memory integrated circuits, and Intel grew to be a leader in the fiercely competitive DRAM, SRAM, and ROM markets throughout the 1970s. Concurrently, Intel engineers Marcian Hoff, Federico Faggin, Stanley Mazor and Masatoshi Shima invented Intel's first microprocessor. Originally developed for the Japanese company Busicom to replace a number of ASICs in a calculator already produced by Busicom, the Intel 4004 was introduced to the mass market on November 15, 1971, though the microprocessor did not become the core of Intel's business until the mid-1980s. (Note: Intel is usually given credit with Texas Instruments for the almost-simultaneous invention of the microprocessor)

===From DRAM to microprocessors===
In 1983, at the dawn of the personal computer era, Intel's profits came under increased pressure from Japanese memory-chip manufacturers, and then-president Andy Grove focused the company on microprocessors. Grove described this transition in the book Only the Paranoid Survive. A key element of his plan was the notion, then considered radical, of becoming the single source for successors to the popular 8086 microprocessor.

Until then, the manufacture of complex integrated circuits was not reliable enough for customers to depend on a single supplier, but Grove began producing processors in three geographically distinct factories, and ceased licensing the chip designs to competitors such as Zilog and AMD. When the PC industry boomed in the late 1980s and 1990s, Intel was one of the primary beneficiaries.

===Intel, x86 processors, and the IBM PC===
The die from an Intel 8742, an 8-bit microcontroller that includes a CPU running at 12 MHz, 128 bytes of RAM, 2048 bytes of EPROM, and I/O in the same chip.
Despite the ultimate importance of the microprocessor, the 4004 and its successors the 8008 and the 8080 were never major revenue contributors at Intel. As the next processor, the 8086 (and its variant the 8088) was completed in 1978, Intel embarked on a major marketing and sales campaign for that chip nicknamed "Operation Crush", and intended to win as many customers for the processor as possible. One design win was the newly created IBM PC division, though the importance of this was not fully realized at the time.

IBM introduced its personal computer in 1981, and it was rapidly successful. In 1982, Intel created the 80286 microprocessor, which, two years later, was used in the IBM PC/AT. Compaq, the first IBM PC "clone" manufacturer, produced a desktop system based on the faster 80286 processor in 1985 and in 1986 quickly followed with the first 80386-based system, beating IBM and establishing a competitive market for PC-compatible systems and setting up Intel as a key component supplier.

In 1975 the company had started a project to develop a highly advanced 32-bit microprocessor, finally released in 1981 as the Intel iAPX 432. The project was too ambitious and the processor was never able to meet its performance objectives, and it failed in the marketplace. Intel extended the x86 architecture to 32 bits instead. 

====386 microprocessor====
During this period Andrew Grove dramatically redirected the company, closing much of its DRAM business and directing resources to the microprocessor business. Of perhaps greater importance was his decision to "single-source" the 386 microprocessor. Prior to this, microprocessor manufacturing was in its infancy, and manufacturing problems frequently reduced or stopped production, interrupting supplies to customers. To mitigate this risk, these customers typically insisted that multiple manufacturers produce chips they could use to ensure a consistent supply. The 8080 and 8086-series microprocessors were produced by several companies, notably AMD. Grove made the decision not to license the 386 design to other manufacturers, instead producing it in three geographically distinct factories: Santa Clara, California; Hillsboro, Oregon; and Chandler, a suburb of Phoenix, Arizona. He convinced customers that this would ensure consistent delivery. As the success of Compaq's Deskpro 386 established the 386 as the dominant CPU choice, Intel achieved a position of near-exclusive dominance as its supplier. Profits from this funded rapid development of both higher-performance chip designs and higher-performance manufacturing capabilities, propelling Intel to a position of unquestioned leadership by the early 1990s.

====486, Pentium, and Itanium====
Intel introduced the 486 microprocessor in 1989, and in 1990 formally established a second design team, designing the processors code-named "P5" and "P6" in parallel and committing to a major new processor every two years, versus the four or more years such designs had previously taken. Engineers Vinod Dham and Rajeev Chandrasekhar (Member of Parliament, India) were key figures on the core team that invented the 486 chip and later, Intel's signature Pentium chip. The P5 was earlier known as "Operation Bicycle," referring to the cycles of the processor. The P5 was introduced in 1993 as the Intel Pentium, substituting a registered trademark name for the former part number (numbers, such as 486, are hard to register as a trademark). The P6 followed in 1995 as the Pentium Pro and improved into the Pentium II in 1997. New architectures were developed alternately in Santa Clara, California and Hillsboro, Oregon.

The Santa Clara design team embarked in 1993 on a successor to the x86 architecture, codenamed "P7". The first attempt was dropped a year later, but quickly revived in a cooperative program with Hewlett-Packard engineers, though Intel soon took over primary design responsibility. The resulting implementation of the IA-64 64-bit architecture was the Itanium, finally introduced in June 2001. The Itanium's performance running legacy x86 code did not meet expectations, and it failed to compete effectively with x86-64, which was AMD's 64-bit extensions to the original x86 architecture (Intel uses the name Intel 64, previously EM64T). As of 2012, Intel continues to develop and deploy the Itanium; known planning continues into 2014.

The Hillsboro team designed the Willamette processors (initially code-named P68), which were marketed as the Pentium 4.

====Pentium flaw====

In June 1994, Intel engineers discovered a flaw in the floating-point math subsection of the P5 Pentium microprocessor. Under certain data-dependent conditions, the low-order bits of the result of a floating-point division would be incorrect. The error could compound in subsequent calculations. Intel corrected the error in a future chip revision, but nonetheless declined to disclose it.

In October 1994, Dr. Thomas Nicely, Professor of Mathematics at Lynchburg College, independently discovered the bug. He contacted Intel, but received no response. On October 30, he posted a message on the Internet. Word of the bug spread quickly and reached the industry press. The bug was easy to replicate; a user could enter specific numbers into the calculator on the operating system. Consequently, many users did not accept Intel's statements that the error was minor and "not even an erratum." During Thanksgiving, in 1994, The New York Times ran a piece by journalist John Markoff spotlighting the error. Intel changed its position and offered to replace every chip, quickly putting in place a large end-user support organization. This resulted in a $500 million charge against Intel's 1994 revenue.

Ironically, the "Pentium flaw" incident, Intel's response to it, and the surrounding media coverage propelled Intel from being a technology supplier generally unknown to most computer users to a household name. Dovetailing with an uptick in the "Intel Inside" campaign, the episode is considered to have been a positive event for Intel, changing some of its business practices to be more end-user focused and generating substantial public awareness, while avoiding a lasting negative impression. Grove, Andrew and Burgleman, Robert; Strategy Is Destiny: How Strategy-Making Shapes a Company's Future, 2001, Free Press 

===="Intel Inside" and other 1990s programs====
During this period, Intel undertook two major supporting programs. The first is widely known: the 1991 "Intel Inside" marketing and branding campaign. The idea of ingredient branding was new at the time with only Nutrasweet and a few others making attempts to do so. This campaign established Intel, which had been a component supplier little-known outside the PC industry, as a household name.

The second program is little-known: Intel's Systems Group began, in the early 1990s, manufacturing PC "motherboards", the main board component of a personal computer, and the one into which the processor (CPU) and memory (RAM) chips are plugged. Shortly after, Intel began manufacturing fully configured "white box" systems for the dozens of PC clone companies that rapidly sprang up. At its peak in the mid-1990s, Intel manufactured over 15% of all PCs, making it the third-largest supplier at the time.

During the 1990s, Intel's Architecture Lab (IAL) was responsible for many of the hardware innovations of the personal computer, including the PCI Bus, the PCI Express (PCIe) bus, the Universal Serial Bus (USB). IAL's software efforts met with a more mixed fate; its video and graphics software was important in the development of software digital video, but later its efforts were largely overshadowed by competition from Microsoft. The competition between Intel and Microsoft was revealed in testimony by IAL Vice-President Steven McGeady at the Microsoft antitrust trial.

===Solid-state drives (SSD)===

An Intel X25-M SSD
On September 8, 2008, Intel began shipping its first mainstream solid-state drives, the X18-M and X25-M with 80GB and 160GB storage capacities. Intel Introduces Solid-State Drives for Notebook and Desktop Computers. Intel (September 8, 2008). Retrieved on July 8, 2011. Reviews measured high performance with these MLC-based drives. Intel's X25-M Solid State Drive Reviewed : Intel's First Flash SSD Ready for Vertical Take-Off. Tomshardware (September 8, 2008). Retrieved on July 8, 2011. Intel X25-M SSD: Intel Delivers One of the World's Fastest Drives. AnandTech. Retrieved on July 8, 2011. World, The PC. (October 26, 2009) The PC World 100: Best Products of 2009. PC World. Retrieved on July 8, 2011. Intel X-25M. Maximum PC (November 17, 2008). Retrieved on July 8, 2011. Intel released their SLC-based Enterprise X25-E Extreme SSDs on October 15 that same year in capacities of 32GB and 64GB. Intel Ships Enterprise-Class Solid-State Drives. Intel (October 15, 2008). Retrieved on July 8, 2011. 

In July 2009, Intel refreshed their X25-M and X18-M lines by moving from a 50-nanometer to a 34-nanometer process. These new drives, dubbed by the press as the X25-M and X18-M G2 Intel X25-M G2: Dissected and Performance Preview. AnandTech. Retrieved on July 8, 2011. Intel's 3rd Generation X25-M SSD Specs Revealed. AnandTech. Retrieved on July 8, 2011. (or generation 2), reduced prices by up to 60 percent while offering lower latency and improved performance. Intel Delivers Industry's First 34-Nanometer NAND Flash Solid-State Drives; Advancement Lowers Prices by Up to 60 Percent. Intel (July 21, 2009). Retrieved on July 8, 2011. 

On February 1, 2010, Intel and Micron announced that they were gearing up for production of NAND flash memory using a new 25-nanometer process. Intel, Micron Introduce 25-Nanometer NAND  The Smallest, Most Advanced Process Technology in the Semiconductor Industry. Intel (February 1, 2010). Retrieved on July 8, 2011. In March of that same year, Intel entered the budget SSD segment with their X25-V drives with an initial capacity of 40GB. Intel Brings Affordable Solid-State Computing to Netbooks and Desktop PCs. Intel (March 15, 2010). Retrieved on July 8, 2011. The SSD 310, Intel's first mSATA drive was released on December 2010, providing X25-M G2 performance in a much smaller package. Intel's SSD 310: G2 Performance in an mSATA Form Factor. AnandTech. Retrieved on July 8, 2011. Intel Newsroom: News Stories: New Intel Solid-State Drive 310 Series Offers Full SSD Performance in 1/8th the Size. Newsroom.intel (December 29, 2010). Retrieved on July 8, 2011. 

March 2011 saw the introduction of two new SSD lines from Intel. The first, the SSD 510, used a SATA 6 Gigabit per second interface to reach speeds of up to 500 MegaBytes per second. Intel Newsroom: News Stories: Intel Announces Next in Solid-State Drive Line Up: Intel SSD 510 Series Featuring Super-Fast 6Gbps SATA Throughput. Newsroom.intel (February 28, 2011). Retrieved on July 8, 2011. The drive, which uses a controller from Marvell Technology Group, The Intel SSD 510 Review. AnandTech. Retrieved on July 8, 2011. was released using 34 nm NAND Flash and came in capacities of 120GB and 250GB. The second product announcement, the SSD 320, is the successor to Intel's earlier X25-M. It uses the new 25 nm process that Intel and Micron announced in 2010, and was released in capacities of 40 GB, 80 GB, 120 GB, 160 GB, 300 GB and 600 GB. Intel Newsroom: News Stories: Intel Announces Third-Generation SSD: Intel Solid-State Drive 320 Series. Newsroom.intel (March 28, 2011). Retrieved on July 8, 2011. Sequential read performance maxes out at 270 MB/s due to the older SATA 3 Gbit/s interface, and sequential write performance varies greatly based on the size of the drive with sequential write performance of the 40 GB model peaking at 45 MB/s and the 600 GB at 220 MB/s. The Intel SSD 320 Review: 25nm G3 is Finally Here. AnandTech. Retrieved on July 8, 2011. 

Micron and Intel announced that they were producing their first 20 nm MLC NAND flash on April 14, 2011. Intel & Micron Announce First 20nm MLC NAND Flash for Use in SSDs. AnandTech. Retrieved on July 8, 2011. 

In February 2012, Intel launched the SSD 520 series solid state drives using the SandForce SF-2200 controller with sequential read and write speeds of 550 and 520 MB/s respectively with random read and write IOPS as high as 80,000. These drives will replace the 510 series. Intel has released the budget 330 series solid state drive in 60, 120, and 180GB capacities using 25 nm flash memory and a SandForce controller that have replaced the 320 series. 

 Intel SSDs 
 Model Codename Capacities (GB) NAND type Interface Form factor Controller Seq. read/write MB/s Rnd 4KB read/write IOPS (K) Introduced Comment / Source 
 X18-M/X25-M Ephraim 80/160 50 nm MLC SATA 3 Gbit/s 1.8\"/2.5\" Intel 250 / 70 35 / 3.3000.35 Sept 2008 (now EOL) Products (Formerly Ephraim). Intel. Retrieved on July 8, 2011. 
 X25-E Ephraim 32/64 50 nm SLC SATA 3 Gbit/s 2.5\" Intel 250 / 170 35 / 3.3 Oct 2008 
 X18-M G2 / X25-M G2 Postville 80/120/160 34 nm MLC SATA 3 Gbit/s 1.8\"/2.5\" Intel 250 / 100 35 / 6.60.3 July 2009 
 X25-V Glenbrook 40 34 nm MLC SATA 3 Gbit/s 2.5\" Intel 170 / 35 25 / 2.5? Mar 2010 Intel SSD X25-V Series (40GB, 2.5in SATA 3 Gbit/s, 34nm, MLC). Intel. Retrieved on July 8, 2011. 
 310 Soda Creek 40/80 34 nm MLC SATA 3 Gbit/s mSATA Intel 200/70 35/2.6 Dec 2010 Products (Formerly Soda Creek). Intel. Retrieved on July 8, 2011. 
 510 Elmcrest 120/250 34 nm MLC SATA 6 Gbit/s 2.5\" Marvell 500/315 20/8 Mar 2011 Intel SSD 500 Family Family. Intel. Retrieved on July 8, 2011. 
 320 Postville Refresh 40/80/120/160/300/600 25 nm MLC SATA 3 Gbit/s 1.8\"/2.5\" Intel Intel 320 Series 300GB SATA II SSD Review  Intel Maintains Focus On SATA II SSD Consumer Need. The SSD Review (March 28, 2011). Retrieved on July 8, 2011. 270/220 39.5/23 Mar 2011 Originally to be released Oct 2010, named X18-M G3 & X25-M G3, the 1.8\" was released later in 2011 Intel SSD 300 Family Family. Intel. Retrieved on July 8, 2011. 
 311 Larsen Creek 20 34 nm SLC SATA 3 Gbit/s 2.5\"/mSATA Intel 200/105 37/3.3 May 2011 Special low capacity SLC SSD for use with Intel SRT Intel debuts 311 series SSD. hw-lab (May 16, 2011). Retrieved on July 8, 2011. Intel SSD 311 (Larson Creek): Z68-Optimized : The Intel Z68 Express Review: A Real Enthusiast Chipset. Tomshardware (May 11, 2011). Retrieved on July 8, 2011. 
 710 Lyndonville 100/200/300 25 nm MLC-HET SATA 3 Gbit/s 2.5\" Intel 270/210 38.5/2.7 Q3 2011 Intel SSD 710 and 720 Series Specifications Revealed. AnandTech. Retrieved on July 8, 2011. Intel 710 and 720 series SSD specs leaked. hw-lab (June 15, 2011). Retrieved on July 8, 2011. 
 520 Cherryville 60/120/180/240/480 25 nm MLC SATA 6 Gbit/s 2.5\" SandForce 550/520 50/80 February 2012 Replaces 510 
 313 Hawley Creek 20/24 25 nm SLC SATA 3 Gbit/s 2.5\"/mSATA Intel 220/115 36/4 April 2012 Replaces 311; for use with SRT 
 330 Maple Crest 60/120/180/240 25 nm MLC SATA 6 Gbit/s 2.5\" SandForce 500/450 22.5/33 April 2012 
 910 Ramsdale 400/800 25 nm MLC-HET PCIe 2.0  8 PCIe Intel/Hitachi 2000/1000 180/75 April 2012 
 335 Jay Crest 80/180/240 20 nm MLC SATA 6 Gbit/s 2.5\" SandForce 500/450 42/52 October 2012 
 S3700 Taylorsville 100/200/400/800 25 nm MLC-HET SATA 6 Gbit/s 1.8\"/2.5\" Intel 500/450 72/34 November 2012 
 525 Lincoln Crest 30/60/120/180/240 25 nm MLC SATA 6 Gbit/s mSATA SandForce 550/520 50/60 January 2013 
 DC S3500 Wolfsville 80/120/160/240/300/400/480/600/800 20 nm MLC SATA 6 Gbit/s 1.8\"/2.5\" Intel 475/450 75/11.5 June 2013 
 530 Dale Crest 80/120/180/240/360/480 20 nm MLC SATA 6 Gbit/s M.2/mSATA/2.5\" SandForce 540/490 41/80 July 2013 
 Pro 1500 Sierra Star 80/120/180/240/360/480 20 nm MLC SATA 6 Gbit/s M.2/2.5\" SandForce 540/490 41/80 Sept 2013 
 Pro 2500 Temple Star 80/180/240/360/480 20 nm MLC SATA 6 Gbit/s M.2/2.5\" SandForce? 540/490 42/52 Q2 2014 
 DC P3700 Fultondale 200/400/800/1600/2000 20 nm MLC-HET PCIe (2.5\"/AIC) Intel 2800/1700 450/150 Q2 2014 Custom Intel NVMe controller 
 DC P3500 Pleasantdale 250/500/1000/2000 20 nm MLC PCIe (2.5\"/AIC) Intel 2800/1700 450/40 Q2 2014 Custom Intel NVMe controller 
 730 Jackson Ridge 240/480 20 nm MLC SATA 6 Gbit/s 2.5\" Intel 550/470 89/74 March 2014 
 DC P3600 400/800/1200/1600/2000 20 nm MLC PCIe (2.5\"/AIC) Intel 2600/1700 450/56 June 2014 
 Model Codename Capacities (GB) NAND type Interface Form factor Controller Seq. read/write MB/s Rnd 4KB read/write IOPS (K) Introduced Comment / Source 

===Supercomputers===
The Intel Scientific Computers division was founded in 1984 by Justin Rattner, in order to design and produce parallel computers based on Intel microprocessors connected in hypercube topologies. In 1992 the name was changed to the Intel Supercomputing Systems Division, and development of the iWarp architecture was also subsumed. The division designed several supercomputer systems, including the Intel iPSC/1, iPSC/2, iPSC/860, Paragon and ASCI Red.

===Competition, antitrust and espionage===

Two factors combined to end this dominance: the slowing of PC demand growth beginning in 2000 and the rise of the low cost PC. By the end of the 1990s, microprocessor performance had outstripped software demand for that CPU power. Aside from high-end server systems and software, whose demand dropped with the end of the "dot-com bubble", consumer systems ran effectively on increasingly low-cost systems after 2000. Intel's strategy of producing ever-more-powerful processors and obsoleting their predecessors stumbled, leaving an opportunity for rapid gains by competitors, notably AMD. This in turn lowered the profitability of the processor line and ended an era of unprecedented dominance of the PC hardware by Intel.

Intel's dominance in the x86 microprocessor market led to numerous charges of antitrust violations over the years, including FTC investigations in both the late 1980s and in 1999, and civil actions such as the 1997 suit by Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) and a patent suit by Intergraph. Intel's market dominance (at one time it controlled over 85% of the market for 32-bit x86 microprocessors) combined with Intel's own hardball legal tactics (such as its infamous 338 patent suit versus PC manufacturers) made it an attractive target for litigation, but few of the lawsuits ever amounted to anything.

A case of industrial espionage arose in 1995 that involved both Intel and AMD. Bill Gaede, an Argentine formerly employed both at AMD and at Intel's Arizona plant, was arrested for attempting in 1993 to sell the i486 and P5 Pentium designs to AMD and to certain foreign powers. Gaede videotaped data from his computer screen at Intel and mailed it to AMD, which immediately alerted Intel and authorities, resulting in Gaede's arrest. Gaede was convicted and sentenced to 33 months in prison in June 1996. 

===Partnership with Apple===

On June 6, 2005, Steve Jobs, then CEO of Apple, announced that Apple would be transitioning from its long favored PowerPC architecture to the Intel x86 architecture, because the future PowerPC road map was unable to satisfy Apple's needs. The first Macintosh computers containing Intel CPUs were announced on January 10, 2006, and Apple had its entire line of consumer Macs running on Intel processors by early August 2006. The Apple Xserve server was updated to Intel Xeon processors from November 2006, and was offered in a configuration similar to Apple's Mac Pro. Jobs: New Intel Macs are 'screamers' news.com 

===Core 2 Duo advertisement controversy===
In 2007, the company released a print advertisement for its Core 2 Duo processor featuring six African American runners appearing to bow down to a Caucasian male inside of an office setting (due to the posture taken by runners on starting blocks). According to Nancy Bhagat, Vice President of Intel Corporate Marketing, the general public found the ad to be "insensitive and insulting." The campaign was quickly pulled and several Intel executives made public apologies on the corporate website. 

===Classmate PC===
Intel's Classmate PC is the company's first low-cost netbook computer. One of the models, designed by TEAMS Design in their Shanghai office, won many design awards, such as the Appliance Design EID Award, the 2008 Spark Award, and the iF 2008 China Award. 

===Mobile processor===
In June 2011, Intel introduced the first Pentium mobile processor based on the Sandy Bridge core. The B940, clocked at 2 GHz, is faster than existing or upcoming mobile Celerons, although it is almost identical to dual-core Celeron CPUs in all other aspects. CPU World. "Intel mobile CPUs to launch in June 2011." CPU World. Jun 16, 2011. Retrieved Jun 20, 2011. According to IHS iSuppli's report on September 28, 2011, Sandy Bridge chips have helped Intel increase its market share in global processor market to 81.8%, while AMD's market share dropped to 10.4%. Jeffrey Burt, eWeek. "Intel Gains Chip Market Share Due to Sandy Bridge: IHS iSuppli." September 28, 2011. Retrieved October 7, 2011. 

Intel planned to introduce Medfield  a processor for tablets and smartphones  to the market in 2012, as an effort to compete with ARM. Brooke Crothers, CNET. "Intel maps out tablet plans through 2014." Jun 30, 2011. Retrieved Jul 1, 2011. As a 32-nanometer processor, Medfield is designed to be energy-efficient, which is one of the core features in ARM's chips. Agam Shah, IDG News. "Intel's New Smartphone Chip Is Key ARM Battle." Jun 7, 2011. Retrieved Jul 8, 2011. 

At the Intel Developers Forum (IDF) 2011 in San Francisco, Intel's partnership with Google was announced. By January 2012, Google's Android 2.3 will use Intel's Atom microprocessor. WILL KNIGHT, Technology Review. "Intel Chases a More Power-Efficient Future." Sep 14, 2011. Retrieved Sep 19, 2011. Chris Nuttall, Financial Times. "Intel and Google form Android chip alliance." Sep 13, 2011. Retrieved Sep 19, 2011. All Geek. "Intel to Officially Support Android 2.3 Gingerbread by January 2012." Sep 12, 2011. Retrieved Sep 19, 2011. 

===Server chips===
In July 2011, Intel announced that its server chips, the Xeon series, will use new sensors that can improve data center cooling efficiency. James Niccolai, IDG News. "Intel Adds Sensors to Aid Data Center Cooling." PC World. July 8, 2011. Retrieved July 8, 2011. 

===22 nm processors===

In 2011, Intel announced the Ivy Bridge processor family at the Intel Developer Forum. Rick Merritt, EE Times. "Intel describes 22nm Ivy Bridge CPUs." September 13, 2011. Retrieved September 14, 2011. Ivy Bridge supports both DDR3 memory and DDR3L chips.

===Personal Office Energy Monitor (POEM)===
As part of its efforts in the Positive Energy Buildings Consortium, Intel has been developing an application, called Personal Office Energy Monitor (POEM), to help office buildings to be more energy-efficient. With this application, employees can get the power consumption info for their office machines, so that they can figure out a better way to save energy in their working environment. Peter Sayer, IDG News. "Intel Hopes POEM Will Encourage Office Staff to Save Energy." PC World. July 8, 2011. Retrieved July 8, 2011. 

===IT Manager 3: Unseen Forces===
Manager 3: Unseen Forces|IT Manager III: Unseen Forces] is a web-based IT simulation game from Intel. In it you manage a company's IT department. The goal is to apply technology and skill to enable the company to grow from a small business into a global enterprise.

===Car Security System===

In 2011, Intel announced that it is working on a car security system that connects to smartphones via an application. The application works by streaming video to a cloud service if your car is broken into. Radu Tyrsina, Mobile Mag. "Intel working on streaming video car alarm systems." August 2, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011. 

===High-Bandwidth Digital Content Protection===

Intel also developed High-Bandwidth Digital Content Protection (HDCP) to prevent copying of digital audio and video content as it travels across connections.

===Move from Wintel desktop to open mobile platforms===

In 2013, Intel's Kirk Skaugen said that Intel's exclusive focus on Microsoft platforms was a thing of the past and that they would now support all "tier-one operating systems" such as Linux, Android, iOS, and Chrome. 

In 2014, Intel cut thousands of employees in response to "evolving market trends", and offered to subsidize manufacturers for the extra costs involved in using Intel chips in their tablets. 

===Wearable fashion===
On January 6, 2014, Intel announced that it was "teaming with the Council of Fashion Designers of America, Barneys New York and Opening Ceremony around the wearable tech field." 

==Corporate affairs==
In September 2006, Intel had nearly 100,000 employees and 200 facilities world wide. Its 2005 revenues were $38.8 billion and its Fortune 500 ranking was 49th. Its stock symbol is INTC, listed on the NASDAQ. As of February 2009 the biggest customers of Intel are Hewlett-Packard and Dell. 

===Leadership and corporate structure===
Paul Otellini, Craig Barrett and Sean Maloney in 2006
Robert Noyce was Intel's CEO at its founding in 1968, followed by co-founder Gordon Moore in 1975. Andy Grove became the company's president in 1979 and added the CEO title in 1987 when Moore became chairman. In 1998 Grove succeeded Moore as Chairman, and Craig Barrett, already company president, took over. On May 18, 2005, Barrett handed the reins of the company over to Paul Otellini, who previously was the company president and COO and who was responsible for Intel's design win in the original IBM PC. The board of directors elected Otellini as President and CEO, and Barrett replaced Grove as Chairman of the Board. Grove stepped down as chairman, but is retained as a special adviser. In May 2009, Barrett stepped down as chairman of the Board and was succeeded by Jane Shaw. In May 2012, Intel vice chairman Andy Bryant, who had previously held the posts of CFO (1994) and Chief Administrative Officer (2007) at Intel, succeeded Shaw as executive chairman. 

In November 2012, president and CEO Paul Otellini announced that he would step down in May 2013 at the age of 62, three years before the company's mandatory retirement age. During a six-month transition period, Intel's board of directors commenced a search process for the next CEO, in which it considered both internal managers and external candidates such as Sanjay Jha and Patrick Gelsinger. Financial results revealed that, under Otellini, Intel's revenue increased by 55.8 percent (US$34.2 to 53.3 billion), while its net income increased by 46.7% (US$7.5 billion to 11 billion). 

On May 2, 2013, Executive Vice President and COO Brian Krzanich was elected as Intel's sixth CEO, a selection that became effective on May 16, 2013 at the company's annual meeting. Reportedly, the board concluded that an insider could proceed with the role and exert an impact more quickly, without the need to learn Intel's processes, and Krzanich was selected on such a basis. Intel's software head Rene James was selected as president of the company, a role that is second to the CEO position. 

As of May 2013, Intel's board of directors consists of Andy Bryant, John Donahoe, Frank Yeary, Ambassador Charlene Barshefsky, Susan Decker, Reed Hundt, Paul Otellini, James Plummer, David Pottruck, and David Yoffie. The board was described by former Financial Times journalist Tom Foremski as "an exemplary example of corporate governance of the highest order" and received a rating of ten from GovernanceMetrics International, a form of recognition that has only been awarded to twenty-one other corporate boards worldwide. 

===Employment===

Intel microprocessor facility in Costa Rica was responsible in 2006 for 20% of Costa Rican exports and 4.9% of the country's GDP. 

The firm promotes very heavily from within, most notably in its executive suite. The company has resisted the trend toward outsider CEOs. Paul Otellini was a 30-year veteran of the company when he assumed the role of CEO. All of his top lieutenants have risen through the ranks after many years with the firm. In many cases, Intel's top executives have spent their entire working careers with Intel.

Intel has a mandatory retirement policy for its CEOs when they reach age 65, Andy Grove retired at 62, while both Robert Noyce and Gordon Moore retired at 58. Grove retired as Chairman and as a member of the board of directors in 2005 at age 68.

The company is headquartered in California's Silicon Valley and has operations around the world. Its largest workforce concentration anywhere is in Washington County, Oregon (in the Portland metropolitan area's "Silicon Forest"), with about 17,000 employees at several facilities and major expansion under way. Outside the United States, the company has facilities in China, Costa Rica, Malaysia, Israel, Ireland, India, Russia and Vietnam, 63 countries and regions internationally. In the U.S. Intel employs significant numbers of people in California, Colorado, Massachusetts, Arizona, New Mexico, Oregon, Texas, Washington, and Utah. In Oregon, Intel is the state's largest private employer. Suh, Elizabeth (October 28, 2007). Home of Oregon's largest employer and much more. The Oregonian. The company is the largest industrial employer in New Mexico while in Arizona the company has over 10,000 employees.

Intel invests heavily in research in China and about 100 researchers  or 10% of the total number of researchers from Intel  are located in Beijing. Mads lholm, semiaccurate. "Intel: Chinese microprocessor development inefficient." Jun 13, 2011. Retrieved Jun 20, 2011. 

In 2011, the Israeli government offered Intel $290 million to expand in the country. As a condition, Intel will have to employ 1,500 more workers in Kiryat Gat and between 6001000 workers in the north. Peter Clarke, EE Times. "Israel offers Intel $290 million for expansion." July 27, 2011. Retrieved July 27, 2011. 

In January 2014 it was reported that Intel would cut about 5,000 jobs from its work force of 107,000. The announcement was made a day after it reported earnings that missed analyst targets. 

====Diversity====
Intel has a Diversity Initiative, including employee diversity groups as well as supplier diversity programs. Like many companies with employee diversity groups, they include groups based on race and nationality as well as sexual identity and religion. In 1994, Intel sanctioned one of the earliest corporate Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, and Transgender employee groups, Intel Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual or Transgender Employees Home Page. Intelglbt.org (July 16, 2008). Retrieved on July 8, 2011. and supports a Muslim employees group, a Jewish employees group, and a Bible-based Christian group. Intel Bible-Based Christian Network (IBCN) website. IBCN (April 8, 2011). Retrieved on July 8, 2011. 

Intel received a 100% rating on the first Corporate Equality Index released by the Human Rights Campaign in 2002. It has maintained this rating in 2003 and 2004. In addition, the company was named one of the 100 Best Companies for Working Mothers in 2005 by Working Mother magazine.

===Economic Impacts===
In 2011, ECONorthwest conducted an economic impact analysis of Intel's economic contribution to the state of Oregon. The report found that in 2009 "the total economic impacts attributed to Intel's operations, capital spending, contributions and taxes amounted to almost $14.6 billion in activity, including $4.3 billion in personal income and 59,990 jobs." Eckert, Kurt. "Intel Boosts County, State Economies." Hillsboro Argus. October 18, 2011. http://www.oregonlive.com/argus/index.ssf/2011/10/intel_boosts_county_state_econ.html Through multiplier effects, every 10 Intel jobs supported, on average, was found to create 31 jobs in other sectors of the economy. ECONorthwest. "Economic Impacts of Intel's Oregon Operations, 2009." Prepared for Intel. October 2011. http://www.intel.com/content/dam/www/public/us/en/documents/reports/intel-oregon-economic-impact-report.pdf 

===Funding of a school===
In Rio Rancho, New Mexico, Intel is the leading employer. In 1997, a community partnership between Sandoval County and Intel Corporation funded and built Rio Rancho High School. 

===Ultrabook Fund===
In 2011, Intel Capital announced a new fund to support startups working on technologies in line with the company's concept for next generation notebooks. Rick Merritt, EE Times. "Intel Capital launches $300M ultrabook fund." August 10, 2011. Retrieved August 11, 2011. The company is setting aside a $300 million fund to be spent over the next three to four years in areas related to ultrabooks. Intel announced the ultrabook concept at Computex in 2011. The ultrabook is defined as a thin (less than 0.8 inches cm thick ) notebook that utilizes Intel processors and also incorporates tablet features such as a touch screen and long battery life. 

At the Intel Developers Forum in 2011, four Taiwan ODMs showed prototype ultrabooks that used Intel's Ivy Bridge chips. Rick Merritt, EE Times. "Intel shows progress on ultrabook vision." September 14, 2011. Retrieved September 14, 2011. Intel plans to improve power consumption of its chips for ultrabooks, like new Ivy Bridge processors in 2013, which will only have 10W default thermal design power. 

Intel's goal for Ultrabook's price is below $1000; Jeffrey Burt, eWeek. "Intel Ultrabook Partners Look for Cut in Chip Prices: Report." Sep 20, 2011. Retrieved Sep 28, 2011. however, according to two presidents from Acer and Compaq, this goal will not be achieved if Intel does not lower the price of its chips. Aaron Lee & Joseph Tsai, DIGITIMES. "Intel downstream partners request CPU price drop." Sep 20, 2011. Retrieved Sep 28, 2011. 

===Finances===
Intel stock price, Nov 1986  Nov 2006
Intel's market capitalization is $140.84 billion (Mar. 26, 2012). It publicly trades on NASDAQ with the symbol INTC. A widely held stock, the following indices include Intel shares: Dow Jones Industrial Average, S&P 500, NASDAQ-100, Russell 1000 Index, Russell 1000 Growth Index and SOX (PHLX Semiconductor Sector).

On July 15, 2008, Intel announced that it had achieved the highest earnings in the history of the company during Q2 2008. Hruska, Joel. (July 15, 2008) Intel posts record-breaking Q2 earnings. Arstechnica.com. Retrieved on July 8, 2011. 

===Advertising and brand management===

====Intel Inside====
Intel has become one of the world's most recognizable computer brands following its long-running Intel Inside campaign. The campaign, which started in 1991, was created by Intel marketing manager Dennis Carter. The five-note jingle was introduced in 1994 and by its tenth anniversary was being heard in 130 countries around the world. The initial branding agency for the Intel Inside campaign was DahlinSmithWhite Advertising of Salt Lake City. The Intel swirl logo was the work of DahlinSmithWhite art director Steve Grigg under the direction of Intel president and CEO Andy Grove.

The Intel Inside advertising campaign sought public brand loyalty and awareness of Intel processors in consumer computers. Intel paid some of the advertiser's costs for an ad that used the Intel Inside logo and xylomarimba jingle. 

The Intel Inside logo from 1991 to 2006.
2009-present logo. This was still used by the Pentium and Celeron processors.
In 2008, Intel planned to shift the emphasis of its Intel Inside campaign from traditional media such as television and print to newer media such as the Internet. Intel required that a minimum of 35% of the money it provided to the companies in its co-op program be used for online marketing. The Intel 2010 annual financial report indicated that $1.8 billion (6% of the gross margin and nearly 16% of the total net income) was allocated to all advertising with Intel Inside being part of that. 

====Sonic logo====
The famous D D G D A xylophone/xylomarimba jingle, sonic logo, tag, audio mnemonic was produced by Musikvergnuegen and written by Walter Werzowa, once a member of the Austrian 1980s sampling band Edelweiss. The sonic Intel logo has undergone substantial changes in tone since the introduction of the Pentium III, Pentium 4, and Core processors, yet keeps the same jingle.

====Naming strategy====
In 2006, Intel expanded its promotion of open specification platforms beyond Centrino, to include the Viiv media center PC and the business desktop Intel vPro.

In mid January 2006, Intel announced that they were dropping the long running Pentium name from their processors. The Pentium name was first used to refer to the P5 core Intel processors (Pent refers to the 5 in P5,) and was done to circumvent court rulings that prevent the trademarking of a string of numbers, so competitors could not just call their processor the same name, as had been done with the prior 386 and 486 processors (both of which had copies manufactured by IBM and AMD). They phased out the Pentium names from mobile processors first, when the new Yonah chips, branded Core Solo and Core Duo, were released. The desktop processors changed when the Core 2 line of processors were released. By 2009 Intel was using a good-better-best strategy with Celeron being good, Pentium better, and the Intel Core family representing the best the company has to offer. 

According to spokesman Bill Calder, Intel has maintained only the Celeron brand, the Atom brand for netbooks and the vPro lineup for businesses. Since late 2009, Intel's mainstream processors have been called Celeron, Pentium, Core i3, Core i5, and Core i7, in order of performance from lowest to highest. The first generation core products carry a 3 digit name, such as i5 750, and the second generation products carry a 4 digit name, such as the i5 2500. In both cases, a K at the end of it shows that it is an unlocked processor, enabling additional overclocking abilities (for instance, 2500K). vPro products will carry the Intel Core i7 vPro processor or the Intel Core i5 vPro processor name. In October 2011, Intel started to sell its Core i7-2700K "Sandy Bridge" chip to customers worldwide. Anton Shilov, XBitLabs. "Intel Quietly Starts to Sell New "Unlocked" Core i7 Chip." October 24, 2011. Retrieved October 26, 2011. 

Beginning in 2010 "Centrino" will only be applied to Intel's WiMAX and Wi-Fi technologies; it won't be a PC brand anymore. This will be an evolutionary process taking place over time, Intel acknowledges that multiple brands will be in the market including older ones throughout the transition. 

===Open source support===
Intel has a significant participation in the open source communities. For example, in 2006 Intel released MIT-licensed X.org drivers for their integrated graphic cards of the i965 family of chipsets. Intel released FreeBSD drivers for some networking cards, available under a BSD-compatible license, which were also ported to OpenBSD. Intel ran the Moblin project until April 23, 2009, when they handed the project over to the Linux Foundation. Intel also runs the LessWatts.org campaigns. About. Lesswatts.org. Retrieved on July 8, 2011. 

However, after the release of the wireless products called Intel Pro/Wireless 2100, 2200BG/2225BG/2915ABG and 3945ABG in 2005, Intel was criticized for not granting free redistribution rights for the firmware that must be included in the operating system for the wireless devices to operate. As a result of this, Intel became a target of campaigns to allow free operating systems to include binary firmware on terms acceptable to the open source community. Linspire-Linux creator Michael Robertson outlined the difficult position that Intel was in releasing to open source, as Intel did not want to upset their large customer Microsoft. Theo de Raadt of OpenBSD also claimed that Intel is being "an Open Source fraud" after an Intel employee presented a distorted view of the situation at an open-source conference. In spite of the significant negative attention Intel received as a result of the wireless dealings, the binary firmware still has not gained a license compatible with free software principles.

===Corporate responsibility record===
Intel has been accused by some residents of Rio Rancho, New Mexico of allowing VOCs to be released in excess of their pollution permit. One resident claimed that a release of 1.4 tons of carbon tetrachloride was measured from one acid scrubber during the fourth quarter of 2003 but an emission factor allowed Intel to report no carbon tetrachloride emissions for all of 2003. Corrales Comment 4/8/07 Corrales Comment  Intel Air Pollution Permit Revision Expected 

Another resident alleges that Intel was responsible for the release of other VOCs from their Rio Rancho site and that a necropsy of lung tissue from two deceased dogs in the area indicated trace amounts of toluene, hexane, ethylbenzene, and xylene isomers, Corrales Comment 11/25/2006 Intel Pollution Unresolved. all of which are solvents used in industrial settings but also commonly found in gasoline, retail paint thinners and retail solvents. During a sub-committee meeting of the New Mexico Environment Improvement Board, a resident claimed that Intel's own reports documented more than 1580 lb of VOCs were released in June and July 2006. Corrales Comment: Intel Pollution Control Shut Down Probed 

Intel's environmental performance is published annually in their corporate responsibility report. Intel Corporate Responsibility Report. Intel.com. Retrieved on July 8, 2011. 

In its 2012 rankings on the progress of consumer electronics companies relating to conflict minerals, the Enough Project rated Intel the best of 24 companies, calling it a "Pioneer of progress". In 2014, chief executive Brian Krzanich urged the rest of the industry to follow Intel's lead by also shunning conflict minerals. 

===Religious controversy===
Orthodox Jews have protested against Intel operating in Israel on Saturday, Shabbat. Intel ringed its office with barbed wire before the protest, but there was no violence. As of December 2009, the situation has been stable for Intel Israel while some employees reported working overtime on Shabbat.

===Age discrimination===
Intel has faced complaints of age discrimination in firing and layoffs. Intel was sued by nine former employees, over allegations that they were laid off because they were over the age of 40. "Intel Sued for Discrimination", Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, Jan. 30, 1993, B-12. 

A group called FACE Intel (Former and Current Employees of Intel) claims that Intel weeds out older employees. FACE Intel claims that more than 90 percent of people who have been laid off or fired from Intel are over the age of 40. Upside magazine requested data from Intel breaking out its hiring and firing by age, but the company declined to provide any. Alster, Norm, (December 7, 1998). "Techies complain of age biases", Upside Magazine. Retrieved on July 8, 2011. Intel has denied that age plays any role in Intel's employment practices. Weinberg, Neal (September 14, 1998). "Help Wanted: Older workers need not apply". CNN Retrieved on July 8, 2011. FACE Intel was founded by Ken Hamidi, who was fired from Intel in 1995 at the age of 47. Hamidi was blocked in a 1999 court decision from using Intel's email system to distribute criticism of the company to employees. Goodin, Dan (Apr. 28, 1999) "Court blocks former Intel employee's spam". CNET News. Retrieved on July 8, 2011. 

==Competition==

In the 1980s, Intel was among the top ten sellers of semiconductors (10th in 1987) in the world. In 1991, Intel became the biggest chip maker by revenue and has held the position ever since. Other top semiconductor companies include TSMC, Advanced Micro Devices, Samsung, Texas Instruments, Toshiba and STMicroelectronics.

Competitors in PC chip sets include AMD, VIA Technologies, SiS, and Nvidia. Intel's competitors in networking include Freescale, Infineon, Broadcom, Marvell Technology Group and AMCC, and competitors in flash memory include Spansion, Samsung, Qimonda, Toshiba, STMicroelectronics, and Hynix.

The only major competitor in the x86 processor market is Advanced Micro Devices (AMD), with which Intel has had full cross-licensing agreements since 1976: each partner can use the other's patented technological innovations without charge after a certain time. However, the cross-licensing agreement is canceled in the event of an AMD bankruptcy or takeover. Some smaller competitors such as VIA and Transmeta produce low-power x86 processors for small factor computers and portable equipment. However, the advent of such mobile computing devices, in particular, smartphones, has in recent years led to a decline in PC sales. This is seen as the main reason for Intel's 2013 Q1 net income drop of 25%. As over 95% of the world's smartphones are currently powered by processors designed by ARM Holdings, this company has become a major competitor for Intel's processor market. ARM is also planning to make inroads into the PC and server market. 

===Lawsuits===
Intel has often been accused by competitors of using legal claims to thwart competition. Intel claims that it is defending its intellectual property. Intel has been plaintiff and defendant in numerous legal actions.

In September 2005, Intel filed a response to an AMD lawsuit, disputing AMD's claims, and claiming that Intel's business practices are fair and lawful. In a rebuttal, Intel deconstructed AMD's offensive strategy and argued that AMD struggled largely as a result of its own bad business decisions, including underinvestment in essential manufacturing capacity and excessive reliance on contracting out chip foundries. Legal analysts predicted the lawsuit would drag on for a number of years, since Intel's initial response indicated its unwillingness to settle with AMD. In 2008 a court date was finally set, but in 2009 Intel settled with a $1.25 billion payout to AMD (see below). 

In October 2006, a Transmeta lawsuit was filed against Intel for patent infringement on computer architecture and power efficiency technologies. The lawsuit was settled in October 2007, with Intel agreeing to pay US$150 million initially and US$20 million per year for the next five years. Both companies agreed to drop lawsuits against each other, while Intel was granted a perpetual non-exclusive license to use current and future patented Transmeta technologies in its chips for 10 years. 

On November 4, 2009, New York's attorney general filed an antitrust lawsuit against Intel Corp, claiming the company used "illegal threats and collusion" to dominate the market for computer microprocessors.

On November 12, 2009, AMD agreed to drop the antitrust lawsuit against Intel in exchange for $1.25 billion. A joint press release published by the two chip makers stated "While the relationship between the two companies has been difficult in the past, this agreement ends the legal disputes and enables the companies to focus all of our efforts on product innovation and development." 

An antitrust lawsuit and a class-action suit relating to cold calling employees of other companies were settled out of court.
 http://www.washingtonpost.com/business/economy/apple-google-agree-to-settle-lawsuit-alleging-hiring-salary-conspiracy/2014/04/24/56f1bb32-cbff-11e3-95f7-7ecdde72d2ea_story.html?tid=hpModule_a2e19bf4-86a3-11e2-9d71-f0feafdd1394 

===Anti-competitive allegations===

====Japan====
In 2005, the local Fair Trade Commission found that Intel violated the Japanese Antimonopoly Act. The commission ordered Intel to eliminate discounts that had discriminated against AMD. To avoid a trial, Intel agreed to comply with the order. Europe files more antitrust complaints against Intel  MarketWatch. Marketwatch (July 17, 2008). Retrieved on July 8, 2011. Predatory pricing or old-fashioned competition? . International Herald Tribune (March 29, 2009). Retrieved on July 8, 2011. "Intel to abide by Japan FTC recommendations". CNET News. Retrieved on July 8, 2011. 

====European Union====
In July 2007, the European Commission accused Intel of anti-competitive practices, mostly against AMD. The allegations, going back to 2003, include giving preferential prices to computer makers buying most or all of their chips from Intel, paying computer makers to delay or cancel the launch of products using AMD chips, and providing chips at below standard cost to governments and educational institutions. Intel responded that the allegations were unfounded and instead qualified its market behavior as consumer-friendly. General counsel Bruce Sewell responded that the Commission had misunderstood some factual assumptions as to pricing and manufacturing costs. 

In February 2008, Intel stated that its office in Munich had been raided by European Union regulators. Intel reported that it was cooperating with investigators. Intel faced a fine of up to 10% of its annual revenue, if found guilty of stifling competition. AMD subsequently launched a website promoting these allegations. In June 2008, the EU filed new charges against Intel. In May 2009, the EU found that Intel had engaged in anti-competitive practices and subsequently fined Intel 1.06 billion (US$1.44 billion), a record amount. Intel was found to have paid companies, including Acer, Dell, HP, Lenovo and NEC, to exclusively use Intel chips in their products, and therefore harmed other companies including AMD. "Antitrust: Commission imposes fine of 1.06 bn on Intel for abuse of dominant position; orders Intel to cease illegal practices", reference: IP/09/745, date: May 13, 2009. Europa.eu (May 13, 2009). Retrieved on July 8, 2011. Neelie Kroes, "Commission takes antitrust action against Intel", introductory remarks at press conference, Brussels, May 13, 2009 The European Commission said that Intel had deliberately acted to keep competitors out of the computer chip market and in doing so had made a "serious and sustained violation of the EU's antitrust rules". In addition to the fine, Intel was ordered by the Commission to immediately cease all illegal practices. Intel has stated that they will appeal against the Commission's verdict. In June 2014, the General Court, which sits below the European Court of Justice, rejected the appeal. 

====South Korea====
In September 2007, South Korean regulators accused Intel of breaking antitrust law. The investigation began in February 2006, when officials raided Intel's South Korean offices. The company risked a penalty of up to 3% of its annual sales, if found guilty. In June 2008, the Fair Trade Commission ordered Intel to pay a fine of US$25.5 million for taking advantage of its dominant position to offer incentives to major Korean PC manufacturers on the condition of not buying products from AMD. 

====United States====
New York started an investigation of Intel in January 2008 on whether the company violated antitrust laws in pricing and sales of its microprocessors. In June 2008, the Federal Trade Commission also began an antitrust investigation of the case. In December 2009 the FTC announced it would initiate an administrative proceeding against Intel in September 2010. [http://online.wsj.com/article/BT-CO-20091217-712217.html ] 

In November 2009, following a two-year investigation, New York Attorney General Andrew Cuomo sued Intel, accusing them of bribery and coercion, claiming that Intel bribed computer makers to buy more of their chips than those of their rivals, and threatened to withdraw these payments if the computer makers were perceived as working too closely with its competitors. Intel has denied these claims. 

On July 22, 2010, Dell agreed to a settlement with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) to pay $100M in penalties resulting from charges that Dell did not accurately disclose accounting information to investors. In particular, the SEC charged that from 2002 to 2006, Dell had an agreement with Intel to receive rebates in exchange for not using chips manufactured by AMD. These substantial rebates were not disclosed to investors, but were used to help meet investor expectations regarding the company's financial performance; "These exclusivity payments grew from 10 percent of Dell's operating income in FY 2003 to 38 percent in FY 2006, and peaked at 76 percent in the first quarter of FY 2007.". Dell eventually did adopt AMD as a secondary supplier in 2006, and Intel subsequently stopped their rebates, causing Dell's financial performance to fall. 
 

 

 

==Market share==
According to IDC, while Intel still enjoys the biggest market share in both the overall worldwide PC microprocessor market (79.3%) and the mobile PC microprocessor (84.4%) in the second quarter of 2011, the numbers decreased by 1.5% and 1.9% compared to the first quarter. Dylan McGrath, EE Times. "IDC cuts PC microprocessor forecast." Aug 2, 2011. Retrieved Aug 2, 2011. Agam Shah, IDG News. "IDC Reduces Yearly Processor Shipment Growth Forecast." Aug 1, 2011. Retrieved Aug 2, 2011. 

Per Passmark's (?) CPU benchmark, which takes into account individual benchmarking of their software and each system results are reported with, Intel has retained 70% and more of the active market versus AMD since Q1 2008. PassMark CPU Benchmarks  AMD versus Intel market share "" 

==See also==

* ASCI Red
* AMD
* Comparison of ATI Graphics Processing Units
* Comparison of Intel processors
* Comparison of Nvidia graphics processing units
* Cyrix
* Engineering sample (CPU)
* Intel GMA (Graphics Media Accelerator)
* Intel Museum
* Intel Science Talent Search
* Intel Developer Zone (Intel DZ)
* List of Intel chipsets
* List of Intel CPU microarchitectures
* List of Intel manufacturing sites
* List of Intel microprocessors
* List of Semiconductor Fabrication Plants
* Semiconductor sales leaders by year
* Wintel

Intel related biographical articles on Wikipedia:
* Andy Grove
* Bill Gaede
* Bob Colwell
* Craig Barrett (chief executive)
* Gordon Moore
* Justin Rattner
* Pat Gelsinger
* Paul Otellini
* Robert Noyce
* Sean Maloney

==References==

==External links==

* Intel official website
* 
* Intel Developer Zone
* Intel Vintage Info.
* Intel demonstrated at CES 2014, wearable devices makes us more smarter with smart wirelesscharging, smart onesie, smart watch and Intel Edison.

 



[[smet nn]]

Mustafa smet nn (; 24 September 1884  25 December 1973) was a Turkish Army General, TSK Genel Kurmay Baskanlari Prime Minister, and second President of Turkey. In 1938, the Republican People's Party gave him the title of "Milli ef" (National Chief). Howard, Douglas Arthur (2001). The History of Turkey. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 109. ISBN 0-313-30708-3. 

==Family and early life==
smet nn was born in zmir, Aidin Vilayet to Hac Reit () and Cevriye () (later Cevriye Temelli), and was of Kurdish descent on his father's side and of Turkish descent through his mother. N. Pope, H. Pope, Turkey Unveiled: A History of Modern Turkey, Overlook Press, 1998, ISBN 1-58567-096-0, ISBN 978-1-58567-096-3, p.254 (... president of republic, including Ismet Inn and Turgut zal, had Kurdish blood. Several cabinet ministers in 1980s and 1990s had been Kurdish...)  reference found in Turkish Wikipedia article Romano, David, The Kurdish nationalist movement: opportunity, mobilization, and identity, (Cambridge University Press, 2006), 118; Despite his own Kurdish ancestry, Inonu had apparently embraced Ziya Gokalp's notions of Turkism, which allowed him to advance to the highest post of the new republic. Erik Jan Zrcher, (October 2002) "Demek smet Krttr. Hem de koyu Krt! Biz bu heyetin bandan Abaza diye Raufu attrdk. Trk diye bir halis Krt getirmiiz, vah yazk!", Rza Nur, Hayat ve Hatratm: Rza Nur-nn kavgas, Lozan ve tesi, aret Yaynlar, 1992, p. 235. "Even Ismet Inonu, Ataturk's long time ally and successor, was discouraged from revealing his Kurdish heritage.", Nader Entessar, "The Kurdish Mosaic of Discord", Third World Foundation, Third World Quarterly, Vol. 11, No. 4, Ethnicity in World Politics (Oct. 1989), Carfax Publishing Co., 1989, p. 93. Hac Reit was retired from the First Examinant Department of Legal Affairs Bureau of the War Ministry (Harbiye Nezareti Muhakemat Dairesi Birinci Mmeyyizlii), T.C. Genelkurmay Harp Tarihi Bakanl Yaynlar, Trk stikll Harbine Katlan Tmen ve Daha st Kademlerdeki Komutanlarn Biyografileri, Genkurmay Bakanl Basmevi, Ankara, 1972. who was born in Malatya and a member of Kmroullar family of Bitlis. Cevriye was a daughter of Mderris (professor) Hasan Efendi who was ulema and a member of Turkish family of Razgrad. Gnvar Otmanblk, smet Paa Dosyas, Cilt 1, Yaylack Matbaas, 1969, p. 6. Due to his father's assignments, the family moved from one city to another. Thus, Ismet completed his primary education in Sivas and graduated Sivas Military Junior High School (Sivas Asker Rtiyesi) in 1894. And then he studied at Sivas School for Civil Servants (Sivas Mlkiye dadisi) for a year.

When the 1934 Surname Law was adopted, Mustafa Kemal gave him a surname delivered from nn, where he commanded the forces of Army of Grand National Assembly as the Minister of the Chief of the General Staff (Erkn- Harbiye-i Umumiye Reis Vekili) during the Greco-Turkish War of 19191922. Afterwards these battles became to be known as the First Battle of nn and Second Battle of nn.

On 13 April 1916, Ismet married Mevhibe, who was a daughter of an Ashraf (Eraf) of Zitovi (present day Svishtov) Zht Efendi. They had three children: mer, Erdal and zden (married to Metin Toker). 

==Early military career==
Ismet graduated from the Imperial School of Military Engineering (Mhendishane-i Berr-i Hmyn) in 1903 as gunnery officer, and received his first military assignment in the Ottoman Army. He joined the Committee of Union and Progress. He won his first military victories by suppressing two major revolts against the struggling Ottoman Empire, first in Rumelia and later in Yemen, whose leader was Yahya Muhammad Hamid ed-Din. He served as a military officer during the Balkan Wars on the Ottoman-Bulgarian front. During World War I, he served with the Ottoman military rank of Miralay (arbitrarily the equivalent of Colonel or Senior Colonel (Brigadier)) and worked under Mustafa Kemal Pasha during his assignments at the Caucasus and Palestine fronts.

==Turkish War of Independence==

Field Marshal Mustafa Kemal Pasha and Brigadier General smet Pasha before the Battle of Dumlupnar, August 1922.

After losing the Battle of Megiddo against General Edmund Allenby during the last days of World War I, he went to Constantinople (Istanbul) and was assigned Undersecretary of the Ministry of War and then General Secretary of the Documentation in the Military Council.

After the military occupation of Constantinople on 16 March 1920, he decided to pass to Anatolia for joining the Turkish National Movement. He and his chief of staff Major Saffet (Arkan) wore soldier uniform and left Maltepe in the evening of 19 March 1920 and arrived at Ankara on 9 April 1920.

He was appointed the commander of the Western Front of the Army of the Grand National Assembly (GNA), a position in which he remained during the Turkish War of Independence. He was promoted to the rank of Mirliva (arbitrarily the equivalent of Brigadier General or Major General; the most junior General rank with the title Pasha in the Ottoman and pre-1934 Turkish Army) after winning the First Battle of nn which took place between 9 and 11 January 1921. He also won the subsequent Second Battle of nn which was fought between 26 and 31 March 1921. During the Turkish War of Independence he was also a member of the GNA in Ankara.

nn was replaced by Mustafa Fevzi Pasha, who was also the Prime Minister and Minister of Defense at the time, as the Chief of Staff of the Army of the GNA after the Turkish forces lost major battles against the advancing Greek Army in July 1921, as a result of which the cities Afyonkarahisar, Ktahya and Eskiehir were temporarily lost. He participated as a staff officer (with the rank Brigadier General) to the later battles, until the final Turkish victory in September 1922.

===Chief negotiator in Mudanya and Lausanne===

After the War of Independence was won, smet Pasha was appointed as the chief negotiator of the Turkish delegation, both for the Armistice of Mudanya and for the Treaty of Lausanne.

The Lausanne conference convened in late 1922 to settle the terms of a new treaty that would take the place of the Treaty of Svres. Inn became famous for his stubborn resolve in determining Ankara's position as the legitimate, sovereign government of Turkey. After delivering his position, Inn turned off his hearing aid during the speeches of British foreign secretary Lord Cruzon. When the secretary had finished, Inn reiterated his position as if Lord Cruzon had never said a word. Cleveland, William L., and Martin P. Bunton. A History of the Modern Middle East. Boulder: Westview, 2013. Print. 

==Single-party period==

===Prime Minister===
nn later served as the Prime Minister of Turkey for several terms, maintaining the system that Mustafa Kemal had put in place. He acted after every major crisis (such as the rebellion of Sheikh Said or the attempted assassination in Izmir against Mustafa Kemal) to restore peace in the country.

====Statism in economy====
He tried to manage the economy with heavy-handed government intervention, especially after the 1929 economic crisis, by implementing an economic plan inspired by the Five Year Plan of the Soviet Union. In doing so, he took much private property under government control. Due to his efforts, to this day, more than 70% of land in Turkey is still owned by the state.

Desiring a more liberal economic system, Atatrk dissolved the government of nn Lord Kinross, Ataturk: A biography of Mustafa Kermal, Father of Modern Turkey (New York: William Morrow & Company, 1965) p. 449. and appointed Cell Bayar, the founder of the first Turkish commercial bank Trkiye  Bankas, as Prime Minister.

=="National Chief" period==

===President===
Roosevelt, nn and Churchill at the Second Cairo Conference on 46 December 1943.

After the death of Atatrk on 10 November 1938, Nicole Pope and Hugh Pope, Turkey Unveiled: A History of Modern Turkey (New York: The Overlook Press, 2004) p. 68. nn was viewed as the most appropriate candidate to succeed him, and was elected the second President of the Republic of Turkey and enjoyed the official title of "Milli ef", i.e. "National Chief".

World War II broke out in the first year of his presidency, and both the Allies and the Axis pressured nn to bring Turkey into the war on their side. Nicole Pope and Hugh Pope, Turkey Unveiled: A History of Modern Turkey, p. 75. The Germans sent Franz von Papen to Ankara in February 1942, Nicole Pope and Hugh Pope, Turkey Unveiled: A History of Modern Turkey, p. 78. while the British sent Hughe Knatchbull-Hugessen and the French Ren Massigli. On 23 April 1939, Turkish Foreign Minister kr Saracolu told Knatchbull-Hugessen of his nation's fears of Italian claims of the Mediterranean as Mare Nostrum and German control of the Balkans, and suggested an Anglo-Soviet-Turkish alliance as the best way of countering the Axis. Watt, D.C. How War Came : The Immediate Origins of the Second World War, 19381939 ,London: Heinemann, 1989 page 278 In May 1939, during the visit of Maxime Weygand to Turkey, nn told the French Ambassador Ren Massigli that he believed that the best way of stopping Germany was an alliance of Turkey, the Soviet Union, France and Britain; that if such an alliance came into being, the Turks would allow Soviet ground and air forces onto their soil; and that he wanted a major programme of French military aid to modernize the Turkish armed forces. Watt, D.C. How War Came : The Immediate Origins of the Second World War, 19381939, London: Heinemann, 1989 page 282 British Prime Minister Winston Churchill, himself, travelled to Ankara on 30 January 1943 for a conference with President nnu, to urge Turkey's entry into the war on the allied side. Andrew Mango, The Turks Today, (New York: The Overlook Press, 2004) p. 36. The signing of the MolotovRibbentrop Pact on 23 August 1939 led Turkey away from the Allies as the Turks always believed that it was essential to have the Soviet Union as an ally to counter Germany, and the signing of the German-Soviet pact undercut completely the assumptions behind Turkish security policy. Watt, D.C. How War Came : The Immediate Origins of the Second World War, 19381939, London: Heinemann, 1989 page 310. 

When Winston Churchill met with nn in January 1943, they had met secretly inside a train wagon at the Yenice Station near Adana. However, by 46 December 1943, nn felt confident enough about the outcome of the war, that he met with openly with Franklin D. Roosevelt and Winston Churchill at the Second Cairo Conference. Until 1941, both Roosevelt and Churchill thought that Turkey's continuing neutrality would serve the interests of the Allies by blocking the Axis from reaching the strategic oil reserves of the Middle East. But the early victories of the Axis up to the end of 1942 caused Roosevelt and Churchill to re-evaluate a possible Turkish participation in the war on the side of the Allies. Turkey had maintained a decently-sized Army and Air Force throughout the war, and Churchill wanted the Turks to open a new front in the Balkans. Roosevelt, on the other hand, still believed that a Turkish attack would be too risky, and an eventual Turkish failure would have disastrous effects for the Allies.

nn knew very well the hardships which his country had suffered during decades of incessant war between 1908 and 1922 and was determined to keep Turkey out of another war as long as he could. The young Turkish Republic was still re-building, recovering from the losses due to earlier wars, and lacked any modern weapons and the infrastructure to enter a war to be fought along and possibly within its borders. nn based his neutrality policy during the Second World War on the premise that Western Allies and the Soviet Union would sooner or later have a falling out after the war. Andrew Mango, The Turks Today, p. 37. Thus, nnu wanted assurances on financial and military aid for Turkey, as well as a guarantee that the United States and the United Kingdom would stand beside Turkey in the event of a Soviet invasion of the Turkish Straits after the war. The post-war tensions and arguments surrounding the Turkish Straits would come to be known as the Turkish Straits crisis. The fear of Soviet invasion and Joseph Stalin's unconcealed desire for Soviet military bases in the Turkish Straits eventually caused Turkey to give up its principle of neutrality in foreign relations and join NATO in February 1952. Andrew Mango, The Turks Today, p. 47. 

==Multi-party period==

Under international pressure to transform the country to a democratic state, nn presided over the infamous 1946 elections, in which votes were cast in the open with onlookers able to observe to which party the voters had cast their votes, yet counting of the votes were not open for the public to observe.

In 1950, his party lost the first free elections in the republic's history. The Democratic Party used a slogan: "Geldi smet, kesildi ksmet" ("Since Ismet came, fortune was cut" ) for their election campaigns. nn presided over the peaceful transfer of power to the Democratic Party of Cell Bayar and Adnan Menderes. nn served for ten years as the leader of the opposition before returning to power as Prime Minister after the 1961 election, held after the military coup-d'etat in 1960.

Although the opposition was imprisoned during the 1961 elections, he still did not win a majority and had to form coalition governments until the 1965 elections. He lost both the 1965 and 1969 general elections to Sleyman Demirel and then in 1972 he lost his party's leadership race to Blent Ecevit.

smet nn was, by the standards of his time, a highly educated man; speaking Arabic, English, French and German in addition to his native Turkish.

nn died in 1973. He was interred opposite to Atatrk's mausoleum at Antkabir in Ankara and a massive tomb was constructed there.

==Legacy==
nn's tomb at Antkabir

nn University and Malatya nn Stadium in Malatya are named after him, as is the nn Stadium in Istanbul, home of the Beikta football club.

==Media==

Image:IsmetInonu1963 text.pdf|Text of the message by President smet nn on Mustafa Kemal Atatrk

==See also==
* Pembe Kk  Private home from 1925 to 1973
* ankaya Kk  The Presidency of the Republic of Turkey
* List of high-ranking commanders of the Turkish War of Independence
* 1st government of Turkey
* 2nd government of Turkey
* 4th government of Turkey
* 26th government of Turkey
* 27th government of Turkey
* 28th government of Turkey

==References==

==Further reading==
*Kinross, Lord, Ataturk: A Biography of Mustafa Kermal, Father of Modern Turkey (New York: William Morrow & Company, 1965). 
*Liebmann, George W. Diplomacy between the Wars: Five Diplomats and the Shaping of the Modern World (London I. B. Tauris, 2008)
*Mango, Andrew, The Turks Today (New York: The Overlook Press, 2004). ISBN 1-58567-615-2. 
*Pope, Nicole and Pope, Hugh, Turkey Unveiled: A History of Modern Turkey (New York: The Overlook Press, 2004). ISBN 1-58567-581-4.

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 



[[Inorganic chemistry]]

Inorganic compounds show rich variety:
A: Diborane features unusual bonding
B: Caesium chloride has an archetypal crystal structure
C: Fp2 is an organometallic complex

D: Silicone's uses range from breast implants to Silly Putty
E: Grubbs' catalyst won the 2005 Nobel Prize for its discoverer
F: Zeolites find extensive use as molecular sieves
G: Copper(II) acetate surprised theoreticians with its diamagnetism
Inorganic chemistry is the study of the synthesis and behavior of inorganic and organometallic compounds. This field covers all chemical compounds except the myriad organic compounds (carbon based compounds, usually containing C-H bonds), which are the subjects of organic chemistry. The distinction between the two disciplines is far from absolute, and there is much overlap, most importantly in the sub-discipline of organometallic chemistry. It has applications in every aspect of the chemical industryincluding catalysis, materials science, pigments, surfactants, coatings, medicine, fuel, and agriculture. 

==Key concepts==
The structure of the ionic framework in potassium oxide, K2O
Many inorganic compounds are ionic compounds, consisting of cations and anions joined by ionic bonding. Examples of salts (which are ionic compounds) are magnesium chloride MgCl2, which consists of magnesium cations Mg2+ and chloride anions Cl; or sodium oxide Na2O, which consists of sodium cations Na+ and oxide anions O2. In any salt, the proportions of the ions are such that the electric charges cancel out, so that the bulk compound is electrically neutral. The ions are described by their oxidation state and their ease of formation can be inferred from the ionization potential (for cations) or from the electron affinity (anions) of the parent elements. 

Important classes of inorganic salts are the oxides, the carbonates, the sulfates and the halides. Many inorganic compounds are characterized by high melting points. Inorganic salts typically are poor conductors in the solid state. Other important features include their solubility in water(see: solubility chart) and ease of crystallization. Where some salts (e.g., NaCl) are very soluble in water, others (e.g., SiO2) are not.

The simplest inorganic reaction is double displacement when in mixing of two salts the ions are swapped without a change in oxidation state. In redox reactions one reactant, the oxidant, lowers its oxidation state and another reactant, the reductant, has its oxidation state increased. The net result is an exchange of electrons. Electron exchange can occur indirectly as well, e.g., in batteries, a key concept in electrochemistry.

When one reactant contains hydrogen atoms, a reaction can take place by exchanging protons in acid-base chemistry. In a more general definition, an acid can be any chemical species capable of binding to electron pairs is called a Lewis acid; conversely any molecule that tends to donate an electron pair is referred to as a Lewis base. As a refinement of acid-base interactions, the HSAB theory takes into account polarizability and size of ions.

Inorganic compounds are found in nature as minerals. Soil may contain iron sulfide as pyrite or calcium sulfate as gypsum. Inorganic compounds are also found multitasking as biomolecules: as electrolytes (sodium chloride), in energy storage (ATP) or in construction (the polyphosphate backbone in DNA). 

The first important man-made inorganic compound was ammonium nitrate for soil fertilization through the Haber process. Inorganic compounds are synthesized for use as catalysts such as vanadium(V) oxide and titanium(III) chloride, or as reagents in organic chemistry such as lithium aluminium hydride.

Subdivisions of inorganic chemistry are organometallic chemistry, cluster chemistry and bioinorganic chemistry. These fields are active areas of research in inorganic chemistry, aimed toward new catalysts, superconductors, and therapies.

===Industrial inorganic chemistry===
Inorganic chemistry is a highly practical area of science. Traditionally, the scale of a nation's economy could be evaluated by their productivity of sulfuric acid. The top 20 inorganic chemicals manufactured in Canada, China, Europe, India, Japan, and the US (2005 data): "Facts & Figures Of The Chemical Industry Chemical and Engineering News, July 10, 2006. 
aluminium sulfate, ammonia, ammonium nitrate, ammonium sulfate, carbon black, chlorine, hydrochloric acid, hydrogen, hydrogen peroxide, nitric acid, nitrogen, oxygen, phosphoric acid, sodium carbonate, sodium chlorate, sodium hydroxide, sodium silicate, sodium sulfate, sulfuric acid, and titanium dioxide.

The manufacturing of fertilizers is another practical application of industrial inorganic chemistry.

==Descriptive inorganic chemistry==
Descriptive inorganic chemistry focuses on the classification of compounds based on their properties. Partly the classification focuses on the position in the periodic table of the heaviest element (the element with the highest atomic weight) in the compound, partly by grouping compounds by their structural similarities. When studying inorganic compounds, one often encounters parts of the different classes of inorganic chemistry (an organometallic compound is characterized by its coordination chemistry, and may show interesting solid state properties).

Different classifications are:

===Coordination compounds===
EDTA chelates an octahedrally coordinated Co3+ ion in 

Classical coordination compounds feature metals bound to "lone pairs" of electrons residing on the main group atoms of ligands such as H2O, NH3, Cl, and CN. In modern coordination compounds almost all organic and inorganic compounds can be used as ligands. The "metal" usually is a metal from the groups 3-13, as well as the trans-lanthanides and trans-actinides, but from a certain perspective, all chemical compounds can be described as coordination complexes. 

The stereochemistry of coordination complexes can be quite rich, as hinted at by Werner's separation of two enantiomers of 6+, an early demonstration that chirality is not inherent to organic compounds. A topical theme within this specialization is supramolecular coordination chemistry. 
*Examples: , hexammine chloride|], TiCl4(THF)2.

===Main group compounds===
Tetrasulfur tetranitride, S4N4, is a main group compound that continues to intrigue chemists
These species feature elements from groups 1, 2 and 13-18 (excluding hydrogen) of the periodic table. Due to their often similar reactivity, the elements in group 3 (Sc, Y, and La) and group 12 (Zn, Cd, and Hg) are also generally included. 

Main group compounds have been known since the beginnings of chemistry, e.g., elemental sulfur and the distillable white phosphorus. Experiments on oxygen, O2, by Lavoisier and Priestley not only identified an important diatomic gas, but opened the way for describing compounds and reactions according to stoichiometric ratios. The discovery of a practical synthesis of ammonia using iron catalysts by Carl Bosch and Fritz Haber in the early 1900s deeply impacted mankind, demonstrating the significance of inorganic chemical synthesis.
Typical main group compounds are SiO2, SnCl4, and N2O. Many main group compounds can also be classed as organometallic, as they contain organic groups, e.g., B(CH3)3). Main group compounds also occur in nature, e.g., phosphate in DNA, and therefore may be classed as bioinorganic. Conversely, organic compounds lacking (many) hydrogen ligands can be classed as inorganic, such as the fullerenes, buckytubes and binary carbon oxides.
*Examples: tetrasulfur tetranitride S4N4, diborane B2H6, silicones, buckminsterfullerene C60.

===Transition metal compounds===

Compounds containing metals from group 4 to 11 are considered transition metal compounds. Compounds with a metal from group 3 or 12 are sometimes also incorporated into this group, but also often classified as main group compounds.

Transition metal compounds show a rich coordination chemistry, varying from tetrahedral for titanium (e.g., TiCl4) to square planar for some nickel complexes to octahedral for coordination complexes of cobalt. A range of transition metals can be found in biologically important compounds, such as iron in hemoglobin.
*Examples: iron pentacarbonyl, titanium tetrachloride, cisplatin

===Organometallic compounds===
Organolithium reagents are most often found in polymeric form, such as n-butyllithium shown here

Usually, organometallic compounds are considered to contain the M-C-H group. The metal (M) in these species can either be a main group element or a transition metal. Operationally, the definition of an organometallic compound is more relaxed to include also highly lipophilic complexes such as metal carbonyls and even metal alkoxides.

Organometallic compounds are mainly considered a special category because organic ligands are often sensitive to hydrolysis or oxidation, necessitating that organometallic chemistry employs more specialized preparative methods than was traditional in Werner-type complexes. Synthetic methodology, especially the ability to manipulate complexes in solvents of low coordinating power, enabled the exploration of very weakly coordinating ligands such as hydrocarbons, H2, and N2. Because the ligands are petrochemicals in some sense, the area of organometallic chemistry has greatly benefited from its relevance to industry.
*Examples: Cyclopentadienyliron dicarbonyl dimer (C5H5)Fe(CO)2CH3, Ferrocene Fe(C5H5)2, Molybdenum hexacarbonyl Mo(CO)6, Diborane B2H6, Tetrakis(triphenylphosphine)palladium(0) Pd4

===Cluster compounds===
Decaborane is a powerfully toxic cluster compound of boron
Iron-sulfur clusters are central components of iron-sulfur proteins, essential for human metabolism

Clusters can be found in all classes of chemical compounds. According to the commonly accepted definition, a cluster consists minimally of a triangular set of atoms that are directly bonded to each other. But metal-metal bonded dimetallic complexes are highly relevant to the area. Clusters occur in "pure" inorganic systems, organometallic chemistry, main group chemistry, and bioinorganic chemistry. The distinction between very large clusters and bulk solids is increasingly blurred. This interface is the chemical basis of nanoscience or nanotechnology and specifically arise from the study of quantum size effects in cadmium selenide clusters. Thus, large clusters can be described as an array of bound atoms intermediate in character between a molecule and a solid.

*Examples: Fe3(CO)12, B10H14, chloride|], 4Fe-4S

===Bioinorganic compounds===
The octahedral cobalt centre of Vitamin B12

By definition, these compounds occur in nature, but the subfield includes anthropogenic species, such as pollutants (e.g., methylmercury) and drugs (e.g., Cisplatin). The field, which incorporates many aspects of biochemistry, includes many kinds of compounds, e.g., the phosphates in DNA, and also metal complexes containing ligands that range from biological macromolecules, commonly peptides, to ill-defined species such as humic acid, and to water (e.g., coordinated to gadolinium complexes employed for MRI). Traditionally bioinorganic chemistry focuses on electron- and energy-transfer in proteins relevant to respiration. Medicinal inorganic chemistry includes the study of both non-essential and essential elements with applications to diagnosis and therapies.

*Examples: hemoglobin, methylmercury, carboxypeptidase

===Solid state compounds===

YBa2Cu3O7, or YBCO, is a high temperature superconductor able to levitate above a magnet when colder than its critical temperature of about 90 K (183 C)
This important area focuses on structure, bonding, and the physical properties of materials. In practice, solid state inorganic chemistry uses techniques such as crystallography to gain an understanding of the properties that result from collective interactions between the subunits of the solid. Included in solid state chemistry are metals and their alloys or intermetallic derivatives. Related fields are condensed matter physics, mineralogy, and materials science.
*Examples: silicon chips, zeolites, YBa2Cu3O7

==Theoretical inorganic chemistry==
An alternative perspective on the area of inorganic chemistry begins with the Bohr model of the atom and, using the tools and models of theoretical chemistry and computational chemistry, expands into bonding in simple and then more complex molecules. Precise quantum mechanical descriptions for multielectron species, the province of inorganic chemistry, is difficult. This challenge has spawned many semi-quantitative or semi-empirical approaches including molecular orbital theory and ligand field theory, In parallel with these theoretical descriptions, approximate methodologies are employed, including density functional theory.

Exceptions to theories, qualitative and quantitative, are extremely important in the development of the field. For example, CuII2(OAc)4(H2O)2 is almost diamagnetic below room temperature whereas Crystal Field Theory predicts that the molecule would have two unpaired electrons. The disagreement between qualitative theory (paramagnetic) and observation (diamagnetic) led to the development of models for "magnetic coupling." These improved models led to the development of new magnetic materials and new technologies.

===Qualitative theories===
3 has only one unpaired electron]]
Inorganic chemistry has greatly benefited from qualitative theories. Such theories are easier to learn as they require little background in quantum theory. Within main group compounds, VSEPR theory powerfully predicts, or at least rationalizes, the structures of main group compounds, such as an explanation for why NH3 is pyramidal whereas ClF3 is T-shaped. For the transition metals, crystal field theory allows one to understand the magnetism of many simple complexes, such as why 3 has only one unpaired electron, whereas 3+ has five. A particularly powerful qualitative approach to assessing the structure and reactivity begins with classifying molecules according to electron counting, focusing on the numbers of valence electrons, usually at the central atom in a molecule.

===Molecular symmetry group theory===
Nitrogen dioxide, NO2, exhibits C2v symmetry
A central construct in inorganic chemistry is the theory of molecular symmetry. Mathematical group theory provides the language to describe the shapes of molecules according to their point group symmetry. Group theory also enables factoring and simplification of theoretical calculations. 

Spectroscopic features are analyzed and described with respect to the symmetry properties of the, inter alia, vibrational or electronic states. Knowledge of the symmetry properties of the ground and excited states allows one to predict the numbers and intensities of absorptions in vibrational and electronic spectra. A classic application of group theory is the prediction of the number of C-O vibrations in substituted metal carbonyl complexes. The most common applications of symmetry to spectroscopy involve vibrational and electronic spectra.

As an instructional tool, group theory highlights commonalities and differences in the bonding of otherwise disparate species, such as WF6 and Mo(CO)6 or CO2 and NO2.

==Thermodynamics and inorganic chemistry==
An alternative quantitative approach to inorganic chemistry focuses on energies of reactions. This approach is highly traditional and empirical, but it is also useful. Broad concepts that are couched in thermodynamic terms include redox potential, acidity, phase changes. A classic concept in inorganic thermodynamics is the Born-Haber cycle, which is used for assessing the energies of elementary processes such as electron affinity, some of which cannot be observed directly.

==Mechanistic inorganic chemistry==
An important and increasingly popular aspect of inorganic chemistry focuses on reaction pathways. The mechanisms of reactions are discussed differently for different classes of compounds.

===Main group elements and lanthanides===
The mechanisms of main group compounds of groups 13-18 are usually discussed in the context of organic chemistry (organic compounds are main group compounds, after all). Elements heavier than C, N, O, and F often form compounds with more electrons than predicted by the octet rule, as explained in the article on hypervalent molecules. The mechanisms of their reactions differ from organic compounds for this reason. Elements lighter than carbon (B, Be, Li) as well as Al and Mg often form electron-deficient structures that are electronically akin to carbocations. Such electron-deficient species tend to react via associative pathways. The chemistry of the lanthanides mirrors many aspects of chemistry seen for aluminium.

===Transition metal complexes===
Mechanisms for the reactions of transition metals are discussed differently from main group compounds. The important role of d-orbitals in bonding strongly influences the pathways and rates of ligand substitution and dissociation. These themes are covered in articles on coordination chemistry and ligand. Both associative and dissociative pathways are observed.

An overarching aspect of mechanistic transition metal chemistry is the kinetic lability of the complex illustrated by the exchange of free and bound water in the prototypical complexes n+:
:n+ + 6 H2O*  n+ + 6 H2O
:where H2O* denotes isotopically enriched water, e.g., H217O
The rates of water exchange varies by 20 orders of magnitude across the periodic table, with lanthanide complexes at one extreme and Ir(III) species being the slowest.

====Redox reactions====
Redox reactions are prevalent for the transition elements. Two classes of redox reaction are considered: atom-transfer reactions, such as oxidative addition/reductive elimination, and electron-transfer. A fundamental redox reaction is "self-exchange", which involves the degenerate reaction between an oxidant and a reductant. For example, permanganate and its one-electron reduced relative manganate exchange one electron:
: + 2  2 + 

====Reactions at ligands====
Coordinated ligands display reactivity distinct from the free ligands. For example, the acidity of the ammonia ligands in hexammine chloride|] is elevated relative to NH3 itself. Alkenes bound to metal cations are reactive toward nucleophiles whereas alkenes normally are not. The large and industrially important area of catalysis hinges on the ability of metals to modify the reactivity of organic ligands. Homogeneous catalysis occurs in solution and heterogeneous catalysis occurs when gaseous or dissolved substrates interact with surfaces of solids. Traditionally homogeneous catalysis is considered part of organometallic chemistry and heterogeneous catalysis is discussed in the context of surface science, a subfield of solid state chemistry. But the basic inorganic chemical principles are the same. Transition metals, almost uniquely, react with small molecules such as CO, H2, O2, and C2H4. The industrial significance of these feedstocks drives the active area of catalysis. Ligands can also undergo ligand transfer reactions such as transmetalation.

==Characterization of inorganic compounds==
Because of the diverse range of elements and the correspondingly diverse properties of the resulting derivatives, inorganic chemistry is closely associated with many methods of analysis. Older methods tended to examine bulk properties such as the electrical conductivity of solutions, melting points, solubility, and acidity. With the advent of quantum theory and the corresponding expansion of electronic apparatus, new tools have been introduced to probe the electronic properties of inorganic molecules and solids. Often these measurements provide insights relevant to theoretical models. For example, measurements on the photoelectron spectrum of methane demonstrated that describing the bonding by the two-center, two-electron bonds predicted between the carbon and hydrogen using Valence Bond Theory is not appropriate for describing ionisation processes in a simple way. Such insights led to the popularization of molecular orbital theory as fully delocalised orbitals are a more appropriate simple description of electron removal and electron excitation.

Commonly encountered techniques are:
* X-ray crystallography: This technique allows for the 3D determination of molecular structures.
* Dual polarisation interferometer: This technique measures the conformation and conformational change of molecules.
* Various forms of spectroscopy
** Ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy: Historically, this has been an important tool, since many inorganic compounds are strongly colored
** NMR spectroscopy: Besides 1H and 13C many other "good" NMR nuclei (e.g., 11B, 19F, 31P, and 195Pt) give important information on compound properties and structure. Also the NMR of paramagnetic species can result in important structural information. Proton NMR is also important because the light hydrogen nucleus is not easily detected by X-ray crystallography.
** Infrared spectroscopy: Mostly for absorptions from carbonyl ligands
** Electron nuclear double resonance (ENDOR) spectroscopy
**Mssbauer spectroscopy
** Electron-spin resonance: ESR (or EPR) allows for the measurement of the environment of paramagnetic metal centres.
* Electrochemistry: Cyclic voltammetry and related techniques probe the redox characteristics of compounds.

==Synthetic inorganic chemistry==
Although some inorganic species can be obtained in pure form from nature, most are synthesized in chemical plants and in the laboratory.

Inorganic synthetic methods can be classified roughly according the volatility or solubility of the component reactants. Soluble inorganic compounds are prepared using methods of organic synthesis. For metal-containing compounds that are reactive toward air, Schlenk line and glove box techniques are followed. Volatile compounds and gases are manipulated in vacuum manifolds consisting of glass piping interconnected through valves, the entirety of which can be evacuated to 0.001 mm Hg or less. Compounds are condensed using liquid nitrogen (b.p. 78K) or other cryogens. Solids are typically prepared using tube furnaces, the reactants and products being sealed in containers, often made of fused silica (amorphous SiO2) but sometimes more specialized materials such as welded Ta tubes or Pt boats. Products and reactants are transported between temperature zones to drive reactions.

==See also==
* Important publications in inorganic chemistry

==References==

 

 


[[Insert (filmmaking)]]

In film, an insert is a shot of part of a scene as filmed from a different angle and/or focal length from the master shot. Inserts cover action already covered in the master shot, but emphasize a different aspect of that action due to the different framing. An insert differs from a cutaway as cutaways cover action not covered in the master shot.

There are more exact terms to use when the new, inserted shot is another view of actors: close-up, head shot, knee shot, two shot. So the term "insert" is often confined to views of objectsand body parts, other than the head. Thus: CLOSE-UP of the gunfighter, INSERT of his hand quivering above the holster, TWO SHOT of his friends watching anxiously, INSERT of the clock ticking.

Often inserts of this sort are done separately from the main action, by a second-unit director using stand-ins.

Inserts and cutaways can both be vexatious for directors, as care must be taken to preserve continuity by keeping the objects in the same relative position as in the main take, and having the lighting be the same.

== In popular culture ==
The 1975 movie Inserts directed by John Byrum about a pornographic film production, which starred Richard Dreyfuss and was originally released with an X rating, took its name from the double meaning that "insert" both refers to this film technique (often used in pornographic filmmaking) and to sexual intercourse.

==See also==

*Continuity editing
*Cutaway (filmmaking)

== References ==
 



[[Ingmar Bergman]]

Ernst Ingmar Bergman (; 14 July 1918  30 July 2007) was a Swedish director, writer and producer for film, stage and television. He is recognized as one of the most accomplished and influential film directors of all time. 

He directed over sixty films and documentaries for cinematic release and for television, most of which he also wrote. He also directed over one hundred and seventy plays. Among his company of actors were Harriet Andersson, Liv Ullmann, Gunnar Bjrnstrand, Bibi Andersson, Erland Josephson, Ingrid Thulin and Max von Sydow. Most of his films were set in the landscape of Sweden. His work often dealt with death, illness, faith, betrayal, bleakness and insanity.

==Early life==
A young Bergman
Ingmar Bergman was born in Uppsala, Sweden, the son of Erik Bergman, a Lutheran minister and later chaplain to the King of Sweden, and Karin (ne kerblom), a nurse who also had Walloon Frank Gado, The Passion of Ingmar Bergman, Duke University Press (1996), p. 374. ancestors. In a book published in 2011, Bergman's niece Veronica Ralston suggested that the director was not identical to the child born to Erik and Karin Bergman in July 1918. Ralston's claim was that this child would have died and been substituted for another child allegedly born to Erik Bergman in an extramarital relationship. (See Who was the mother of Ingmar Bergman? Dagens Nyheter, 26 May 2011, accessed 28 May 2011.) The DNA evidence was weakened after the laboratory consulted by Ralston clarified that it had only been possible to extract DNA from one out of two stamps submitted for testing, and the child supposedly substituted for the newborn child of Karin Bergman was later identified as having emigrated to the USA in 1923 with his adopted parents and lived there until his death in 1982 (Clas Barkman, Nya turer i mysteriet kring Bergman, Dagens Nyheter, 4 June 2011, accessed 8 June 2011). He grew up with his older brother Dag and sister Margareta surrounded by religious imagery and discussion. His father was a conservative parish minister with strict parenting concepts. Ingmar was locked up in dark closets for "infractions", such as wetting the bed. "While father preached away in the pulpit and the congregation prayed, sang, or listened", Ingmar wrote in his autobiography Laterna Magica,"I devoted my interest to the church's mysterious world of low arches, thick walls, the smell of eternity, the coloured sunlight quivering above the strangest vegetation of medieval paintings and carved figures on ceilings and walls. There was everything that one's imagination could desire  angels, saints, dragons, prophets, devils, humans".

Although raised in a devout Lutheran household, Bergman later stated that he lost his faith at age eight and only came to terms with this fact while making Winter Light. The Films of Ingmar Bergman, by Jesse Kalin, 2003, pg. 193 Bergmans interest in theatre and film began early: At the age of nine, he traded a set of tin soldiers for a magic lantern, a possession that altered the course of his life. Within a year, he had created, by playing with this toy, a private world in which he felt completely at home, he recalled. He fashioned his own scenery, marionettes, and lighting effects and gave puppet productions of Strindberg plays in which he spoke all the parts. Ingmar Bergman, Master Filmmaker, Dies at 89 by Mervyn Rothstein, New York Times, 31 July 2007. For an extended discussion of the profound influence that August Strindbergs work played in Bergmans life and career, see: Ottiliana Rolandsson, Pure Artistry: Ingmar Bergman, the Face as Portal and the Performance of the Soul, Ph.D. dissertation, University of California, Santa Barbara, 2010, especially chapter 3, Bergman, Strindberg and the Territories of Imagination. 

In 1934, aged 16, he was sent to Germany to spend the summer vacation with family friends. He attended a Nazi rally in Weimar at which he saw Adolf Hitler. Jerry Vermilye, Ingmar Bergman: His Life and Films, 2001, p. 6; see also Bergman's autobiography, Laterna Magica. He later wrote in Laterna Magica (The Magic Lantern) about the visit to Germany, describing how the German family had put a portrait of Adolf Hitler on the wall by his bed, and that "for many years, I was on Hitler's side, delighted by his success and saddened by his defeats". Ingmar Bergman, The Magic Lantern (transl. from Swedish: Laterna Magica), Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007; ISBN 978-0-226-04382-1. Bergman commented that "Hitler was unbelievably charismatic. He electrified the crowd. ... The Nazism I had seen seemed fun and youthful". Bergman did two five-month stretches of mandatory military service. Peter Ohlin. (2009.) "Bergman's Nazi Past", Scandinavian Studies, 81(4):437-74 

In 1937, he entered Stockholm University College (later renamed Stockholm University), to study art and literature. He spent most of his time involved in student theatre and became a genuine movie addict. Jerry Vermilye, Ingmar Bergman: His Life and Films, 2001, p. 6. At the same time, a romantic involvement led to a break with his father that lasted for years. Although he did not graduate, he wrote a number of plays, as well as an opera, and became an assistant director at a theatre. In 1942, he was given the chance to direct one of his own scripts, Caspars Death. The play was seen by members of Svensk Filmindustri, which then offered Bergman a position working on scripts. In 1943, he married Else Fisher.

==Career==

===Film work===
Bergmans film career began in 1941 with his rewriting of scripts, but his first major accomplishment was in 1944 when he wrote the screenplay for Torment/Frenzy (Hets), a film directed by Alf Sjberg. Along with writing the screenplay, he was also given position as assistant director to the film. In his second autobiographical work, Images: My Life in Film, Bergman describes the filming of the exteriors as his actual film directorial debut. Ingmar Bergman, Images : my life in film (translated from the Swedish by Marianne Ruuth), London: Bloomsbury, 1994. ISBN 0-7475-1670-7. The international success of this film led to Bergmans first opportunity to direct a year later. During the next ten years, he wrote and directed more than a dozen films including The Devils Wanton/Prison (Fngelse) in 1949 as well as The Naked Night/Sawdust and Tinsel (Gycklarnas afton) and Summer with Monika (Sommaren med Monika), both from 1953.

Ingmar Bergman and Victor Sjstrm on the set of Wild Strawberries (1957)

Bergman first achieved worldwide success with Smiles of a Summer Night (Sommarnattens leende) (1955), which won for Best poetic humour and was nominated for the Palme dOr at Cannes the following year. This was followed by The Seventh Seal (Det sjunde inseglet) and Wild Strawberries (Smultronstllet), released in Sweden ten months apart in 1957. The Seventh Seal won a special jury prize and was nominated for the Palme dOr at Cannes and Wild Strawberries won numerous awards for Bergman and its star, Victor Sjstrm. Bergman continued to be productive for the next two decades. From the early 1960s, he spent much of his life on the Swedish island of Fr, where he made several films.

In the early 1960s he directed three films that explored the theme of faith and doubt in God, Through a Glass Darkly (Ssom i en Spegel, 1961), Winter Light (Nattvardsgsterna, 1962), and The Silence (Tystnaden, 1963). Critics created the notion that the common themes in these three films made them a trilogy or cinematic triptych. Bergman initially responded that he did not plan these three films as a trilogy and that he could not see any common motifs in them, but he later seemed to have adopted the notion, with some equivocation. Stated in Marie Nyrerds interview series (the first part named Bergman och filmen) aired on Sveriges Television Easter 2004. In contrast, in 1964 Bergman had the three scripts published in a single volume: These three films deal with reduction. Through a Glass Darkly  conquered certainty. Winter Light  penetrated certainty. The Silence  Gods silence  the negative imprint. Therefore, they constitute a trilogy. The Criterion Collection groups the films as a trilogy in a boxed set. In the 1963 documentary Ingmar Bergman Makes a Movie, about the making of Winter Light, supports the idea that Bergman did not plan a trilogy. In the interview with Bergman about writing the script of Winter Light, and the interviews made during the shooting of it, he hardly mentions Through a Glass Darkly. Instead, he discusses the themes of Winter Light, in particular the religious issues, in relation to The Virgin Spring. In 1964 he made a parody of Fellini with All These Women (Fr att inte tala om alla dessa kvinnor). Donald F. Theall, Beyond the word: reconstructing sense in the Joyce era of technology, culture, and communication, 1995, p. 35. 

In 1966, he directed Persona, a film that he himself considered one of his most important works. While the shockingly experimental film won few awards, many consider it his masterpiece. Other notable films of the period include The Virgin Spring (Jungfrukllan, 1960), Hour of the Wolf (Vargtimmen, 1968), Shame (Skammen, 1968) and A Passion/The Passion of Anna (En Passion, 1969). Bergman also produced extensively for Swedish television at this time. Two works of note were Scenes from a Marriage (Scener ur ett ktenskap, 1973) and The Magic Flute (Trollfljten, 1975).

After his arrest in 1976 for tax evasion, Bergman swore he would never again make films in Sweden. He shut down his film studio on the island of Fr and went into self-imposed exile. He briefly considered the possibility of working in America and his next film, The Serpents Egg (1977) was a German-U.S. production and his second English-language film (the first being 1971s The Touch). This was followed a year later with a British-Norwegian co-production of Autumn Sonata (Hstsonaten, 1978) starring Ingrid Bergman. The one other film he directed was From the Life of the Marionettes (Aus dem Leben der Marionetten, 1980) a British-German co-production.

In 1982, he temporarily returned to his homeland to direct Fanny and Alexander (Fanny och Alexander). Bergman stated that the film would be his last, and that afterwards he would focus on directing theatre. Since then, he wrote several film scripts and directed a number of television specials. As with previous work for TV, some of these productions were later released in theatres. The last such work was Saraband (2003), a sequel to Scenes from a Marriage and directed by Bergman when he was eighty-four years old.

Ingmar Bergman with his long-time cinematographer Sven Nykvist during the production of Through a Glass Darkly (1960)

====Repertory company====
A great number of Bergmans interior scenes were filmed at the Filmstaden studios north of Stockholm.

Bergman developed a personal repertory company of Swedish actors whom he repeatedly cast in his films, including Max von Sydow, Bibi Andersson, Harriet Andersson, Erland Josephson, Ingrid Thulin, Gunnel Lindblom, Bengt Ekerot, Anders Ek, and Gunnar Bjrnstrand, each of whom appeared in at least five Bergman features. Norwegian actress Liv Ullmann, who appeared in nine of Bergmans films and one televisual film (Saraband), was the last to join this group (in the 1966 film Persona), and ultimately became most closely associated with Bergman, both artistically and personally. They had a daughter together, Linn Ullmann (born 1966).

Bergman began working with Sven Nykvist, his cinematographer, in 1953. The two of them developed and maintained a working relationship of sufficient rapport to allow Bergman not to worry about the composition of a shot until the day before it was filmed. On the morning of the shoot, he would briefly speak to Nykvist about the mood and composition he hoped for, and then leave Nykvist to work lacking interruption or comment until post-production discussion of the next days work.

====Financing====
By Bergmans own account, he never had a problem with funding. He cited two reasons for this: one, that he did not live in the United States, which he viewed as obsessed with box-office earnings; and two, that his films tended to be low-budget affairs. (Cries and Whispers, for instance, was finished for about $450,000, while Scenes from a Marriage, a six-episode television feature, cost only $200,000.) American Film Institute seminar, 1975, on The Criterion Collections 2006 DVD of The Virgin Spring. 

====Technique====
Bergman usually wrote his own screenplays, thinking about them for months or years before starting the actual process of writing, which he viewed as somewhat tedious. His earlier films are carefully constructed and are either based on his plays or written in collaboration with other authors. Bergman stated that in his later works, when on occasion his actors would want to do things differently from his own intention, he would let them, noting that the results were often disastrous when he did not do so. As his career progressed, Bergman increasingly let his actors improvise their dialogue. In his latest films, he wrote just the ideas informing the scene and allowed his actors to determine the exact dialogue. When viewing daily rushes, Bergman stressed the importance of being critical but unemotive, claiming that he asked himself not if the work is great or terrible, but if it is sufficient or if it needs to be reshot. 

Bergman and actress Ingrid Thulin during the production of The Silence (1963)

====Subjects====
Bergmans films usually deal with existential questions of mortality, loneliness, and religious faith. While these topics could seem cerebral, sexual desire found its way to the foreground of most of his films, whether the setting was a medieval plague (The Seventh Seal), upper-class family activity in early twentieth century Uppsala (Fanny and Alexander) or contemporary alienation (The Silence). His female characters are usually more in touch with their sexuality than the men, and unafraid to proclaim it, sometimes with breathtaking overtness (e.g., Cries and Whispers) as would define the work of the conjurer, as Bergman called himself in a 1960 Time Magazine cover story. In an interview with Playboy in 1964, he said: The manifestation of sex is very important, and particularly to me, for above all, I dont want to make merely intellectual films. I want audiences to feel, to sense my films. This to me is much more important than their understanding them. Film, Bergman said, was his demanding mistress.

====Bergmans views on his career====
When asked about his films, Bergman said he held Winter Light, Persona, and Cries and Whispers in the highest regard, though in an interview in 2004, Bergman said that he was depressed by his own films and could not watch them anymore. In these films, he said, he managed to push the medium to its limit. Bergman stated on numerous occasions (for example in the interview book Bergman on Bergman) that The Silence meant the end of the era in which religious questions were a major concern of his films.

===Theatrical work===
Although Bergman was universally famous for his contribution to cinema, he was also an active and productive stage director all his life. During his studies at Stockholm University, he became active in its student theatre, where he made a name for himself early on. His first work after graduation was as a trainee-director at a Stockholm theatre. At twenty-six years, he became the youngest theatrical manager in Europe at the Helsingborg City Theatre. He stayed at Helsingborg for three years and then became the director at Gothenburg city theatre from 1946 to 1949.

He became director of the Malm city theatre in 1953 and remained for seven years. Many of his star actors were people with whom he began working on stage, and a number of people in the Bergman troupe of his 1960s films came from Malms city theatre (Max von Sydow, for example). He was the director of the Royal Dramatic Theatre in Stockholm from 1960 to 1966 and manager from 1963 to 1966, where he began a long-time collaboration with choreographer Donya Feuer.

After Bergman left Sweden because of the tax evasion incident, he became director of the Residenz Theatre of Munich, Germany (197784). He remained active in theatre throughout the 1990s and made his final production on stage with Henrik Ibsens The Wild Duck at the Royal Dramatic Theatre in 2002. A complete list of Bergmans work in theatre can be found under Stage Productions and Radio Theatre Credits at Ingmar Bergman filmography.

===Tax evasion charges===
On 30 January 1976, while rehearsing August Strindbergs Dance of Death at the Royal Dramatic Theatre in Stockholm, he was arrested by two plainclothes police officers and charged with income tax evasion. The impact of the event on Bergman was devastating. He suffered a nervous break-down as a result of the humiliation and was hospitalized in a state of deep depression.

The investigation was focused on an alleged 1970 transaction of 500,000 Swedish kronor (SEK) between Bergmans Swedish company Cinematograf and its Swiss subsidiary Persona, an entity that was mainly used for the paying of salaries to foreign actors. Bergman dissolved Persona in 1974 after having been notified by the Swedish Central Bank and subsequently reported the income. On 23 March 1976, the special prosecutor Anders Nordenadler dropped the charges against Bergman, saying that the alleged crime had no legal basis, saying it would be like bringing charges against a person who has stolen his own car, thinking it was someone elses. tal mot Bergman lggs ned (video) Sveriges Television, Rapport, 23 March 1976. Director General Gsta Ekman, chief of the Swedish Internal Revenue Service, defended the failed investigation, saying that the investigation was dealing with important legal material and that Bergman was treated just like any other suspect. He expressed regret that Bergman had left the country, hoping that Bergman was a stronger person now when the investigation had shown that he had not done any wrong. Generaldirektr om Bergmans flykt (video) Sveriges Television, Rapport, 22 April 1976. 

Even though the charges were dropped, Bergman became disconsolate, fearing he would never again return to directing. Despite pleas by the Swedish prime minister Olof Palme, high public figures, and leaders of the film industry, he vowed never to work again in Sweden. He closed down his studio on the island of Fr, suspended two announced film projects, and went into self-imposed exile in Munich, Germany. Harry Schein, director of the Swedish Film Institute, estimated the immediate damage as ten million SEK (kronor) and hundreds of jobs lost. Harry Schein om Bergmans flyk (video) Sveriges Television, Rapport, 22 April 1976. 

===Return===
Although he continued to operate from Munich, by mid-1978 Bergman had overcome some of his bitterness toward the government of Sweden. In July of that year he visited Sweden, celebrating his sixtieth birthday at Fr, and partly resumed his work as a director at Royal Dramatic Theatre. To honour his return, the Swedish Film Institute launched a new Ingmar Bergman Prize to be awarded annually for excellence in filmmaking. Ephraim Katz, The Film Encyclopedia, New York: HarperCollins, 5th ed., 1998. Still, he remained in Munich until 1984. In one of the last major interviews with Bergman, conducted in 2005 at Fr Island, Bergman said that despite being active during the exile, he had effectively lost eight years of his professional life. Ingmar Bergman: Samtal p Fr, Sveriges Radio, 28 March 2005. 

Bergman retired from filmmaking in December 2003. He had hip surgery in October 2006 and was making a difficult recovery. He died peacefully in his sleep, at his home on Fr, on 30 July 2007, at the age of 89, the same day that another renowned film director, Michelangelo Antonioni, also died. He was buried on the island on 18 August 2007 in a private ceremony. A place in the Fr churchyard was prepared for him under heavy secrecy. Although he was buried on the island of Fr, his name and date of birth were inscribed under his wifes name on a tomb at Roslagsbro churchyard, Norrtlje Municipality, several years before his death.

On 6 April 2011, the Bank of Sweden announced that Bergmans portrait will feature on the new 200 kronor banknote, to be issued in 2014 or 2015. Bergman portrait on Swedish kronor 

===Unrealised projects===
When Bergman died, a large archive of notes was donated to the Swedish Film Institute. Among the notes are several unpublished and unfinished scripts both for stage and films, and many more ideas for works in different stages of development. A never performed play has the title Krlek utan lskare (Love without lovers), and has the note Complete disaster! written on the envelope; the play is about a director who disappears and an editor who tries to complete a work he has left unfinished. Other canceled projects include the script for a pornographic film which Bergman abandoned since he did not think it was alive enough, a play about a cannibal, some loose scenes set inside a womb, a film about the life of Jesus, a film about The Merry Widow, and a play with the title Frn sperm till spke (From sperm to spook). The Swedish director Marcus Lindeen went through the material, and inspired by Krlek utan lskare he took samples from many of the works and turned them into a play, titled Arkivet fr orealiserbara drmmar och visioner (The archive for unrealisable dreams and visions). Lindeens play premiered on 28 May 2012 at the Stockholm City Theatre. 

==Family==
The grave of Ingmar Bergman and his last wife, Ingrid von Rosen
Bergman was married five times:
* 25 March 1943  1945, to Else Fisher, choreographer and dancer (divorced). Children:
** Lena Bergman, actress, born 1943.
* 22 July 1945  1950, to Ellen Lundstrm, choreographer and film director (divorced). Children:
** Eva Bergman, film director, born 1945,
** Jan Bergman, film director (19462000), and
** the twins Mats and Anna Bergman, both actors and film directors, born in 1948.
* 1951  1959, to Gun Grut, journalist (divorced). Children:
** Ingmar Bergman Jr, airline captain, born 1951.
* 1959  1969, to Kbi Laretei, concert pianist (divorced). Children:
** Daniel Bergman, film director, born 1962.
* 11 November 1971  20 May 1995, to Ingrid von Rosen (maiden name Karlebo). Children:
** Maria von Rosen, author, born 1959.

The first four marriages ended in divorce, while the last ended when his wife Ingrid died of stomach cancer in 1995, aged 65. Aside from his marriages, Bergman had romantic relationships with actresses Harriet Andersson (195255), Bibi Andersson (195559), and Liv Ullmann (196570). He was the father of writer Linn Ullmann with Liv Ullmann. In all, Bergman had nine children, one of whom predeceased him. Bergman was eventually married to all of the mothers except Liv Ullmann, but his daughter with his last wife, Ingrid von Rosen, was born twelve years before their marriage.

==Collegial critique and influence==
Bust of Ingmar Bergman in Celebrity Alley in Kielce, Poland
Many filmmakers have praised Bergman and some have also cited his work as an influence on their own:
* Andrei Tarkovsky held Bergman in very high regard, noting him and Robert Bresson as his two favourite filmmakers, stating: I am only interested in the views of two people: one is called Bresson and one called Bergman. Such was Bergmans influence, Tarkovskys last film was made in Sweden with Sven Nykvist, Bergmans longtime cinematographer, and several of Bergmans favoured actors including Erland Josephson. Bergman likewise had great respect for Tarkovsky, stating: Tarkovsky for me is the greatest director. Title quote of 2003 Tarkovsky Festival Program, Pacific Film Archive 
* Pedro Almodvar 
* Jean-Luc Godard 
* Robert Altman 
* Olivier Assayas 
* Francis Ford Coppola stated: My all-time favorite because he embodies passion, emotion and has warmth.
* Guillermo del Toro said: Bergman as a fabulist  my favorite  is absolutely mesmerizing. 
* Asghar Farhadi Farhadi, Asghar. DP/30: A Separation, Writer/director Asghar Farhadi. Interview. 19 December 2011. Web. 
* Todd Field stated: He was our tunnel man building the aqueducts of our cinematic collective unconscious.
* Woody Allen referred to Bergman as probably the greatest film artist, all things considered, since the invention of the motion picture camera and paid homage to Bergman in Manhattan.
* Krzysztof Kielowski stated: This man is one of the few film directors  perhaps the only one in the world  to have said as much about human nature as Dostoyevsky or Camus.
* Stanley Kubrick stated: I believe Ingmar Bergman, Vittorio De Sica and Federico Fellini are the only three filmmakers in the world who are not just artistic opportunists. By this I mean they dont just sit and wait for a good story to come along and then make it. They have a point of view which is expressed over and over and over again in their films, and they themselves write or have original material written for them.
* Ang Lee stated: For me the filmmaker Bergman is the greatest actor of all... 
* Franois Ozon 
* Park Chan-wook 
* ric Rohmer stated: The Seventh Seal is the most beautiful film ever. 
* Marjane Satrapi 
* Mamoru Oshii 
* Paul Schrader stated: I would not have made any of my films or written scripts such as Taxi Driver had it not been for Ingmar Bergman. What he has left is a legacy greater than any other director. I think the extraordinary thing that Bergman will be remembered for, other than his body of work, was that he probably did more than anyone to make cinema a medium of personal and introspective value. 
* Martin Scorsese said: I guess Id put it like this: if you were alive in the 50s and the 60s and of a certain age, a teenager on your way to becoming an adult, and you wanted to make films, I dont see how you couldnt be influenced by Bergman. You would have had to make a conscious effort, and even then, the influence would have snuck through. [http://www.ingmarbergman.se/page.asp?guid=65BFD29C-045F-4C51-88B1-1A50F6173D26 ] 
* Steven Spielberg stated: His love for the cinema almost gives me a guilty conscience. 
* Satyajit Ray Satyajit Ray: Interviews - Satyajit Ray - Google Books. Books.google.co.in. Retrieved on 2014-05-22. stated: Its Bergman whom I continue to be fascinated by. I think hes remarkable. I envy his stock company, because given actors like that one could do extraordinary things.
* Andr Tchin 
* Liv Ullmann " 

==Popular culture==
A Bergman-themed parody spoofs the allegory of cheating death (Bergmans The Seventh Seal) in the sketch comedy show Saturday Night Live season 1 (ep. 23, 24 July 1976). The sketch, titled Swedish Movie, is somberly narrated in the third-person by a Swedish-speaking Death (Tom Schiller) with English subtitles scrolling. The baleful voice-over dialogue, revealed to be emanating from the apparition of Death personified, imposes upon dreamily preoccupied lovers Sven (Chevy Chase) and Inger (Louise Lasser) who send a not-so-silently jeering Death out for pizza.

Monty Pythons The Meaning of Life includes a sketch based on The Seventh Seal in which bourgeois weekenders at an isolated farmhouse are visited by The Grim Reaper.

Bill and Teds Bogus Journey includes a further spoof on the theme of playing games with Death from Bergmans The Seventh Seal. Bill and Ted are set to play a game with Death. Rather than chess, they play checkers. When Bill and Ted win, Death challenges them to a best of three match, wherein they play Battleship and other games from popular culture.

The Muppets franchise had a spoof of Bergmans style in a segment entitled Silent Strawberries from the TV special, The Muppets Go to the Movies. 

==Filmography==

==Awards==

===Academy Awards===
In 1971, Bergman received the Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award at the Academy Awards ceremony. Three of his films won the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film. The list of his nominations and awards follows:
* Won: Best Foreign Film The Virgin Spring (Jungfrukllan), 1960 
* Won: Best Foreign Film Through a Glass Darkly (Ssom i en spegel) (1961) 
* Won: Best Foreign Film Fanny and Alexander (Fanny och Alexander) (1983) 
* Nominated: Best Original Screenplay, Wild Strawberries (Smultronstllet), 1957
* Nominated: Best Original Screenplay Through a Glass Darkly, 1961 
* Nominated: Best Original Screenplay, Cries and Whispers (Viskningar och rop), 1974
* Nominated: Best Picture, Cries and Whispers (Viskningar och rop), 1974
* Nominated: Best Director, Cries and Whispers (Viskningar och rop), 1974
* Nominated: Best Director, Face to Face (Ansikte mot ansikte), 1977
* Nominated: Best Original Screenplay, Autumn Sonata (Hstsonaten), 1979
* Nominated: Best Original Screenplay, Fanny and Alexander (Fanny och Alexander), 1983
* Nominated: Best Director, Fanny and Alexander (Fanny och Alexander), 1983

===BAFTA Awards===
* Nominated: Best Film from any Source, The Magician (Ansiktet), 1960
* Nominated: Best Foreign Film, Fanny and Alexander (Fanny och Alexander), 1984

===Berlin Film Festival===
* Won: Golden Bear for Best Film, Wild Strawberries (Smultronstllet), 1957 
* Nominated: Golden Bear for Best Film, Through a Glass Darkly (Ssom i en spegel), 1961
* Won: OCIC Prize, Through a Glass Darkly, 1961

===Cesar Awards===
* Nominated: Best Foreign Film, The Magic Flute (Trollfljten), 1976
* Nominated: Best Foreign Film, Autumn Sonata (Hstsonaten), 1979
* Won: Best Foreign Film, Fanny and Alexander (Fanny och Alexander), 1984
* Nominated: Best European Film, Saraband, 2005

===Cannes Film Festival===
* Won: Best Poetic Humour, Smiles of a Summer Night (Sommarnattens leende), 1955
* Nominated: Golden Palm Smiles of a Summer Night (Sommarnattens leende), 1955
* Won: Jury Special prize, The Seventh Seal (Det Sjunde inseglet), 1957
* Nominated: Golden Palm, The Seventh Seal (Det Sjunde inseglet), 1957
* Won: Best Director, Brink of Life (Nra livet), 1958
* Nominated: Golden Palm, Brink of Life (Nra livet), 1958
* Won: Special Mention, The Virgin Spring (Jungfrukllan), 1960
* Nominated: Golden Palm, The Virgin Spring (Jungfrukllan), 1960
* Won: Technical Grand Prize, Cries and Whispers (Viskningar och rop), 1972
* Won: Palm of Palms, 1997
* Won: Prize of the Ecumenical Jury (special award for his whole works), 1998

===Golden Globe Awards===
* Won: Best Foreign Film, Wild Strawberries (Smultronstllet), 1960
* Won: Best Foreign Film, The Virgin Spring, 1961
* Won: Best Foreign Film, Scenes from a Marriage, 1975
* Won: Best Foreign Film, Face to Face, 1976
* Won: Best Foreign Film, Autumn Sonata, 1978
* Won: Best Foreign Film, Fanny and Alexander, 1984

* Nominated: Best Foreign Film, Shame, 1968
* Nominated: Best Foreign Film, Cries and Whispers, 1973

===Guldbagge Awards===
* Won: Best Film, The Silence, 1963 
* Won: Best Director, The Silence, 1963
* Won: Best Film, Persona, 1966 
* Won: Best Film, Cries and Whispers, 1972 
* Won: Best Film, Fanny and Alexander, 1982 
* Won: Best Director, Fanny and Alexander, 1982 
* Won: Best Screenplay, The Best Intentions, 1992. 

===Other awards and honours===
* Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 1961 
* The Dorothy and Lillian Gish Prize, 1995 [http://www.gishprize.org/bergman/bergman_select.html ] 
* Commandeur de la Lgion dhonneur, 1985

==Exhibitions==
* Ingmar Bergman.The Image Maker, Multimedia Art Museum, Moscow 2012
* Ingmar Bergman: The Man Who Asked Hard Questions, Multimedia Art Museum, Moscow 2012

==See also==
* Cinema of Sweden
* List of film collaborations

==References==

==Bibliography==
* Bergman on Bergman: Interviews with Ingmar Bergman. By Stig Bjrkman, Torsten Manns, and Jonas Sima; Translated by Paul Britten Austin. Simon & Schuster, New York. Swedish edition copyright 1970; English translation 1973.
* Filmmakers on filmmaking: the American Film Institute seminars on motion pictures and television (edited by Joseph McBride). Boston, Houghton Mifflin Co., 1983.
* Images: my life in film, Ingmar Bergman, Translated by Marianne Ruuth. New York, Arcade Pub., 1994, ISBN 1-55970-186-2
* The Magic Lantern, Ingmar Bergman, Translated by Joan Tate New York, Viking Press, 1988, ISBN 0-670-81911-5

==External links==

* 
* 
* 
* Ingmar Bergman Face to Face
* The Ingmar Bergman Foundation
* Ingmar Bergman all posters
* Bergmanorama: The magic works of Ingmar Bergman
* The Guardian/NFT interview with Liv Ullmann by Shane Danielson, 23 January 2001
* Xan Brooks reports on Bergmans interview for Reuters, The Guardian, 12 December 2001
* Bergman Week
* Regilexikon
* DVD Beavers Directors Chair on Bergman, with links to DVD and Blu-ray comparisons of his major films

;Bibliographies
* Ingmar Bergman Bibliography (via UC Berkeley)
* Ingmar Bergman Site
* Collection of interviews with Bergman

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

[[Isaac Newton]]

Sir Isaac Newton (; "Newton" entry in Collins English Dictionary, HarperCollins Publishers, 1998. 25 December 164220 March 1727 ) was an English physicist and mathematician (described in his own day as a "natural philosopher") who is widely recognised as one of the most influential scientists of all time and as a key figure in the scientific revolution. His book Philosophi Naturalis Principia Mathematica ("Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy"), first published in 1687, laid the foundations for classical mechanics. Newton also made seminal contributions to optics and shares credit with Gottfried Leibniz for the invention of calculus.

Newton's Principia formulated the laws of motion and universal gravitation, which dominated scientists' view of the physical universe for the next three centuries. By deriving Kepler's laws of planetary motion from his mathematical description of gravity, and then using the same principles to account for the trajectories of comets, the tides, the precession of the equinoxes, and other phenomena, Newton removed the last doubts about the validity of the heliocentric model of the cosmos. This work also demonstrated that the motion of objects on Earth and of celestial bodies could be described by the same principles. His prediction that the Earth should be shaped as an oblate spheroid was later vindicated by the measurements of Maupertuis, La Condamine, and others, which helped convince most Continental European scientists of the superiority of Newtonian mechanics over the earlier system of Descartes.

Newton also built the first practical reflecting telescope and developed a theory of colour based on the observation that a prism decomposes white light into the many colours of the visible spectrum. He formulated an empirical law of cooling, studied the speed of sound, and introduced the notion of a Newtonian fluid. In addition to his work on calculus, as a mathematician Newton contributed to the study of power series, generalised the binomial theorem to non-integer exponents, and developed Newton's method for approximating the roots of a function.

Newton was a fellow of Trinity College and the second Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at the University of Cambridge. He was a devout but unorthodox Christian and, unusually for a member of the Cambridge faculty of the day, he refused to take holy orders in the Church of England, perhaps because he privately rejected the doctrine of the Trinity. Beyond his work on the mathematical sciences, Newton dedicated much of his time to the study of biblical chronology and alchemy, but most of his work in those areas remained unpublished until long after his death. In his later life, Newton became president of the Royal Society. He also served the British government as Warden and Master of the Royal Mint.

== Life ==

=== Early life ===

Isaac Newton was born (according to the Julian calendar in use in England at the time) on Christmas Day, 25 December 1642 (NS 4 January 1643 ), at Woolsthorpe Manor in Woolsthorpe-by-Colsterworth, a hamlet in the county of Lincolnshire. He was born three months after the death of his father, a prosperous farmer also named Isaac Newton. Born prematurely, he was a small child; his mother Hannah Ayscough reportedly said that he could have fit inside a quart mug (which, depending on the quart measure in use at that time, could have ranged from 2.25 litre (the Winchester quart, in use in England at the time) to 0.95 litre (the US quart) with several possibilities beween). When Newton was three, his mother remarried and went to live with her new husband, the Reverend Barnabus Smith, leaving her son in the care of his maternal grandmother, Margery Ayscough. The young Isaac disliked his stepfather and maintained some enmity towards his mother for marrying him, as revealed by this entry in a list of sins committed up to the age of 19: "Threatening my father and mother Smith to burn them and the house over them." Newton's mother had three children from her second marriage. Although it was claimed that he was once engaged, This claim was made Dr. Stukeley in 1727, in a letter about Newton written to Dr. Richard Mead. Charles Hutton, who in the late 18th century collected oral traditions about earlier scientists, declares that there "do not appear to be any sufficient reason for his never marrying, if he had an inclination so to do. It is much more likely that he had a constitutional indifference to the state, and even to the sex in general." Charles Hutton "A Mathematical and Philosophical Dictionary" (1795/6) II p.100. Newton never married.

Newton in a 1702 portrait by Godfrey Kneller
Isaac Newton (Bolton, Sarah K. Famous Men of Science. NY: Thomas Y. Crowell & Co., 1889)

From the age of about twelve until he was seventeen, Newton was educated at The King's School, Grantham which taught him Latin but no mathematics. He was removed from school, and by October 1659, he was to be found at Woolsthorpe-by-Colsterworth, where his mother, widowed for a second time, attempted to make a farmer of him. He hated farming. Westfall 1994, pp 1619 Henry Stokes, master at the King's School, persuaded his mother to send him back to school so that he might complete his education. Motivated partly by a desire for revenge against a schoolyard bully, he became the top-ranked student, White 1997, p. 22 distinguishing himself mainly by building sundials and models of windmills. 

In June 1661, he was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, on the recommendation of his uncle Rev William Ayscough. He started as a subsizarpaying his way by performing valet's dutiesuntil he was awarded a scholarship in 1664, which guaranteed him four more years until he would get his M.A. At that time, the college's teachings were based on those of Aristotle, whom Newton supplemented with modern philosophers such as Descartes, and astronomers such as Galileo and Thomas Street, through whom he learned of Kepler's work. He set down in his notebook a series of 'Quaestiones' about mechanical philosophy as he found it. In 1665, he discovered the generalised binomial theorem and began to develop a mathematical theory that later became calculus. Soon after Newton had obtained his B.A. degree in August 1665, the university temporarily closed as a precaution against the Great Plague. Although he had been undistinguished as a Cambridge student, ed. Michael Hoskins (1997). Cambridge Illustrated History of Astronomy, p. 159. Cambridge University Press Newton's private studies at his home in Woolsthorpe over the subsequent two years saw the development of his theories on calculus, optics, and the law of gravitation. In April 1667, he returned to Cambridge and in October was elected as a fellow of Trinity. Fellows were required to become ordained priests, although this was not enforced in the restoration years and an assertion of conformity to the Church of England was sufficient. However, by 1675 the issue could not be avoided and by then his unconventional views stood in the way. Nevertheless, Newton managed to avoid it by means of a special permission from Charles II (see "Middle years" section below).

His studies had impressed the Lucasian professor, Isaac Barrow, who was more anxious to develop his own religious and administrative potential (he became master of Trinity two years later), and in 1669, Newton succeeded him, only one year after he received his M.A.

=== Middle years ===

==== Mathematics ====
Newton's work has been said "to distinctly advance every branch of mathematics then studied". W W Rouse Ball (1908), "A short account of the history of mathematics", at page 319. His work on the subject usually referred to as fluxions or calculus, seen in a manuscript of October 1666, is now published among Newton's mathematical papers. D T Whiteside (ed.), The Mathematical Papers of Isaac Newton (Volume 1), (Cambridge University Press, 1967), part 7 "The October 1666 Tract on Fluxions", at page 400, in 2008 reprint. The author of the manuscript De analysi per aequationes numero terminorum infinitas, sent by Isaac Barrow to John Collins in June 1669, was identified by Barrow in a letter sent to Collins in August of that year as: D Gjertsen (1986), "The Newton handbook", (London (Routledge & Kegan Paul) 1986), at page 149. 
Newton later became involved in a dispute with Leibniz over priority in the development of calculus (the LeibnizNewton calculus controversy). Most modern historians believe that Newton and Leibniz developed calculus independently, although with very different notations. Occasionally it has been suggested that Newton published almost nothing about it until 1693, and did not give a full account until 1704, while Leibniz began publishing a full account of his methods in 1684. (Leibniz's notation and "differential Method", nowadays recognised as much more convenient notations, were adopted by continental European mathematicians, and after 1820 or so, also by British mathematicians.) Such a suggestion, however, fails to notice the content of calculus which critics of Newton's time and modern times have pointed out in Book 1 of Newton's Principia itself (published 1687) and in its forerunner manuscripts, such as De motu corporum in gyrum ("On the motion of bodies in orbit"), of 1684. The Principia is not written in the language of calculus either as we know it or as Newton's (later) 'dot' notation would write it. His work extensively uses calculus in geometric form based on limiting values of the ratios of vanishing small quantities: in the Principia itself, Newton gave demonstration of this under the name of 'the method of first and last ratios' Newton, 'Principia', 1729 English translation, at page 41. and explained why he put his expositions in this form, Newton, 'Principia', 1729 English translation, at page 54. remarking also that 'hereby the same thing is performed as by the method of indivisibles'.

Because of this, the Principia has been called "a book dense with the theory and application of the infinitesimal calculus" in modern times Clifford Truesdell, Essays in the History of Mechanics (Berlin, 1968), at p.99. and "lequel est presque tout de ce calcul" ('nearly all of it is of this calculus') in Newton's time. In the preface to the Marquis de L'Hospital's Analyse des Infiniment Petits (Paris, 1696). His use of methods involving "one or more orders of the infinitesimally small" is present in his De motu corporum in gyrum of 1684 Starting with De motu corporum in gyrum, see also (Latin) Theorem 1. and in his papers on motion "during the two decades preceding 1684". D T Whiteside (1970), "The Mathematical principles underlying Newton's Principia Mathematica" in Journal for the History of Astronomy, vol.1, pages 116138, especially at pages 119120. 

Newton had been reluctant to publish his calculus because he feared controversy and criticism. Stewart 2009, p.107 He was close to the Swiss mathematician Nicolas Fatio de Duillier. In 1691, Duillier started to write a new version of Newton's Principia, and corresponded with Leibniz. Westfall 1980, pp 538539 In 1693, the relationship between Duillier and Newton deteriorated and the book was never completed.

Starting in 1699, other members of the Royal Society (of which Newton was a member) accused Leibniz of plagiarism. The dispute then broke out in full force in 1711 when the Royal Society proclaimed in a study that it was Newton who was the true discoverer and labelled Leibniz a fraud. This study was cast into doubt when it was later found that Newton himself wrote the study's concluding remarks on Leibniz. Thus began the bitter controversy which marred the lives of both Newton and Leibniz until the latter's death in 1716. Ball 1908, p. 356ff 

Newton is generally credited with the generalised binomial theorem, valid for any exponent. He discovered Newton's identities, Newton's method, classified cubic plane curves (polynomials of degree three in two variables), made substantial contributions to the theory of finite differences, and was the first to use fractional indices and to employ coordinate geometry to derive solutions to Diophantine equations. He approximated partial sums of the harmonic series by logarithms (a precursor to Euler's summation formula), and was the first to use power series with confidence and to revert power series. Newton's work on infinite series was inspired by Simon Stevin's decimals. 

He was appointed Lucasian Professor of Mathematics in 1669 on Barrow's recommendation. During that time, any fellow of Cambridge or Oxford was required to become an ordained Anglican priest. However, the terms of the Lucasian professorship required that the holder not be active in the church (presumably so as to have more time for science). Newton argued that this should exempt him from the ordination requirement, and Charles II, whose permission was needed, accepted this argument. Thus a conflict between Newton's religious views and Anglican orthodoxy was averted. White 1997, p. 151 

==== Optics ====
In 1666, Newton observed that the spectrum of colours exiting a prism is oblong, even when the light ray entering the prism is circular, which is to say, the prism refracts different colours by different angles. This led him to conclude that colour is a property intrinsic to lighta point which had been debated in prior years.

Replica of Newton's second Reflecting telescope that he presented to the Royal Society in 1672 
From 1670 to 1672, Newton lectured on optics. During this period he investigated the refraction of light, demonstrating that the multicoloured spectrum produced by a prism could be recomposed into white light by a lens and a second prism. Ball 1908, p. 324 Modern scholarship has revealed that Newton's analysis and resynthesis of white light owes a debt to corpuscular alchemy. William R. Newman, "Newton's Early Optical Theory and its Debt to Chymistry," in Danielle Jacquart and Michel Hochmann, eds., Lumire et vision dans les sciences et dans les arts (Geneva: Droz, 2010), pp. 283-307. A free access online version of this article can be found at the Chymistry of Isaac Newton project 

He also showed that coloured light does not change its properties by separating out a coloured beam and shining it on various objects. Newton noted that regardless of whether it was reflected, scattered, or transmitted, it remained the same colour. Thus, he observed that colour is the result of objects interacting with already-coloured light rather than objects generating the colour themselves. This is known as Newton's theory of colour. Ball 1908, p. 325 

Illustration of a dispersive prism decomposing white light into the colours of the spectrum, as discovered by Newton
From this work, he concluded that the lens of any refracting telescope would suffer from the dispersion of light into colours (chromatic aberration). As a proof of the concept, he constructed a telescope using a mirror as the objective to bypass that problem. Building the design, the first known functional reflecting telescope, today known as a Newtonian telescope, involved solving the problem of a suitable mirror material and shaping technique. Newton ground his own mirrors out of a custom composition of highly reflective speculum metal, using Newton's rings to judge the quality of the optics for his telescopes. In late 1668 he was able to produce this first reflecting telescope. In 1671, the Royal Society asked for a demonstration of his reflecting telescope. White 1997, p168 Their interest encouraged him to publish his notes, On Colour, which he later expanded into the work Opticks. When Robert Hooke criticised some of Newton's ideas, Newton was so offended that he withdrew from public debate. Newton and Hooke had brief exchanges in 167980, when Hooke, appointed to manage the Royal Society's correspondence, opened up a correspondence intended to elicit contributions from Newton to Royal Society transactions, which had the effect of stimulating Newton to work out a proof that the elliptical form of planetary orbits would result from a centripetal force inversely proportional to the square of the radius vector (see Newton's law of universal gravitation  History and De motu corporum in gyrum). But the two men remained generally on poor terms until Hooke's death. Iliffe, Robert (2007) Newton. A very short introduction, Oxford University Press 2007 

Facsimile of a 1682 letter from Isaac Newton to Dr William Briggs, commenting on Briggs' "A New Theory of Vision"

Newton argued that light is composed of particles or corpuscles, which were refracted by accelerating into a denser medium. He verged on soundlike waves to explain the repeated pattern of reflection and transmission by thin films (Opticks Bk.II, Props. 12), but still retained his theory of 'fits' that disposed corpuscles to be reflected or transmitted (Props.13). However, later physicists favoured a purely wavelike explanation of light to account for the interference patterns and the general phenomenon of diffraction. Today's quantum mechanics, photons, and the idea of waveparticle duality bear only a minor resemblance to Newton's understanding of light.

In his Hypothesis of Light of 1675, Newton posited the existence of the ether to transmit forces between particles. The contact with the theosophist Henry More, revived his interest in alchemy. He replaced the ether with occult forces based on Hermetic ideas of attraction and repulsion between particles. John Maynard Keynes, who acquired many of Newton's writings on alchemy, stated that "Newton was not the first of the age of reason: He was the last of the magicians." Newton's interest in alchemy cannot be isolated from his contributions to science. This was at a time when there was no clear distinction between alchemy and science. Had he not relied on the occult idea of action at a distance, across a vacuum, he might not have developed his theory of gravity. (See also Isaac Newton's occult studies.)

In 1704, Newton published Opticks, in which he expounded his corpuscular theory of light. He considered light to be made up of extremely subtle corpuscles, that ordinary matter was made of grosser corpuscles and speculated that through a kind of alchemical transmutation "Are not gross Bodies and Light convertible into one another, ...and may not Bodies receive much of their Activity from the Particles of Light which enter their Composition?" Newton also constructed a primitive form of a frictional electrostatic generator, using a glass globe (Opticks, 8th Query).

In an article entitled "Newton, prisms, and the 'opticks' of tunable lasers" it is indicated that Newton in his book Opticks was the first to show a diagram using a prism as a beam expander. In the same book he describes, via diagrams, the use of multiple-prism arrays. Some 278 years after Newton's discussion, multiple-prism beam expanders became central to the development of narrow-linewidth tunable lasers. Also, the use of these prismatic beam expanders led to the multiple-prism dispersion theory. 

Subsequent to Newton, much has been amended. Young and Fresnel combined Newton's particle theory with Huygen's wave theory to show that colour is the visible manifestation of light's wavelength. Science also slowly came to realise the difference between perception of colour and mathematisable optics. The German poet, Goethe, could not shake the Newtonian foundation but "one hole Goethe did find in Newton's armour, ... Newton had committed himself to the doctrine that refraction without colour was impossible. He therefore thought that the object-glasses of telescopes must for ever remain imperfect, achromatism and refraction being incompatible. This inference was proved by 
Dollond to be wrong." Tyndall, John. (1880). Popular Science Monthly Volume 17, July. Science Monthly/Volume 17/July 1880/Goethe's Farbenlehre: Theory of Colors II] 

==== Mechanics and gravitation ====
Newton's own copy of his Principia, with hand-written corrections for the second edition

In 1679, Newton returned to his work on (celestial) mechanics by considering gravitation and its effect on the orbits of planets with reference to Kepler's laws of planetary motion. This followed stimulation by a brief exchange of letters in 167980 with Hooke, who had been appointed to manage the Royal Society's correspondence, and who opened a correspondence intended to elicit contributions from Newton to Royal Society transactions. Newton's reawakening interest in astronomical matters received further stimulus by the appearance of a comet in the winter of 16801681, on which he corresponded with John Flamsteed. After the exchanges with Hooke, Newton worked out proof that the elliptical form of planetary orbits would result from a centripetal force inversely proportional to the square of the radius vector (see Newton's law of universal gravitation  History and De motu corporum in gyrum). Newton communicated his results to Edmond Halley and to the Royal Society in De motu corporum in gyrum, a tract written on about 9 sheets which was copied into the Royal Society's Register Book in December 1684. D T Whiteside (ed.), 'Mathematical Papers of Isaac Newton', vol.6, 16841691, Cambridge University Press 1974, at page 30. This tract contained the nucleus that Newton developed and expanded to form the Principia.

The Principia was published on 5 July 1687 with encouragement and financial help from Edmond Halley. In this work, Newton stated the three universal laws of motion that contributed to many advances during the Industrial Revolution which soon followed and were not to be improved upon for more than 200 years. Many of these advancements continue to be the underpinnings of non-relativistic technologies in the modern world. He used the Latin word gravitas (weight) for the effect that would become known as gravity, and defined the law of universal gravitation.

In the same work, Newton presented a calculus-like method of geometrical analysis using 'first and last ratios', gave the first analytical determination (based on Boyle's law) of the speed of sound in air, inferred the oblateness of the spheroidal figure of the Earth, accounted for the precession of the equinoxes as a result of the Moon's gravitational attraction on the Earth's oblateness, initiated the gravitational study of the irregularities in the motion of the moon, provided a theory for the determination of the orbits of comets, and much more.

Newton made clear his heliocentric view of the solar system  developed in a somewhat modern way, because already in the mid-1680s he recognised the "deviation of the Sun" from the centre of gravity of the solar system. See Curtis Wilson, "The Newtonian achievement in astronomy", pages 233274 in R Taton & C Wilson (eds) (1989) The General History of Astronomy, Volume, 2A', at page 233. For Newton, it was not precisely the centre of the Sun or any other body that could be considered at rest, but rather "the common centre of gravity of the Earth, the Sun and all the Planets is to be esteem'd the Centre of the World", and this centre of gravity "either is at rest or moves uniformly forward in a right line" (Newton adopted the "at rest" alternative in view of common consent that the centre, wherever it was, was at rest). Text quotations are from 1729 translation of Newton's Principia, Book 3 (1729 vol.2) at pages 232233. 

Newton's postulate of an invisible force able to act over vast distances led to him being criticised for introducing "occult agencies" into science. Edelglass et al., Matter and Mind, ISBN 0-940262-45-2. p. 54 Later, in the second edition of the Principia (1713), Newton firmly rejected such criticisms in a concluding General Scholium, writing that it was enough that the phenomena implied a gravitational attraction, as they did; but they did not so far indicate its cause, and it was both unnecessary and improper to frame hypotheses of things that were not implied by the phenomena. (Here Newton used what became his famous expression "hypotheses non fingo" On the meaning and origins of this expression, see Kirsten Walsh, Does Newton feign an hypothesis?, Early Modern Experimental Philosophy, 18 October 2010. ).

With the Principia, Newton became internationally recognised. Westfall 1980. Chapter 11. He acquired a circle of admirers, including the Swiss-born mathematician Nicolas Fatio de Duillier, with whom he formed an intense relationship. This abruptly ended in 1693, and at the same time Newton suffered a nervous breakdown. on the friendship with Fatio, pp 531540 on Newton's breakdown. 

=== Classification of cubics ===
Besides the work of Newton and others on calculus, the first important demonstration of the power of analytic geometry was Newton's classification of cubic curves in the Euclidean plane in the late 1600s. He divided them into four types, satisfying different equations, and in 1717 Stirling, probably with Newton's help, proved that every cubic was one of these four. Newton also claimed that the four types could be obtained by plane projection from one of them, and this was proved in 1731. Conics and Cubics, Robert Bix, Springer Undergraduate Texts in Mathematics, 2nd edition, 2006, Springer Verlag. 

=== Later life ===
Isaac Newton in old age in 1712, portrait by Sir James Thornhill

In the 1690s, Newton wrote a number of religious tracts dealing with the literal and symbolic interpretation of the Bible. A manuscript Newton sent to John Locke in which he disputed the fidelity of and its fidelity to the original manuscripts of the New Testament, remained unpublished until 1785. John Locke Manuscripts -- Chronological Listing: 1690 John C. Attig, John Locke Bibliography  Chapter 5, Religion, 1751-1900 

Even though a number of authors have claimed that the work might have been an indication that Newton disputed the belief in Trinity, others assure that Newton did question the passage but never denied Trinity as such. His biographer, scientist Sir David Brewster, who compiled his manuscripts for over 20 years, wrote about the controversy in well-known book Memoirs of the Life, Writings, and Discoveries of Sir Isaac Newton, where he explains that Newton questioned the veracity of those passages, but he never denied the doctrine of Trinity as such. Brewster states that Newton was never known as an Arian during his lifetime, it was first William Whiston (an Arian) who argued that "Sir Isaac Newton was so hearty for the Baptists, as well as for the Eusebians or Arians, that he sometimes suspected these two were the two witnesses in the Revelations," while other like Hopton Haynes (a Mint employee and Humanitarian), "mentioned to Richard Baron, that Newton held the same doctrine as himself". David Brewster. "Memoirs of the Life, Writings, and Discoveries of Sir Isaac Newton:" p.268. 

Later worksThe Chronology of Ancient Kingdoms Amended (1728) and Observations Upon the Prophecies of Daniel and the Apocalypse of St. John (1733)were published after his death. He also devoted a great deal of time to alchemy (see above).

Newton was also a member of the Parliament of England for Cambridge University in 168990 and 17012, but according to some accounts his only comments were to complain about a cold draught in the chamber and request that the window be closed. White 1997, p. 232 

Newton moved to London to take up the post of warden of the Royal Mint in 1696, a position that he had obtained through the patronage of Charles Montagu, 1st Earl of Halifax, then Chancellor of the Exchequer. He took charge of England's great recoining, somewhat treading on the toes of Lord Lucas, Governor of the Tower (and securing the job of deputy comptroller of the temporary Chester branch for Edmond Halley). Newton became perhaps the best-known Master of the Mint upon the death of Thomas Neale in 1699, a position Newton held for the last 30 years of his life. These appointments were intended as sinecures, but Newton took them seriously, retiring from his Cambridge duties in 1701, and exercising his power to reform the currency and punish clippers and counterfeiters. As Master of the Mint in 1717 in the "Law of Queen Anne" Newton moved the Pound Sterling de facto from the silver standard to the gold standard by setting the bimetallic relationship between gold coins and the silver penny in favour of gold. This caused silver sterling coin to be melted and shipped out of Britain. Newton was made President of the Royal Society in 1703 and an associate of the French Acadmie des Sciences. In his position at the Royal Society, Newton made an enemy of John Flamsteed, the Astronomer Royal, by prematurely publishing Flamsteed's Historia Coelestis Britannica, which Newton had used in his studies. White 1997, p.317 
Personal coat of arms of Sir Isaac Newton 

In April 1705, Queen Anne knighted Newton during a royal visit to Trinity College, Cambridge. The knighthood is likely to have been motivated by political considerations connected with the Parliamentary election in May 1705, rather than any recognition of Newton's scientific work or services as Master of the Mint. "The Queen's 'great Assistance' to Newton's election was his knighting, an honor bestowed not for his contributions to science, nor for his service at the Mint, but for the greater glory of party politics in the election of 1705." Westfall 1994 p.245 Newton was the second scientist to be knighted, after Sir Francis Bacon.

Towards the end of his life, Newton took up residence at Cranbury Park, near Winchester with his niece and her husband, until his death in 1727. His half-niece, Catherine Barton Conduitt, served as his hostess in social affairs at his house on Jermyn Street in London; he was her "very loving Uncle," according to his letter to her when she was recovering from smallpox.

Newton died in his sleep in London on 20 March 1727 (OS 20 March 1726; NS 31 March 1727) and was buried in Westminster Abbey. Voltaire was present at his funeral and praised the British for honoring a scientist of heretical religious beliefs with burial there. A bachelor, he had divested much of his estate to relatives during his last years, and died intestate. After his death, Newton's hair was examined and found to contain mercury, probably resulting from his alchemical pursuits. Mercury poisoning could explain Newton's eccentricity in late life. 

=== After death ===

==== Fame ====
The mathematician Joseph-Louis Lagrange often said that Newton was the greatest genius who ever lived, and once added that Newton was also "the most fortunate, for we cannot find more than once a system of the world to establish." Fred L. Wilson, History of Science: Newton citing: Delambre, M. "Notice sur la vie et les ouvrages de M. le comte J. L. Lagrange," Oeuvres de Lagrange I. Paris, 1867, p. xx. English poet Alexander Pope was moved by Newton's accomplishments to write the famous epitaph:

Nature and nature's laws lay hid in night;
God said "Let Newton be" and all was light.

Newton himself had been rather more modest of his own achievements, famously writing in a letter to Robert Hooke in February 1676:
If I have seen further it is by standing on the shoulders of giants. Letter from Isaac Newton to Robert Hooke, 5 February 1676, as transcribed in Jean-Pierre Maury (1992) Newton: Understanding the Cosmos, New Horizons 

Two writers think that the above quote, written at a time when Newton and Hooke were in dispute over optical discoveries, was an oblique attack on Hooke (said to have been short and hunchbacked), rather thanor in addition toa statement of modesty. John Gribbin (2002) Science: A History 15432001, p 164. White 1997, p187. On the other hand, the widely known proverb about standing on the shoulders of giants, published among others by 17th-century poet George Herbert (a former orator of the University of Cambridge and fellow of Trinity College) in his Jacula Prudentum (1651), had as its main point that "a dwarf on a giant's shoulders sees farther of the two", and so its effect as an analogy would place Newton himself rather than Hooke as the 'dwarf'.

In a later memoir, Newton wrote:
I do not know what I may appear to the world, but to myself I seem to have been only like a boy playing on the sea-shore, and diverting myself in now and then finding a smoother pebble or a prettier shell than ordinary, whilst the great ocean of truth lay all undiscovered before me. Memoirs of the Life, Writings, and Discoveries of Sir Isaac Newton (1855) by Sir David Brewster (Volume II. Ch. 27) 

In 1816 a tooth said to have belonged to Isaac Newton was sold for 730 ($3,633) in London to an aristocrat who passed to have it set in a ring. The Guinness World Records 2002 classified it as the most valuable tooth, which would value approximately 25,000 ($35,700) in late 2001's terms. Who has bought it and to whom it currently pertains are mysteries.

Albert Einstein kept a picture of Newton on his study wall alongside ones of Michael Faraday and James Clerk Maxwell. "Einstein's Heroes: Imagining the World through the Language of Mathematics", by Robyn Arianrhod UQP, reviewed by Jane Gleeson-White, 10 November 2003, The Sydney Morning Herald Newton remains influential to today's scientists, as demonstrated by a 2005 survey of members of Britain's Royal Society (formerly headed by Newton) asking who had the greater effect on the history of science, Newton or Einstein. Royal Society scientists deemed Newton to have made the greater overall contribution. In 1999, an opinion poll of 100 of today's leading physicists voted Einstein the "greatest physicist ever;" with Newton the runner-up, while a parallel survey of rank-and-file physicists by the site PhysicsWeb gave the top spot to Newton. 

==== Commemorations ====
Newton statue on display at the Oxford University Museum of Natural History

Newton's monument (1731) can be seen in Westminster Abbey, at the north of the entrance to the choir against the choir screen, near his tomb. It was executed by the sculptor Michael Rysbrack (16941770) in white and grey marble with design by the architect William Kent. The monument features a figure of Newton reclining on top of a sarcophagus, his right elbow resting on several of his great books and his left hand pointing to a scroll with a mathematical design. Above him is a pyramid and a celestial globe showing the signs of the Zodiac and the path of the comet of 1680. A relief panel depicts putti using instruments such as a telescope and prism. The Latin inscription on the base translates as:
Here is buried Isaac Newton, Knight, who by a strength of mind almost divine, and mathematical principles peculiarly his own, explored the course and figures of the planets, the paths of comets, the tides of the sea, the dissimilarities in rays of light, and, what no other scholar has previously imagined, the properties of the colours thus produced. Diligent, sagacious and faithful, in his expositions of nature, antiquity and the holy Scriptures, he vindicated by his philosophy the majesty of God mighty and good, and expressed the simplicity of the Gospel in his manners. Mortals rejoice that there has existed such and so great an ornament of the human race! He was born on 25 December 1642, and died on 20 March 1726/7.  Translation from G.L. Smyth, The Monuments and Genii of St. Paul's Cathedral, and of Westminster Abbey (1826), ii, 7034. 

From 1978 until 1988, an image of Newton designed by Harry Ecclestone appeared on Series D 1 banknotes issued by the Bank of England (the last 1 notes to be issued by the Bank of England). Newton was shown on the reverse of the notes holding a book and accompanied by a telescope, a prism and a map of the Solar System. 

Eduardo Paolozzi's Newton, after William Blake (1995), outside the British Library
A statue of Isaac Newton, looking at an apple at his feet, can be seen at the Oxford University Museum of Natural History. A large bronze statue, Newton, after William Blake, by Eduardo Paolozzi, dated 1995 and inspired by Blake's etching, dominates the piazza of the British Library in London.

=== In popular culture ===

== Personal life ==
Newton never married. The French writer and philosopher Voltaire, who was in London at the time of Newton's funeral, said that he "was never sensible to any passion, was not subject to the common frailties of mankind, nor had any commerce with womena circumstance which was assured me by the physician and surgeon who attended him in his last moments". The widespread belief that he died a virgin has been commented on by writers including mathematician Charles Hutton, economist John Maynard Keynes, and physicist Carl Sagan. 

Newton did have a close friendship with the Swiss mathematician Nicolas Fatio de Duillier, whom he met in London around 1690. Their friendship came to an unexplained end in 1693. Some of their correspondence has survived. 

Newton was one of many people who lost heavily when the South Sea Company collapsed. Their most significant trade was slaves and according to his niece, he lost around 20,000.

== Religious views ==

Newton's tomb in Westminster AbbeyAlthough born into an Anglican family, by his thirties Newton held a Christian faith that, had it been made public, would not have been considered orthodox by mainstream Christianity; Richard S. Westfall - Indiana University in recent times he has been described as a heretic. 

When Newton received his M.A. and became a fellow of the "College of the Holy and Undivided Trinity" in 1667, he made the commitment that "I will either set Theology as the object of my studies and will take holy orders when the time prescribed by these statutes years arrives, or I will resign from the college." Up till this point he had not thought much about religion and had twice signed his agreement to the thirty-nine articles, the basis of Church of England doctrine.

By 1672 he had started to record his theological researches in notebooks which he showed to no one and which have only recently been examined. They demonstrate an extensive knowledge of early church writings and show that in the conflict between Athanasius and Arius which defined the Creed, he took the side of Arius, the loser, who rejected the conventional view of the Trinity. Newton "recognized Christ as a divine mediator between God and man, who was subordinate to the Father who created him." He was especially interested in prophecy, but for him, "the great apostasy was trinitarianism." 

Newton tried unsuccessfully to obtain one of the two fellowships that exempted the holder from the ordination requirement. At the last moment in 1675 he received a dispensation from the government that excused him and all future holders of the Lucasian chair. 

In Newton's eyes, worshipping Christ as God was idolatry, to him the fundamental sin. Historian Stephen D. Snobelen says of Newton, "Isaac Newton was a heretic. But ... he never made a public declaration of his private faithwhich the orthodox would have deemed extremely radical. He hid his faith so well that scholars are still unravelling his personal beliefs." Snobelen concludes that Newton was at least a Socinian sympathiser (he owned and had thoroughly read at least eight Socinian books), possibly an Arian and almost certainly an anti-trinitarian. 

In a minority view, T.C. Pfizenmaier argues that Newton held the Eastern Orthodox view on the Trinity. However, this type of view 'has lost support of late with the availability of Newton's theological papers', and now most scholars identify Newton as an Antitrinitarian monotheist. 

Although the laws of motion and universal gravitation became Newton's best-known discoveries, he warned against using them to view the Universe as a mere machine, as if akin to a great clock. He said, "Gravity explains the motions of the planets, but it cannot explain who set the planets in motion. God governs all things and knows all that is or can be done." 

Along with his scientific fame, Newton's studies of the Bible and of the early Church Fathers were also noteworthy. Newton wrote works on textual criticism, most notably An Historical Account of Two Notable Corruptions of Scripture. He placed the crucifixion of Jesus Christ at 3 April, AD 33, which agrees with one traditionally accepted date. John P. Meier, P. Meier#A Marginal Jew: Rethinking the Historical Jesus|A Marginal Jew], v. 1, pp. 382402 after narrowing the years to 30 or 33, provisionally judges 30 most likely. He also tried unsuccessfully to find hidden messages within the Bible.

He believed in a rationally immanent world, but he rejected the hylozoism implicit in Leibniz and Baruch Spinoza. The ordered and dynamically informed Universe could be understood, and must be understood, by an active reason. In his correspondence, Newton claimed that in writing the Principia "I had an eye upon such Principles as might work with considering men for the belief of a Deity". Newton to Richard Bentley 10 December 1692, in Turnbull et al. (195977), vol 3, p. 233. He saw evidence of design in the system of the world: "Such a wonderful uniformity in the planetary system must be allowed the effect of choice". But Newton insisted that divine intervention would eventually be required to reform the system, due to the slow growth of instabilities. Opticks, 2nd Ed 1706. Query 31. For this, Leibniz lampooned him: "God Almighty wants to wind up his watch from time to time: otherwise it would cease to move. He had not, it seems, sufficient foresight to make it a perpetual motion." H. G. Alexander (ed) The Leibniz-Clarke correspondence, Manchester University Press, 1998, p. 11. Newton's position was vigorously defended by his follower Samuel Clarke in a famous correspondence. A century later, Pierre-Simon Laplace's work "Celestial Mechanics" had a natural explanation for why the planet orbits don't require periodic divine intervention. 

=== Effect on religious thought ===
Newton and Robert Boyle's approach to the mechanical philosophy was promoted by rationalist pamphleteers as a viable alternative to the pantheists and enthusiasts, and was accepted hesitantly by orthodox preachers as well as dissident preachers like the latitudinarians. The clarity and simplicity of science was seen as a way to combat the emotional and metaphysical superlatives of both superstitious enthusiasm and the threat of atheism, and at the same time, the second wave of English deists used Newton's discoveries to demonstrate the possibility of a "Natural Religion".
Newton, by William Blake; here, Newton is depicted critically as a "divine geometer". This copy of the work is currently held by the Tate Collection. 

The attacks made against pre-Enlightenment "magical thinking", and the mystical elements of Christianity, were given their foundation with Boyle's mechanical conception of the Universe. Newton gave Boyle's ideas their completion through mathematical proofs and, perhaps more importantly, was very successful in popularising them. Newton refashioned the world governed by an interventionist God into a world crafted by a God that designs along rational and universal principles. These principles were available for all people to discover, allowed people to pursue their own aims fruitfully in this life, not the next, and to perfect themselves with their own rational powers. 

Newton saw God as the master creator whose existence could not be denied in the face of the grandeur of all creation. Principia, Book III; cited in; Newton's Philosophy of Nature: Selections from his writings, p. 42, ed. H.S. Thayer, Hafner Library of Classics, NY, 1953. A Short Scheme of the True Religion, manuscript quoted in Memoirs of the Life, Writings and Discoveries of Sir Isaac Newton by Sir David Brewster, Edinburgh, 1850; cited in; ibid, p. 65. Webb, R.K. ed. Knud Haakonssen. "The emergence of Rational Dissent." Enlightenment and Religion: Rational Dissent in eighteenth-century Britain. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge: 1996. p19. His spokesman, Clarke, rejected Leibniz' theodicy which cleared God from the responsibility for l'origine du mal by making God removed from participation in his creation, since as Clarke pointed out, such a deity would be a king in name only, and but one step away from atheism. H. G. Alexander (ed) The Leibniz-Clarke correspondence, Manchester University Press, 1998, p. 14. But the unforeseen theological consequence of the success of Newton's system over the next century was to reinforce the deist position advocated by Leibniz. Westfall, 1958 p201. 
The understanding of the world was now brought down to the level of simple human reason, and humans, as Odo Marquard argued, became responsible for the correction and elimination of evil. Marquard, Odo. "Burdened and Disemburdened Man and the Flight into Unindictability," in Farewell to Matters of Principle. Robert M. Wallace trans. London: Oxford UP, 1989. 

=== End of the world ===

In a manuscript he wrote in 1704 in which he describes his attempts to extract scientific information from the Bible, he estimated that the world would end no earlier than 2060. In predicting this he said, "This I mention not to assert when the time of the end shall be, but to put a stop to the rash conjectures of fanciful men who are frequently predicting the time of the end, and by doing so bring the sacred prophesies into discredit as often as their predictions fail." 

=== Alchemy ===

Speculative fiction author Fritz Leiber said of Newton, "Everyone knows Newton as the great scientist. Few remember that he spent half his life muddling with alchemy, looking for the philosopher's stone. That was the pebble by the seashore he really wanted to find." Heinlein, ed., p. 208. 

== Enlightenment philosophers ==
Enlightenment philosophers chose a short history of scientific predecessors  Galileo, Boyle, and Newton principally  as the guides and guarantors of their applications of the singular concept of Nature and Natural Law to every physical and social field of the day. In this respect, the lessons of history and the social structures built upon it could be discarded. Cassels, Alan. Ideology and International Relations in the Modern World. p2. 

It was Newton's conception of the Universe based upon Natural and rationally understandable laws that became one of the seeds for Enlightenment ideology. "Although it was just one of the many factors in the Enlightment, the success of Newtonian physics in providing a mathematical description of an ordered world clearly played a big part in the flowering of this movement in the eighteenth century" John Gribbin (2002) Science: A History 15432001, p 241 Locke and Voltaire applied concepts of Natural Law to political systems advocating intrinsic rights; the physiocrats and Adam Smith applied Natural conceptions of psychology and self-interest to economic systems; and sociologists criticised the current social order for trying to fit history into Natural models of progress. Monboddo and Samuel Clarke resisted elements of Newton's work, but eventually rationalised it to conform with their strong religious views of nature.

== Royal Mint ==
As Warden, and afterwards Master, of the Royal Mint, Newton estimated that 20 percent of the coins taken in during The Great Recoinage of 1696 were counterfeit. Counterfeiting was high treason, punishable by the felon's being hanged, drawn and quartered. Despite this, convicting the most flagrant criminals could be extremely difficult. However, Newton proved to be equal to the task. White 1997, p. 259 Disguised as a habitu of bars and taverns, he gathered much of that evidence himself. White 1997, p. 267 For all the barriers placed to prosecution, and separating the branches of government, English law still had ancient and formidable customs of authority. Newton had himself made a justice of the peace in all the home countiesthere is a draft of a letter regarding this matter stuck into Newton's personal first edition of his Philosophi Naturalis Principia Mathematica which he must have been amending at the time. Then he conducted more than 100 cross-examinations of witnesses, informers, and suspects between June 1698 and Christmas 1699. Newton successfully prosecuted 28 coiners. Westfall 2007, p.73 

One of Newton's cases as the King's attorney was against William Chaloner. Chaloner's schemes included setting up phony conspiracies of Catholics and then turning in the hapless conspirators whom he had entrapped. Chaloner made himself rich enough to posture as a gentleman. Petitioning Parliament, Chaloner accused the Mint of providing tools to counterfeiters (a charge also made by others). He proposed that he be allowed to inspect the Mint's processes in order to improve them. He petitioned Parliament to adopt his plans for a coinage that could not be counterfeited, while at the same time striking false coins. Westfall 1994, p 229 Newton put Chaloner on trial for counterfeiting and had him sent to Newgate Prison in September 1697. But Chaloner had friends in high places, who helped him secure an acquittal and his release. Newton put him on trial a second time with conclusive evidence. Chaloner was convicted of high treason and hanged, drawn and quartered on 23 March 1699 at Tyburn gallows. 

As a result of a report written by Newton on 21 September 1717 to the Lords Commissioners of His Majesty's Treasury the bimetallic relationship between gold coins and silver coins was changed by Royal proclamation on 22 December 1717, forbidding the exchange of gold guineas for more than 21 silver shillings. On the Value of Gold and Silver in European Currencies and the Consequences on the World-wide Gold- and Silver-Trade, Sir Isaac Newton, 21 September 1717. By The King, A Proclamation Declaring the Rates at which Gold shall be current in Payments reproduced in the numismatic chronicle and journal of the Royal Numismatic Society, Vol V., April 1842 - January 1843 This inadvertently resulted in a silver shortage as silver coins were used to pay for imports, while exports were paid for in gold, effectively moving Britain from the silver standard to its first gold standard. It is a matter of debate as whether he intended to do this or not. http://www.jstor.org/discover/10.2307/3020836?uid=3738032&uid=2129&uid=2&uid=70&uid=4&sid=21101668938967 It has been argued that Newton conceived of his work at the Mint as a continuation of his alchemical work. http://gtresearchnews.gatech.edu/newsrelease/newton.htm 

== Laws of motion ==

In the Principia, Newton gives the famous three laws of motion, stated here in modern form.

Newton's First Law (also known as the Law of Inertia) states that an object at rest tends to stay at rest and that an object in uniform motion tends to stay in uniform motion unless acted upon by a net external force. The meaning of this law is the existence of reference frames (called inertial frames) where objects not acted upon by forces move in uniform motion (in particular, they may be at rest).

Newton's Second Law states that an applied force, , on an object equals the rate of change of its momentum, , with time. Mathematically, this is expressed as
:

Since the law applies only to systems of constant mass, as in the original can be brought out of the derivative operator. By substitution using the definition of acceleration, the equation can be written in the iconic form

:

The first and second laws represent a break with the physics of Aristotle, in which it was believed that a force was necessary in order to maintain motion. They state that a force is only needed in order to change an object's state of motion. The SI unit of force is the newton, named in Newton's honour.

Newton's Third Law states that for every action there is an equal and opposite reaction. This means that any force exerted onto an object has a counterpart force that is exerted in the opposite direction back onto the first object. A common example is of two ice skaters pushing against each other and sliding apart in opposite directions. Another example is the recoil of a firearm, in which the force propelling the bullet is exerted equally back onto the gun and is felt by the shooter. Since the objects in question do not necessarily have the same mass, the resulting acceleration of the two objects can be different (as in the case of firearm recoil).

Unlike Aristotle's, Newton's physics is meant to be universal. For example, the second law applies both to a planet and to a falling stone.

The vector nature of the second law addresses the geometrical relationship between the direction of the force and the manner in which the object's momentum changes. Before Newton, it had typically been assumed that a planet orbiting the Sun would need a forward force to keep it moving. Newton showed instead that all that was needed was an inward attraction from the Sun. Even many decades after the publication of the Principia, this counterintuitive idea was not universally accepted, and many scientists preferred Descartes' theory of vortices. Ball 1908, p. 337 

== Apple incident ==

Newton himself often told the story that he was inspired to formulate his theory of gravitation by watching the fall of an apple from a tree. White 1997, p. 86 Although it has been said that the apple story is a myth and that he did not arrive at his theory of gravity in any single moment, acquaintances of Newton (such as William Stukeley, whose manuscript account of 1752 has been made available by the Royal Society) do in fact confirm the incident, though not the cartoon version that the apple actually hit Newton's head. Stukeley recorded in his Memoirs of Sir Isaac Newton's Life a conversation with Newton in Kensington on 15 April 1726: 

John Conduitt, Newton's assistant at the Royal Mint and husband of Newton's niece, also described the event when he wrote about Newton's life: 

In similar terms, Voltaire wrote in his Essay on Epic Poetry (1727), "Sir Isaac Newton walking in his gardens, had the first thought of his system of gravitation, upon seeing an apple falling from a tree."

It is known from his notebooks that Newton was grappling in the late 1660s with the idea that terrestrial gravity extends, in an inverse-square proportion, to the Moon; however it took him two decades to develop the full-fledged theory. I. Bernard Cohen and George E. Smith, eds. The Cambridge Companion to Newton (2002) p. 6 The question was not whether gravity existed, but whether it extended so far from Earth that it could also be the force holding the Moon to its orbit. Newton showed that if the force decreased as the inverse square of the distance, one could indeed calculate the Moon's orbital period, and get good agreement. He guessed the same force was responsible for other orbital motions, and hence named it "universal gravitation".

Various trees are claimed to be "the" apple tree which Newton describes. The King's School, Grantham, claims that the tree was purchased by the school, uprooted and transported to the headmaster's garden some years later. The staff of the National Trust-owned Woolsthorpe Manor dispute this, and claim that a tree present in their gardens is the one described by Newton. A descendant of the original tree Alberto A. Martinez Science Secrets: The Truth about Darwin's Finches, Einstein's Wife, and Other Myths, page 69 (University of Pittsburgh Press, 2011). ISBN 978-0-8229-4407-2 can be seen growing outside the main gate of Trinity College, Cambridge, below the room Newton lived in when he studied there. The National Fruit Collection at Brogdale can supply grafts from their tree, which appears identical to Flower of Kent, a coarse-fleshed cooking variety. 

==Works==

* De analysi per aequationes numero terminorum infinitas (1669, published 1711)
* Method of Fluxions (1671)
*Of Natures Obvious Laws & Processes in Vegetation (unpublished, c. 167175) Newton's alchemical works transcribed and online at Indiana University. Retrieved 11 January 2007. 
* De motu corporum in gyrum (1684)
* Philosophi Naturalis Principia Mathematica (1687)
* Opticks (1704)
* Reports as Master of the Mint (170125)
* Arithmetica Universalis (1707)
* The System of the World, Optical Lectures, The Chronology of Ancient Kingdoms, (Amended) and De mundi systemate (published posthumously in 1728)
* Observations on Daniel and The Apocalypse of St. John (1733)
* (A facsimile edition of the 1733 work.)
* An Historical Account of Two Notable Corruptions of Scripture (1754)

===Primary sources===

* Newton, Isaac. The Principia: Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy. University of California Press, (1999). 974 pp.
** Brackenridge, J. Bruce. The Key to Newton's Dynamics: The Kepler Problem and the Principia: Containing an English Translation of Sections 1, 2, and 3 of Book One from the First (1687) Edition of Newton's Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy. University of California Press, 1996. 299 pp.
* Newton, Isaac. The Optical Papers of Isaac Newton. Vol. 1: The Optical Lectures, 16701672. Cambridge U. Press, 1984. 627 pp.
** Newton, Isaac. Opticks (4th ed. 1730) online edition
** Newton, I. (1952). Opticks, or A Treatise of the Reflections, Refractions, Inflections & Colours of Light. New York: Dover Publications.
* Newton, I. Sir Isaac Newton's Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy and His System of the World, tr. A. Motte, rev. Florian Cajori. Berkeley: University of California Press. (1934).
*  8 volumes.
*Newton, Isaac. The correspondence of Isaac Newton, ed. H. W. Turnbull and others, 7 vols. (195977).
* Newton's Philosophy of Nature: Selections from His Writings edited by H. S. Thayer, (1953), online edition.
* Isaac Newton, Sir; J Edleston; Roger Cotes, Correspondence of Sir Isaac Newton and Professor Cotes, including letters of other eminent men, London, John W. Parker, West Strand; Cambridge, John Deighton, 1850 (Google Books).
* Maclaurin, C. (1748). An Account of Sir Isaac Newton's Philosophical Discoveries, in Four Books. London: A. Millar and J. Nourse.
* Newton, I. (1958). Isaac Newton's Papers and Letters on Natural Philosophy and Related Documents, eds. I. B. Cohen and R. E. Schofield. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
* Newton, I. (1962). The Unpublished Scientific Papers of Isaac Newton: A Selection from the Portsmouth Collection in the University Library, Cambridge, ed. A. R. Hall and M. B. Hall. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
*Newton, I. (1975). Isaac Newton's 'Theory of the Moon's Motion' (1702). London: Dawson.

==See also==

 *Ismal Bullialdus *De Motu (Berkeley's essay) * Elements of the Philosophy of Newton *series|Finite difference: Newton_series] *GaussNewton algorithm *History of calculus *History of the telescope *LeibnizNewton calculus controversy *of multiple discoveries#17th century|List of multiple discoveries: 17th century] *List of things named after Isaac Newton *Retrospective diagnoses of autism 

==References==

== Bibliography ==

* 
* This well documented work provides, in particular, valuable information regarding Newton's knowledge of Patristics
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
*
*

== Further reading ==

* 
*Bardi, Jason Socrates. The Calculus Wars: Newton, Leibniz, and the Greatest Mathematical Clash of All Time. 2006. 277 pp. excerpt and text search
* .
* Berlinski, David. Newton's Gift: How Sir Isaac Newton Unlocked the System of the World. (2000). 256 pages. excerpt and text search ISBN 0-684-84392-7
* Buchwald, Jed Z. and Cohen, I. Bernard, eds. Isaac Newton's Natural Philosophy. MIT Press, 2001. 354 pages. excerpt and text search
*
* See this site for excerpt and text search.
* 
* Cohen, I. Bernard and Smith, George E., ed. The Cambridge Companion to Newton. (2002). 500 pp. focuses on philosophical issues only; excerpt and text search; complete edition online
* 
* 
* 
*  Preface by Albert Einstein. Reprinted by Johnson Reprint Corporation, New York (1972).
* 
* 
*
*
*Hawking, Stephen, ed. On the Shoulders of Giants. ISBN 0-7624-1348-4 Places selections from Newton's Principia in the context of selected writings by Copernicus, Kepler, Galileo and Einstein
*
* Keynes took a close interest in Newton and owned many of Newton's private papers.
* 
* Newton, Isaac. Papers and Letters in Natural Philosophy, edited by I. Bernard Cohen. Harvard University Press, 1958,1978. ISBN 0-674-46853-8.
* Newton, Isaac (16421727). The Principia: a new Translation, Guide by I. Bernard Cohen ISBN 0-520-08817-4 University of California (1999)
* 
* 
* Shapley, Harlow, S. Rapport, and H. Wright. A Treasury of Science; "Newtonia" pp. 1479; "Discoveries" pp. 1504. Harper & Bros., New York, (1946).
* 
* (edited by A. H. White; originally published in 1752)
* 

Religion

* Dobbs, Betty Jo Tetter. The Janus Faces of Genius: The Role of Alchemy in Newton's Thought. (1991), links the alchemy to Arianism
* Force, James E., and Richard H. Popkin, eds. Newton and Religion: Context, Nature, and Influence. (1999), 342pp . Pp. xvii + 325. 13 papers by scholars using newly opened manuscripts
* Ramati, Ayval. "The Hidden Truth of Creation: Newton's Method of Fluxions" British Journal for the History of Science 34: 417438. in JSTOR, argues that his calculus had a theological basis
*Snobelen, Stephen "'God of Gods, and Lord of Lords': The Theology of Isaac Newton's General Scholium to the Principia," Osiris, 2nd Series, Vol. 16, (2001), pp. 169208 in JSTOR
* 
* 
* Wiles, Maurice. Archetypal Heresy. Arianism through the Centuries. (1996) 214 pages, with chapter 4 on 18th century England; pp. 7793 on Newton, excerpt and text search.

== External links ==

*
*Newton's Scholar Google profile
*ScienceWorld biography by Eric Weisstein
*Dictionary of Scientific Biography
*"The Newton Project"
*"The Newton Project  Canada"
*
*"Newton's Religious Views Reconsidered"
*"Newton's Royal Mint Reports"
*"Newton's Dark Secrets" - NOVA TV programme
*from The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy:
**"Isaac Newton", by George Smith
**"Newton's Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica", by George Smith
**"Newton's Philosophy", by Andrew Janiak
**"Newton's views on space, time, and motion", by Robert Rynasiewicz
*"Newton's Castle" - educational material
*"The Chymistry of Isaac Newton", research on his alchemical writings
*"FMA Live!" - program for teaching Newton's laws to kids
*Newton's religious position
*The "General Scholium" to Newton's Principia
*Kandaswamy, Anand M. "The Newton/Leibniz Conflict in Context"
*Newton's First ODE  A study by on how Newton approximated the solutions of a first-order ODE using infinite series
*
*
*"The Mind of Isaac Newton" - images, audio, animations and interactive segments
*Enlightening Science Videos on Newton's biography, optics, physics, reception, and on his views on science and religion
*Newton biography (University of St Andrews)
* Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Newton, Sir Isaac". Encyclopdia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.
*and see at Newton] for the following works about him:
**"Newton, Sir Isaac" in A Short Biographical Dictionary of English Literature by John William Cousin, London: J. M. Dent & Sons, 1910.
**"Newton, Isaac," in Dictionary of National Biography, London: Smith, Elder, & Co., (18851900)
**Memoirs of Sir Isaac Newton's life by William Stukeley, 1752
* 
* 

Writings by Newton
*Newton's works  full texts, at the Newton Project
* The Newton Manuscripts at the National Library of Israel - the collection of all his religious writings
*
*"Newton's Principia"  read and search
*Descartes, Space, and Body and A New Theory of Light and Colour, modernised readable versions by Jonathan Bennett
*Opticks, or a Treatise of the Reflections, Refractions, Inflexions and Colours of Light, full text on archive.org
*"Newton Papers" - Cambridge Digital Library
*See Wikisource at Newton] for the following works by him:
** Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica
** Opticks: or, a Treatise of the Reflections, Refractions, Inflections and Colours of Light
** Observations upon the Prophecies of Daniel and the Apocalypse of St. John
** New Theory About Light and Colour
** An Historical Account of Two Notable Corruptions of Scripture

 



[[Immanuel Kant]]

Immanuel Kant (; 22 April 1724  12 February 1804) was a German philosopher who is widely considered to be a central figure of modern philosophy. He argued that fundamental concepts structure human experience, and that reason is the source of morality. His thought continues to have a major influence in contemporary thought, especially the fields of metaphysics, epistemology, ethics, political philosophy, and aesthetics. 

Kant's major work, the Critique of Pure Reason (Kritik der reinen Vernunft, 1781), aimed to explain the relationship between reason and human experience. With this project, he hoped to move beyond what he took to be failures of traditional philosophy and metaphysics. He hoped to put an end to what he considered an era of futile and speculative theories of human experience, while resisting the sceptical arguments developed by David Hume and Ren Descartes.

Kant proposed a "Copernican Revolution" in philosophy. Kant argued that our experiences are structured by necessary features of our minds. In his view, the mind shapes and structures experience so that, on an abstract level, all human experience shares certain essential structural features. Among other things, Kant believed that the concepts of space and time are integral to all human experience, as are our concepts of cause and effect. 

 One important consequence of this view is that one never has direct experience of things, the so-called noumenal world, and that what we do experience is the phenomenal world as conveyed by our senses. These claims summarize Kant's views upon the subjectobject problem.

Kant published other important works on ethics, religion, law, aesthetics, astronomy, and history. These included the Critique of Practical Reason (Kritik der praktischen Vernunft, 1788), the Metaphysics of Morals (Die Metaphysik der Sitten, 1797), which dealt with ethics, and the Critique of Judgment (Kritik der Urteilskraft, 1790), which looks at aesthetics and teleology. He aimed to resolve disputes between empirical and rationalist approaches. The former asserted that all knowledge comes through experience; the latter maintained that reason and innate ideas were prior. Kant argued that experience is purely subjective without first being processed by pure reason. He also said that using reason without applying it to experience only leads to theoretical illusions. The free and proper exercise of reason by the individual was a theme both of the Age of Enlightenment, and of Kant's approaches to the various problems of philosophy.

His ideas influenced many thinkers in Germany during his lifetime, and he moved philosophy beyond the debate between the rationalists and empiricists. The philosophers Johann Gottlieb Fichte, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel and Arthur Schopenhauer amended and developed the Kantian system, bringing about German idealism.

Kant is seen as a major figure in the history and development of philosophy. German and European thinking progressed after his time, and his influence still inspires philosophical work today. Twentieth-century thinkers who have been influenced by Kant include Max Weber, Friedrich Meinecke, and Peter Strawson. Thomas E Willey, Back to Kant: The Revival of Kantianism in German Social and Historical Thought, 18601914 (Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 1978). 

==Biography==
Immanuel Kant was born in 1724 in Knigsberg, Prussia (since 1946 the city of Kaliningrad, Russia), as the fourth of nine children (four of them reached adulthood). Baptized 'Emanuel', he changed his name to 'Immanuel' Kuehn, Manfred. Kant: a Biography. Cambridge University Press, 2001, p. 26 after learning Hebrew. In his entire life, he never traveled more than ten miles from Knigsberg. Lewis, Rick. 2005. 'Kant 200 Years On'. Philosophy Now. No. 49. His father, Johann Georg Kant (16821746), was a German harnessmaker from Memel, at the time Prussia's most northeastern city (now Klaipda, Lithuania). His mother, Anna Regina Reuter (16971737), was born in Nuremberg. 
 Kant's mother's name is sometimes erroneously given as Anna Regina Porter.
 Kant's paternal grandfather, Hans Kant, 

 
had emigrated from Scotland to East Prussia, and his father still spelled their family name "Cant". http://www.csudh.edu/phenom_studies/western/lect_9.html In his youth, Kant was a solid, albeit unspectacular, student. He was brought up in a Pietist household that stressed intense religious devotion, personal humility, and a literal interpretation of the Bible. Kant received a stern educationstrict, punitive, and disciplinarythat preferred Latin and religious instruction over mathematics and science. 
Biographical information sourced from: Kuehn, Manfred. Kant: a Biography. Cambridge University Press, 2001. ISBN 0-521-49704-3 the standard biography of Kant in English.
 Despite his upbringing in a religious household and still maintaining a belief in God, he was skeptical of religion in later life; various commentators have labelled him agnostic. "While this sounds skeptical, Kant is only agnostic about our knowledge of metaphysical objects such as God. And, as noted above, Kant's agnosticism leads to the conclusion that we can neither affirm nor deny claims made by traditional metaphysics." Andrew Fiala, J. M. D. Meiklejohn, Critique of Pure Reason  Introduction, page xi.
 

 

 

 

 

 The common myths concerning Kant's personal mannerisms are enumerated, explained, and refuted in Goldthwait's introduction to his translation of Observations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime. 
Kant, Immanuel. Observations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime. Trans. John T. Goldthwait. University of California Press, 1961, 2003. ISBN 0-520-24078-2
 It is often held that Kant lived a very strict and predictable life, leading to the oft-repeated story that neighbors would set their clocks by his daily walks. He never married, but did not seem to lack a rewarding social life  he was a popular teacher and a modestly successful author even before starting on his major philosophical works.

===The young scholar===
Kant showed a great aptitude for study at an early age. He first attended the Collegium Fredericianum and then enrolled at the University of Knigsberg (where he would spend his entire career) in 1740, at the age of 16. The American International Encyclopedia (New York: J.J. Little & Ives, 1954), Vol. IX. He studied the philosophy of Gottfried Leibniz and Christian Wolff under Martin Knutzen, a rationalist who was also familiar with developments in British philosophy and science and who introduced Kant to the new mathematical physics of Isaac Newton. Knutzen dissuaded Kant from the theory of pre-established harmony, which he regarded as "the pillow for the lazy mind". He also dissuaded the young scholar from idealism, which most philosophers in the 18th century regarded in a negative light. (The theory of transcendental idealism that Kant developed in the Critique of Pure Reason is not traditional idealism, i.e. the idea that reality is purely mental. In fact, Kant produced arguments against traditional idealism in the second part of the Critique of Pure Reason.) His father's stroke and subsequent death in 1746 interrupted his studies. Kant became a private tutor in the smaller towns surrounding Knigsberg, but continued his scholarly research. In 1747, he published his first philosophical work, Thoughts on the True Estimation of Living Forces.

===Early work===
Kant is best known for his work in the philosophy of ethics and metaphysics, but he made significant contributions to other disciplines. He made an important astronomical discovery, namely a discovery about the nature of the Earth's rotation, for which he won the Berlin Academy Prize in 1754.

According to Lord Kelvin:

According to Thomas Huxley:

In the General History of Nature and Theory of the Heavens (Allgemeine Naturgeschichte und Theorie des Himmels) (1755), Kant laid out the Nebular hypothesis, in which he deduced that the Solar System formed from a large cloud of gas, a nebula. He thus attempted to explain the order of the solar system, seen previously by Newton as being imposed from the beginning by God. Kant also correctly deduced that the Milky Way was a large disk of stars, which he theorized also formed from a (much larger) spinning cloud of gas. He further suggested the possibility that other nebulae might also be similarly large and distant disks of stars. These postulations opened new horizons for astronomy: for the first time extending astronomy beyond the solar system to galactic and extragalactic realms. George Gamow, One, Two, Three... Infinity, pp. 300ff. Viking Press, 1954 

From this point on, Kant turned increasingly to philosophical issues, although he continued to write on the sciences throughout his life. In the early 1760s, Kant produced a series of important works in philosophy. The False Subtlety of the Four Syllogistic Figures, a work in logic, was published in 1762. Two more works appeared the following year: Attempt to Introduce the Concept of Negative Magnitudes into Philosophy and The Only Possible Argument in Support of a Demonstration of the Existence of God. In 1764, Kant wrote Observations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime and then was second to Moses Mendelssohn in a Berlin Academy prize competition with his Inquiry Concerning the Distinctness of the Principles of Natural Theology and Morality (often referred to as "The Prize Essay"). In 1770, at the age of 45, Kant was finally appointed Professor of Logic and Metaphysics at the University of Knigsberg. Kant wrote his inaugural dissertation in defense of this appointment. This work saw the emergence of several central themes of his mature work, including the distinction between the faculties of intellectual thought and sensible receptivity. Not to observe this distinction would mean to commit the error of subreption, and, as he says in the last chapter of the dissertation, only in avoidance of this error does metaphysics flourish.

The issue that vexed Kant was central to what twentieth century scholars termed "the philosophy of mind". The flowering of the natural sciences had led to an understanding of how data reaches the brain. Sunlight may fall upon a distant object, whereupon light is reflected from various parts of the object in a way that maps the surface features (color, texture, etc.) of the object. The light reaches the eye of a human observer, passes through the cornea, is focused by the lens upon the retina where it forms an image similar to that formed by light passing through a pinhole into a camera obscura. The retinal cells next send impulses through the optic nerve and thereafter they form a mapping in the brain of the visual features of the distant object. The interior mapping is not the exterior thing being mapped, and our belief that there is a meaningful relationship between the exterior object and the mapping in the brain depends on a chain of reasoning that is not fully grounded. But the uncertainty aroused by these considerations, the uncertainties raised by optical illusions, misperceptions, delusions, etc., are not the end of the problems.

Kant saw that the mind could not function as an empty container that simply receives data from the outside. Something must be giving order to the incoming data. Images of external objects must be kept in the same sequence in which they were received. This ordering occurs through the mind's intuition of time. The same considerations apply to the mind's function of constituting space for ordering mappings of visual and tactile signals arriving via the already described chains of physical causation.

It is often held that Kant was a late developer, that he only became an important philosopher in his mid-50s after rejecting his earlier views. While it is true that Kant wrote his greatest works relatively late in life, there is a tendency to underestimate the value of his earlier works. Recent Kant scholarship has devoted more attention to these "pre-critical" writings and has recognized a degree of continuity with his mature work. Cf., for example, Susan Shell, The Embodiment of Reason (Chicago, 1996) 

===The silent decade===
At the age of 46, Kant was an established scholar and an increasingly influential philosopher. Much was expected of him. In correspondence with his ex-student and friend Markus Herz, Kant admitted that, in the Inaugural Dissertation, he had failed to account for the relation and connection between our sensible and intellectual facultieshe needed to explain how we combine sensory knowledge with reasoned knowledge, these being related but very different processes. He also credited David Hume with awakening him from "dogmatic slumber" (circa 1771). http://hardproblem.ru/wp-content/uploads/2010/06/Vasilyev-The-Origin.pdf Hume had stated that experience consists only of sequences of feelings, images or sounds. Ideas such as "cause", goodness, or objects were not evident in experience, so why do we believe in the reality of these? Kant felt that reason could remove this skepticism, and he set himself to solving these problems. He did not publish any work in philosophy for the next eleven years.

Immanuel Kant

Although fond of company and conversation with others, Kant isolated himself. He resisted friends' attempts to bring him out of his isolation. In 1778, in response to one of these offers by a former pupil, Kant wrote:

:
"Any change makes me apprehensive, even if it offers the greatest promise of improving my condition, and I am persuaded by this natural instinct of mine that I must take heed if I wish that the threads which the Fates spin so thin and weak in my case to be spun to any length. My great thanks, to my well-wishers and friends, who think so kindly of me as to undertake my welfare, but at the same time a most humble request to protect me in my current condition from any disturbance." Christopher Kul-Want and Andrzej Klimowski, Introducing Kant (Cambridge: Icon Books, 2005). ISBN 1-84046-664-2 

When Kant emerged from his silence in 1781, the result was the Critique of Pure Reason. Although now uniformly recognized as one of the greatest works in the history of philosophy, this Critique was largely ignored upon its initial publication. The book was long, over 800 pages in the original German edition, and written in a convoluted style. It received few reviews, and these granted no significance to the work. Its density made it, as Johann Gottfried Herder put it in a letter to Johann Georg Hamann, a "tough nut to crack", obscured by "all this heavy gossamer". Ein Jahrhundert deutscher Literaturkritik, vol/. III, Der Aufstieg zur Klassik in der Kritik der Zeit (Berlin, 1959), p. 315; as quoted in Gulyga, Arsenij. Immanuel Kant: His Life and Thought. Trans., Marijan Despaltovi. Boston: Birkhuser, 1987. Its reception stood in stark contrast to the praise Kant had received for earlier works, such as his Prize Essay and shorter works that preceded the first Critique. These well-received and readable tracts include one on the earthquake in Lisbon that was so popular that it was sold by the page. Gulyga, Arsenij. Immanuel Kant: His Life and Thought. Trans., Marijan Despaltovi. Boston: Birkhuser, 1987 pp. 289. Prior to the change in course documented in the first Critique, his books sold well, and by the time he published Observations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime in 1764 he had become a popular author of some note. Gulyga, Arsenij. Immanuel Kant: His Life and Thought. Trans., Marijan Despaltovi. Boston: Birkhuser, 1987, p. 62. Kant was disappointed with the first Critique's reception. Recognizing the need to clarify the original treatise, Kant wrote the Prolegomena to any Future Metaphysics in 1783 as a summary of its main views. Shortly thereafter, Kant's friend Johann Friedrich Schultz (17391805) (professor of mathematics) published Erluterungen ber des Herrn Professor Kant Critik der reinen Vernunft (Knigsberg, 1784), which was a brief but very accurate commentary on Kant's Critique of Pure Reason.

Kant's reputation gradually rose through the 1780s, sparked by a series of important works: the 1784 essay, "is Enlightenment?|Answer to the Question: What is Enlightenment?]"; 1785's Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (his first work on moral philosophy); and, from 1786, Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science. But Kant's fame ultimately arrived from an unexpected source. In 1786, Karl Reinhold began to publish a series of public letters on the Kantian philosophy. In these letters, Reinhold framed Kant's philosophy as a response to the central intellectual controversy of the era: the Pantheism Dispute. Friedrich Jacobi had accused the recently deceased G. E. Lessing (a distinguished dramatist and philosophical essayist) of Spinozism. Such a charge, tantamount to atheism, was vigorously denied by Lessing's friend Moses Mendelssohn, and a bitter public dispute arose among partisans. The controversy gradually escalated into a general debate over the values of the Enlightenment and the value of reason itself. Reinhold maintained in his letters that Kant's Critique of Pure Reason could settle this dispute by defending the authority and bounds of reason. Reinhold's letters were widely read and made Kant the most famous philosopher of his era.

===Mature work===
Kant published a second edition of the Critique of Pure Reason (Kritik der reinen Vernunft) in 1787, heavily revising the first parts of the book. Most of his subsequent work focused on other areas of philosophy. He continued to develop his moral philosophy, notably in 1788's Critique of Practical Reason (known as the second Critique) and 1797's Metaphysics of Morals. The 1790 Critique of Judgment (the third Critique) applied the Kantian system to aesthetics and teleology.

In 1792, Kant's attempt to publish the Second of the four Pieces of Religion within the Bounds of Bare Reason, in the journal Berlinische Monatsschrift, met with opposition from the King's censorship commission, which had been established that same year in the context of 1789 French Revolution. Kant then arranged to have all four pieces published as a book, routing it through the philosophy department at the University of Jena to avoid the need for theological censorship. Kant got a now famous reprimand from the King, Derrida Vacant Chair p. 44. for this action of insubordination. When he nevertheless published a second edition in 1794, the censor was so irate that he arranged for a royal order that required Kant never to publish or even speak publicly about religion. Kant then published his response to the King's reprimand and explained himself, in the preface of The Conflict of the Faculties. 

He also wrote a number of semi-popular essays on history, religion, politics and other topics. These works were well received by Kant's contemporaries and confirmed his preeminent status in eighteenth century philosophy. There were several journals devoted solely to defending and criticizing the Kantian philosophy. But despite his success, philosophical trends were moving in another direction. Many of Kant's most important disciples (including Reinhold, Beck and Fichte) transformed the Kantian position into increasingly radical forms of idealism. The progressive stages of revision of Kant's teachings marked the emergence of German Idealism. Kant opposed these developments and publicly denounced Fichte in an open letter in 1799. It was one of his final acts expounding a stance on philosophical questions. In 1800 a student of Kant named Gottlob Benjamin Jsche (17621842) published a manual of logic for teachers called Logik, which he had prepared at Kant's request. Jsche prepared the Logik using a copy of a textbook in logic by Georg Freidrich Meier entitled Auszug aus der Vernunftlehre, in which Kant had written copious notes and annotations. The Logik has been considered of fundamental importance to Kant's philosophy, and the understanding of it. The great nineteenth century logician Charles Sanders Peirce remarked, in an incomplete review of Thomas Kingsmill Abbott's English translation of the introduction to the Logik, that "Kant's whole philosophy turns upon his logic." Peirce, C.S., Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, v.1, (HUP, 1960), 'Kant and his Refutation of Idealism' p. 15
 Also, Robert Schirokauer Hartman and Wolfgang Schwarz, wrote in the translators' introduction to their English translation of the Logik, "Its importance lies not only in its significance for the Critique of Pure Reason, the second part of which is a restatement of fundamental tenets of the Logic, but in its position within the whole of Kant's work." Kant, Immanuel, Logic, G.B. Jsche (ed), R.S. Hartman, W. Schwarz (translators), Indianapolis, 1984, p. xv. 

Kant's health, long poor, took a turn for the worse and he died at Knigsberg on 12 February 1804, uttering "Es ist gut" ("It is good") before expiring. Karl Vorlnder, Immanuel Kant: Der Mann und das Werk, Hamburg: Meiner, 1992, p. II 332. His unfinished final work was published as Opus Postumum.

==Philosophy==
In Kant's essay "is Enlightenment?|Answering the Question: What is Enlightenment?]",
Kant defined the Enlightenment as an age shaped by the Latin motto Sapere aude ("Dare to be wise"). Kant maintained that one ought to think autonomously, free of the dictates of external authority. His work reconciled many of the differences between the rationalist and empiricist traditions of the 18th century. He had a decisive impact on the Romantic and German Idealist philosophies of the 19th century. His work has also been a starting point for many 20th century philosophers.

Kant asserted that, because of the limitations of argumentation in the absence of irrefutable evidence, no one could really know whether there is a God and an afterlife or not. For the sake of morality and as a ground for reason, Kant asserted, people are justified in believing in God, even though they could never know God's presence empirically. He explained:

The sense of an enlightened approach and the critical method required that "If one cannot prove that a thing is, he may try to prove that it is not. And if he succeeds in doing neither (as often occurs), he may still ask whether it is in his interest to accept one or the other of the alternatives hypothetically, from the theoretical or the practical point of view. Hence the question no longer is as to whether perpetual peace is a real thing or not a real thing, or as to whether we may not be deceiving ourselves when we adopt the former alternative, but we must act on the supposition of its being real." The Science of Right, Conclusion. The presupposition of God, soul, and freedom was then a practical concern, for "Morality, by itself, constitutes a system, but happiness does not, unless it is distributed in exact proportion to morality. This, however, is possible in an intelligible world only under a wise author and ruler. Reason compels us to admit such a ruler, together with life in such a world, which we must consider as future life, or else all moral laws are to be considered as idle dreams... ." Critique of Pure Reason, A811. 

Kant claimed to have created a "Copernican revolution" in philosophy. This involved two interconnected foundations of his "critical philosophy":
* the epistemology of Transcendental Idealism and
* the moral philosophy of the autonomy of practical reason.

These teachings placed the active, rational human subject at the center of the cognitive and moral worlds. Kant argued that the rational order of the world as known by science was not just the fortuitous accumulation of sense perceptions.

Conceptual unification and integration is carried out by the mind through concepts or the "categories of the understanding" operating on the perceptual manifold within space and time. The latter are not concepts, In the first edition of the Critique of Pure Reason Kant refers to space as "no discursive or...general conception of the relation of things, but a pure intuition" and maintained that "We can only represent to ourselves one space". The "general notion of spaces...depends solely upon limitations" (Meikeljohn trans., A25). In the second edition of the CPR, Kant adds, "The original representation of space is an a priori intuition, not a concept" (Kemp Smith trans., B40). In regard to time, Kant states that "Time is not a discursive, or what is called a general concept, but a pure form of sensible intuition. Different times are but parts of one and the same time; and the representation which can be given only through a single object is intuition" (A31/B47). For the differences in the discursive use of reason according to concepts and its intuitive use through the construction of concepts, see Critique of Pure Reason (A719/B747 ff. and A837/B865). On "One and the same thing in space and time" and the mathematical construction of concepts, see A724/B752. but are forms of sensibility that are a priori necessary conditions for any possible experience. Thus the objective order of nature and the causal necessity that operates within it are dependent upon the mind's processes, the product of the rule-based activity that Kant called, "synthesis. There is much discussion among Kant scholars on the correct interpretation of this train of thought.

The 'two-world' interpretation regards Kant's position as a statement of epistemological limitation, that we are not able to transcend the bounds of our own mind, meaning that we cannot access the "thing-in-itself". Kant, however, also speaks of the thing in itself or transcendental object as a product of the (human) understanding as it attempts to conceive of objects in abstraction from the conditions of sensibility. Following this line of thought, some interpreters have argued that the thing in itself does not represent a separate ontological domain but simply a way of considering objects by means of the understanding alonethis is known as the two-aspect view.

The notion of the "thing in itself" was much discussed by those who came after Kant. It was argued that since the "thing in itself" was unknowable its existence could not simply be assumed. Rather than arbitrarily switching to an account that was ungrounded in anything supposed to be the "real," as did the German Idealists, another group arose to ask how our (presumably reliable) accounts of a coherent and rule-abiding universe were actually grounded. This new kind of philosophy became known as Phenomenology, and its founder was Edmund Husserl.

With regard to morality, Kant argued that the source of the good lies not in anything outside the human subject, either in nature or given by God, but rather is only the good will itself. A good will is one that acts from duty in accordance with the universal moral law that the autonomous human being freely gives itself. This law obliges one to treat humanityunderstood as rational agency, and represented through oneself as well as othersas an end in itself rather than (merely) as means to other ends the individual might hold. This necessitates practical self-reflection in which we universalize our reasons.

These ideas have largely framed or influenced all subsequent philosophical discussion and analysis. The specifics of Kant's account generated immediate and lasting controversy. Nevertheless, his thesesthat the mind itself necessarily makes a constitutive contribution to its knowledge, that this contribution is transcendental rather than psychological, that philosophy involves self-critical activity, that morality is rooted in human freedom, and that to act autonomously is to act according to rational moral principleshave all had a lasting effect on subsequent philosophy.

===Theory of perception===

Kant defines his theory of perception in his influential 1781 work The Critique of Pure Reason, which has often been cited as the most significant volume of metaphysics and epistemology in modern philosophy. Kant maintains that our understanding of the external world had its foundations not merely in experience, but in both experience and a priori concepts, thus offering a non-empiricist critique of rationalist philosophy, which is what he and others referred to as his "Copernican revolution". http://www.factmonster.com/ce6/people/A0827033.html http://www.infoplease.com/ce6/people/A0827033.html 

Firstly, Kant's distinction between analytic and synthetic propositions:

# Analytic proposition: a proposition whose predicate concept is contained in its subject concept; e.g., "All bachelors are unmarried," or, "All bodies take up space."
# Synthetic proposition: a proposition whose predicate concept is not contained in its subject concept; e.g., "All bachelors are happy," or, "All bodies have weight."

Analytic propositions are true by nature of the meaning of the words involved in the sentence  we require no further knowledge than a grasp of the language to understand this proposition. On the other hand, synthetic statements are those that tell us something about the world. The truth or falsehood of synthetic statements derives from something outside of their linguistic content. In this instance, weight is not a necessary predicate of the body; until we are told the heaviness of the body we do not know that it has weight. In this case, experience of the body is required before its heaviness becomes clear. Before Kant's first Critique, empiricists (cf. Hume) and rationalists (cf. Leibniz) assumed that all synthetic statements required experience to be known.

Kant, however, contests this: he claims that elementary mathematics, like arithmetic, is synthetic a priori, in that its statements provide new knowledge, but knowledge that is not derived from experience. This becomes part of his over-all argument for transcendental idealism. That is, he argues that the possibility of experience depends on certain necessary conditions  which he calls a priori forms  and that these conditions structure and hold true of the world of experience. In so doing, his main claims in the "Transcendental Aesthetic" are that mathematic judgments are synthetic a priori and in addition, that Space and Time are not derived from experience but rather are its preconditions.

Once we have grasped the concepts of addition, subtraction or the functions of basic arithmetic, we do not need any empirical experience to know that 100 + 100 = 200, and in this way it would appear that arithmetic is in fact analytic. However, that it is analytic can be disproved thus: if the numbers five and seven in the calculation 5 + 7 = 12 are examined, there is nothing to be found in them by which the number 12 can be inferred. Such it is that "5 + 7" and "the cube root of 1,728" or "12" are not analytic because their reference is the same but their sense is not  that the mathematic judgment "5 + 7 = 12" tells us something new about the world. It is self-evident, and undeniably a priori, but at the same time it is synthetic. And so Kant proves a proposition can be synthetic and known a priori.

Kant asserts that experience is based both upon the perception of external objects and a priori knowledge. The German word Anschauung, which Kant used, literally means 'looking at' and generally means what in philosophy in English is called "perception". However it sometimes is rendered as "intuition": not, however, with the vernacular meaning of an indescribable or mystical experience or sixth sense, but rather with the meaning of the direct perception or grasping of sensory phenomena. In this article, both terms, "perception" and "intuition" are used to stand for Kant's Anschauung. The external world, he writes, provides those things that we sense. It is our mind, though, that processes this information about the world and gives it order, allowing us to comprehend it. Our mind supplies the conditions of space and time to experience objects. According to the "transcendental unity of apperception", the concepts of the mind (Understanding) and the perceptions or intuitions that garner information from phenomena (Sensibility) are synthesized by comprehension. Without the concepts, intuitions are nondescript; without the intuitions, concepts are meaningless  thus the famous statement, "Thoughts without content are empty, intuitions without concepts are blind." Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason , trans. Norman Kemp Smith (N.Y.: St. Martins, 1965), A 51/B 75. 

Kant also makes the claim that an external environment is necessary for the establishment of the self. Although Kant would want to argue that there is no empirical way of observing the self, we can see the logical necessity of the self when we observe that we can have different perceptions of the external environment over time. By uniting all of these general representations into one global representation, we can see how a transcendental self emerges. "I am therefore conscious of the identical self in regard to the manifold of the representations that are given to me in an intuition because I call them all together my representations." Kant, Immanuel. Critique of Pure Reason. Ed. Paul Guyer and Allen W. Wood. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1998. p. 248. 

===Categories of the Faculty of Understanding===

Kant statue in Belo Horizonte, Brazil
In studying the work of Kant one must realize that there is a distinction between "understanding" as the general concept (in German, das Verstehen) and the "understanding" as a faculty of the human mind (in German, der Verstand, "the intellect"). In much English language scholarship, the word "understanding" is used in both senses.

Kant deemed it obvious that we have some objective knowledge of the world, such as, say, Newtonian physics. But this knowledge relies on synthetic, a priori laws of nature, like causality and substance. The problem, then, is how this is possible. Kant's solution was to reason that the subject must supply laws that make experience of objects possible, and that these laws are the synthetic, a priori laws of nature that we know apply to all objects before we experience them. So, to deduce all these laws, Kant examined experience in general, dissecting in it what is supplied by the mind from what is supplied by the given intuitions. What has just been explicated is commonly called a transcendental reduction. Immanuel Kant, Prolegomena to perhaps Any Future Metaphysics, pages 35 to 43. 

To begin with, Kant's distinction between the a posteriori being contingent and particular knowledge, and the a priori being universal and necessary knowledge, must be kept in mind. For if we merely connect two intuitions together in a perceiving subject, the knowledge is always subjective because it is derived a posteriori, when what is desired is for the knowledge to be objective, that is, for the two intuitions to refer to the object and hold good of it necessarily universally for anyone at anytime, not just the perceiving subject in its current condition. What else is equivalent to objective knowledge besides the a priori, that is to say, universal and necessary knowledge? Nothing else, and hence before knowledge can be objective, it must be incorporated under an a priori category of the understanding. Deleuze on Kant, from where the definitions of a priori and a posteriori were obtained. 

For example, say a subject says, "The sun shines on the stone; the stone grows warm," which is all he perceives in perception. His judgment is contingent and holds no necessity. But if he says, "The sunshine causes the stone to warm," he subsumes the perception under the category of causality, which is not found in the perception, and necessarily synthesizes the concept sunshine with the concept heat, producing a necessarily universally true judgment. 

To explain the categories in more detail, they are the preconditions of the construction of objects in the mind. Indeed, to even think of the sun and stone presupposes the category of subsistence, that is, substance. For the categories synthesize the random data of the sensory manifold into intelligible objects. This means that the categories are also the most abstract things one can say of any object whatsoever, and hence one can have an a priori cognition of the totality of all objects of experience if one can list all of them. To do so, Kant formulates another transcendental deduction. 

Judgments are, for Kant, the preconditions of any thought. Man thinks via judgments, so all possible judgments must be listed and the perceptions connected within them put aside, so as to make it possible to examine the moments when the understanding is engaged in constructing judgments. For the categories are equivalent to these moments, in that they are concepts of intuitions in general, so far as they are determined by these moments universally and necessarily. Thus by listing all the moments, one can deduce from them all of the categories. 

One may now ask: How many possible judgments are there? Kant believed that all the possible propositions within Aristotle's syllogistic logic are equivalent to all possible judgments, and that all the logical operators within the propositions are equivalent to the moments of the understanding within judgments. Thus he listed Aristotle's system in four groups of three: quantity (universal, particular, singular), quality (affirmative, negative, infinite), relation (categorical, hypothetical, disjunctive) and modality (problematic, assertoric, apodeictic). The parallelism with Kant's categories is obvious: quantity (unity, plurality, totality), quality (reality, negation, limitation), relation (substance, cause, community) and modality (possibility, existence, necessity). 

The fundamental building blocks of experience, i.e. objective knowledge, are now in place. First there is the sensibility, which supplies the mind with intuitions, and then there is the understanding, which produces judgments of these intuitions and can subsume them under categories. These categories lift the intuitions up out of the subject's current state of consciousness and place them within consciousness in general, producing universally necessary knowledge. For the categories are innate in any rational being, so any intuition thought within a category in one mind is necessarily subsumed and understood identically in any mind. In other words we filter what we see and hear. 

===Schema===

Kant ran into a problem with his theory that the mind plays a part in producing objective knowledge. Intuitions and categories are entirely disparate, so how can they interact? Kant's solution is the schema: a priori principles by which the transcendental imagination connects concepts with intuitions through time. All the principles are temporally bound, for if a concept is purely a priori, as the categories are, then they must apply for all times. Hence there are principles such as substance is that which endures through time, and the cause must always be prior to the effect. Immanuel Kant, Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics, pages 35 to 43. Immanuel Kant, Critique of Judgment, the Introduction to the Hackett edition. 

===Moral philosophy===
Immanuel Kant
Kant developed his moral philosophy in three works: Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals (1785), Kant, Immanuel. Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals. Trans. Lewis White Beck. Page numbers citing this work are Beck's marginal numbers that refer to the page numbers of the standard edition of Knigliche Preussische Akademie der Wissenschaften. Berlin, 190238. Critique of Practical Reason (1788), and Metaphysics of Morals (1797).

In the Groundwork, Kant's method involves trying to convert our everyday, obvious, rational The distinction between rational and philosophical knowledge is given in the Preface to the Groundwork, 1785. knowledge of morality into philosophical knowledge. The latter two works followed a method of using "practical reason", which is based only upon things about which reason can tell us, and not deriving any principles from experience, to reach conclusions which are able to be applied to the world of experience (in the second part of The Metaphysic of Morals).

Kant is known for his theory that there is a single moral obligation, which he called the "Categorical Imperative", and is derived from the concept of duty. Kant defines the demands of the moral law as "categorical imperatives". Categorical imperatives are principles that are intrinsically valid; they are good in and of themselves; they must be obeyed by all, in all situations and circumstances, if our behavior is to observe the moral law. It is from the Categorical Imperative that all other moral obligations are generated, and by which all moral obligations can be tested. Kant also stated that the moral means and ends can be applied to the categorical imperative, that rational beings can pursue certain "ends" using the appropriate "means". Ends that are based on physical needs or wants always give merely hypothetical imperatives. The categorical imperative, however, may be based only on something that is an "end in itself". That is, an end that is a means only to itself and not to some other need, desire, or purpose. Kant, Foundations, p. 421. He believed that the moral law is a principle of reason itself, and is not based on contingent facts about the world, such as what would make us happy, but to act upon the moral law which has no other motive than "worthiness of being happy". Critique of Pure Reason, A806/B834. Accordingly, he believed that moral obligation applies only to rational agents. Kant, Foundations, p. 408. 

A categorical imperative is an unconditional obligation; that is, it has the force of an obligation regardless of our will or desires (Contrast this with hypothetical imperative) Kant, Foundations, pp. 4201. In Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals (1785) Kant enumerated three formulations of the categorical imperative that he believed to be roughly equivalent. Kant, Foundations, p. 436. 

Kant believed that if an action is not done with the motive of duty, then it is without moral value. He thought that every action should have pure intention behind it; otherwise it was meaningless. He did not necessarily believe that the final result was the most important aspect of an action, but that how the person felt while carrying out the action was the time at which value was set to the result.

In Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals, Kant also posited the "counter-utilitarian idea that there is a difference between preferences and values and that considerations of individual rights temper calculations of aggregate utility", a concept that is an axiom in economics: Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (2003) Ecosystems and Well-being: A Framework for Assessment. Washington DC: Island Press, p. 142. 

Everything has either a price or a dignity. Whatever has a price can be replaced by something else as its equivalent; on the other hand, whatever is above all price, and therefore admits of no equivalent, has a dignity. But that which constitutes the condition under which alone something can be an end in itself does not have mere relative worth, i.e., price, but an intrinsic worth, i.e., a dignity. (p. 53, italics in original).

A phrase quoted by Kant, which is used to summarize the counter-utilitarian nature of his moral philosophy, is Fiat justitia, pereat mundus, ("Let justice be done, though the world perish"), which he translates loosely as "Let justice reign even if all the rascals in the world should perish from it". This appears in his 1795 Perpetual Peace (Zum ewigen Frieden. Ein philosophischer Entwurf.), Appendix 1. 

====The first formulation====
The first formulation (Formula of Universal Law) of the moral imperative "requires that the maxims be chosen as though they should hold as universal laws of nature" . This formulation in principle has as its supreme law the creed "Always act according to that maxim whose universality as a law you can at the same time will" and is the "only condition under which a will can never come into conflict with itself " Kant, Foundations, p. 437. 

One interpretation of the first formulation is called the "universalizability test". "Kant and the German Enlightenment" in "History of Ethics". Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Vol. 3, pp. 9596. MacMillan, 1973. An agent's maxim, according to Kant, is his "subjective principle of human actions": that is, what the agent believes is his reason to act. Kant, Foundations, pp. 400, 429. The universalisability test has five steps:

# Find the agent's maxim (i.e., an action paired with its motivation). Take for example the declaration "I will lie for personal benefit". Lying is the action; the motivation is to fulfill some sort of desire. Paired together, they form the maxim.
# Imagine a possible world in which everyone in a similar position to the real-world agent followed that maxim. With no exception of one's self. This is in order for you to hold people to the same principle required of yourself.
# Decide whether any contradictions or irrationalities arise in the possible world as a result of following the maxim.
# If a contradiction or irrationality arises, acting on that maxim is not allowed in the real world.
# If there is no contradiction, then acting on that maxim is permissible, and is sometimes required.

(For a modern parallel, see John Rawls' hypothetical situation, the original position.)

====The second formulation====
The second formulation (or Formula of the End in Itself) holds that "the rational being, as by its nature an end and thus as an end in itself, must serve in every maxim as the condition restricting all merely relative and arbitrary ends". The principle dictates that you "ct with reference to every rational being (whether yourself or another) so that it is an end in itself in your maxim", meaning that the rational being is "the basis of all maxims of action" and "must be treated never as a mere means but as the supreme limiting condition in the use of all means, i.e., as an end at the same time". Kant, Foundations, pp. 4378. 

====The third formulation====
The third formulation (Formula of Autonomy) is a synthesis of the first two and is the basis for the "complete determination of all maxims". It says "that all maxims which stem from autonomous legislation ought to harmonize with a possible realm of ends as with a realm of nature". In principle, "So act as if your maxims should serve at the same time as the universal law (of all rational beings)", meaning that we should so act that we may think of ourselves as "a member in the universal realm of ends", legislating universal laws through our maxims (that is, a code of conduct), in a "possible realm of ends". Kant, Foundations, pp. 4389. See also Kingdom of Ends None may elevate themselves above the universal law, therefore it is one's duty to follow the maxim(s).

====Idea of God====

Kant stated the practical necessity for a belief in God in his Critique of Practical Reason. As an idea of pure reason, "we do not have the slightest ground to assume in an absolute manner ... the object of this idea", Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, A685/B713. but adds that the idea of God cannot be separated from the relation of happiness with morality as the "ideal of the supreme good". The foundation of this connection is an intelligible moral world, and "is necessary from the practical point of view"; Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, A810/B838. compare Voltaire: "If God did not exist, it would be necessary to invent him." Originally, "Si Dieu n'existait pas, il faudrait l'inventer.", , ptre  l'Auteur du Livre des Trois Imposteurs (10 November 1770). In the Jsche Logic (1800) he wrote "One cannot provide objective reality for any theoretical idea, or prove it, except for the idea of freedom, because this is the condition of the moral law, whose reality is an axiom. The reality of the idea of God can only be proved by means of this idea, and hence only with a practical purpose, i.e., to act as though (als ob) there is a God, and hence only for this purpose" (9:93, trans. J. Michael Young, Lectures on Logic, p. 59091).

Along with this 'idea' on reason and God, Kant places thought over religion and nature, i.e. the idea of religion being natural or naturalistic. Kant saw reason as natural, and as some part of Christianity is based on reason and morality, as Kant points out this is major in the scriptures, it is inevitable that Christianity is 'natural'. However, it is not 'naturalistic' in the sense that the religion does include supernatural or transcendent belief. Aside from this, a key point is that Kant saw that the Bible should be seen as a source of natural morality no matter whether there is/was any truth behind the supernatural factor, meaning that it is not necessary to know whether the supernatural part of Christianity has any truth to abide by and use the core Christian moral code.

Kant articulates in Book Four some of his strongest criticisms of the organization and practices of religious organizations that encourage what he sees as a religion of counterfeit service to God. Among the major targets of his criticism are external ritual, superstition and a hierarchical church order. He sees all of these as efforts to make oneself pleasing to God in ways other than conscientious adherence to the principle of moral rightness in the choice of one's actions. The severity of Kant's criticisms on these matters, along with his rejection of the possibility of theoretical proofs for the existence of God and his philosophical re-interpretation of some basic Christian doctrines, have provided the basis for interpretations that see Kant as thoroughly hostile to religion in general and Christianity in particular (e.g., Walsh 1967). Nevertheless, other interpreters consider that Kant was trying to mark off a defensible rational core of Christian belief. 
Kant sees in Jesus Christ the affirmation of a "pure moral disposition of the heart" that "can make man well-pleasing to God". Religion within the Limits of Reason Alone (1793), Book IV, Part 1, Section 1, "The Christian religion as a natural religion" 

====Idea of freedom====
In the Critique of Pure Reason, The Norman Kemp Smith translation has been used for this section, with citation noting the pagination of the first and second editions. Kant distinguishes between the transcendental idea of freedom, which as a psychological concept is "mainly empirical" and refers to "the question whether we must admit a power of spontaneously beginning a series of successive things or states" as a real ground of necessity in regard to causality, Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, A448/B476. and the practical concept of freedom as the independence of our will from the "coercion" or "necessitation through sensuous impulses". Kant finds it a source of difficulty that the practical concept of freedom is founded on the transcendental idea of freedom, Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, A534/B562. but for the sake of practical interests uses the practical meaning, taking "no account of... its transcendental meaning," which he feels was properly "disposed of" in the Third Antinomy, and as an element in the question of the freedom of the will is for philosophy "a real stumbling-block" that has "embarrassed speculative reason". 

Kant calls practical "everything that is possible through freedom", and the pure practical laws that are never given through sensuous conditions but are held analogously with the universal law of causality are moral laws. Reason can give us only the "pragmatic laws of free action through the senses", but pure practical laws given by reason a priori the same distinction of transcendental and practical meaning can be applied to the idea of God, with the proviso that the practical concept of freedom can be experienced (Critique of Pure Reason, A801-804/B829-832). dictate "what ought to be done". Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, A8002/B82830. The concept of freedom is also handled in the third section of the Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals. In the Critique of Practical Reason see  VII and  VIII. 

====The categories of freedom====
In the Critique of Practical Reason, at the end of the second Main Part of the Analytics, 5:6567 Kant introduces, in analogy with the categories of understanding their practical counterparts, the categories of freedom. Kant's categories of freedom appear to have primarily three functions: as conditions of the possibility for actions (i) to be free, (ii) to be comprehensible as free and (iii) to be morally evaluated. For Kant actions, although qua theoretical objects they are always already constituted by means of the theoretical categories, qua practical objects (objects of reason in its practical use, i.e. objects qua possibly good or bad) they are constituted by means of the categories of freedom; and it is only in this way that actions, qua phenomena, can be a consequence of freedom, and can be understood and evaluated as such. Susanne Bobzien, 'Die Kategorien der Freiheit bei Kant', in Kant: Analysen, Probleme, Kritik Vol.1, 1988, 193220. 

===Aesthetic philosophy===
Kant discusses the subjective nature of aesthetic qualities and experiences in Observations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime, (1764). Kant's contribution to aesthetic theory is developed in the Critique of Judgment (1790) where he investigates the possibility and logical status of "judgments of taste." In the "Critique of Aesthetic Judgment," the first major division of the Critique of Judgment, Kant used the term "aesthetic" in a manner that, according to Kant scholar W.H. Walsh, differs from its modern sense. Critique of Judgment in "Kant, Immanuel" Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Vol 4. Macmillan, 1973. Prior to this, in the Critique of Pure Reason, to note essential differences between judgments of taste, moral judgments, and scientific judgments, Kant abandoned the term "aesthetic" as "designating the critique of taste," noting that judgments of taste could never be "directed" by "laws a priori". Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, A22/B36. After A. G. Baumgarten, who wrote Aesthetica (175058), Beardsley, Monroe. "History of Aesthetics". Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Vol. 1, section on "Toward a unified aesthetics", p. 25, Macmillan 1973. Baumgarten coined the term "aesthetics" and expanded, clarified, and unified Wolffian aesthetic theory, but had left the Aesthetica unfinished (See also: Tonelli, Giorgio. "Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten". Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Vol. 1, Macmillan 1973). In Bernard's translation of the Critique of Judgment he indicates in the notes that Kant's reference in  15 in regard to the identification of perfection and beauty is probably a reference to Baumgarten. Kant was one of the first philosophers to develop and integrate aesthetic theory into a unified and comprehensive philosophical system, utilizing ideas that played an integral role throughout his philosophy. German Idealism in "History of Aesthetics" Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Vol 1. Macmillan, 1973. 

In the chapter "Analytic of the Beautiful" of the Critique of Judgment, Kant states that beauty is not a property of an artwork or natural phenomenon, but is instead a consciousness of the pleasure that attends the 'free play' of the imagination and the understanding. Even though it appears that we are using reason to decide what is beautiful, the judgment is not a cognitive judgment, Kant's general discussions of the distinction between "cognition" and "conscious of" are also given in the Critique of Pure Reason (notably A320/B376), and section V and the conclusion of section VIII of his Introduction in Logic. "and is consequently not logical, but aesthetical" ( 1). A pure judgement of taste is in fact subjective insofar as it refers to the emotional response of the subject and is based upon nothing but esteem for an object itself: it is a disinterested pleasure, and we feel that pure judgements of taste, i.e. judgements of beauty, lay claim to universal validity (2022). It is important to note that this universal validity is not derived from a determinate concept of beauty but from common sense . Kant also believed that a judgement of taste shares characteristics engaged in a moral judgement: both are disinterested, and we hold them to be universal. In the chapter "Analytic of the Sublime" Kant identifies the sublime as an aesthetic quality that, like beauty, is subjective, but unlike beauty refers to an indeterminate relationship between the faculties of the imagination and of reason, and shares the character of moral judgments in the use of reason. The feeling of the sublime, itself officially divided into two distinct modes (the mathematical and the dynamical sublime), describes two subjective moments, both of which concern the relationship of the faculty of the imagination to reason. Some commentators, however, argue that Kant's critical philosophy contains a third kind of the sublime, the moral sublime, which is the aesthetic response to the moral law or a representation thereof, and a development of the "noble" sublime in Kant's theory of 1764. The mathematical sublime is situated in the failure of the imagination to comprehend natural objects that appear boundless and formless, or appear "absolutely great" ( 2325). This imaginative failure is then recuperated through the pleasure taken in reason's assertion of the concept of infinity. In this move the faculty of reason proves itself superior to our fallible sensible self ( 2526). In the dynamical sublime there is the sense of annihilation of the sensible self as the imagination tries to comprehend a vast might. This power of nature threatens us but through the resistance of reason to such sensible annihilation, the subject feels a pleasure and a sense of the human moral vocation. This appreciation of moral feeling through exposure to the sublime helps to develop moral character.

Kant had developed the distinction between an object of art as a material value subject to the conventions of society and the transcendental condition of the judgment of taste as a "refined" value in the propositions of his Idea of A Universal History (1784). In the Fourth and Fifth Theses of that work he identified all art as the "fruits of unsociableness" due to men's "antagonism in society", Kant, Immanuel. Idea for a Universal History. Trans. Lewis White Beck (20, 22). Page numbers are Beck's marginal numbers that refer to the page numbers of the standard edition of Knigliche Preussische Akademie der Wissenschaften. Berlin, 190238. and in the Seventh Thesis asserted that while such material property is indicative of a civilized state, only the ideal of morality and the universalization of refined value through the improvement of the mind of man "belongs to culture". Kant, Immanuel. Idea for a Universal History. Trans. Lewis White Beck (26). 

===Political philosophy===

In Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch Kant, Immanuel.Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1795) Kant listed several conditions that he thought necessary for ending wars and creating a lasting peace. They included a world of constitutional republics. Kant, Immanuel. Perpetual Peace. Trans. Lewis White Beck (377). His classical republican theory was extended in the Science of Right, the first part of the Metaphysics of Morals (1797). Manfred Riedel Between Tradition and Revolution: The Hegelian Transformation of Political Philosophy, Cambridge 1984 

"Kant's political teaching may be summarized in a phrase: republican government and international organization. In more characteristically Kantian terms, it is doctrine of the state based upon the law (Rechtsstaat) and of eternal peace. Indeed, in each of these formulations, both terms express the same idea: that of legal constitution or of "peace through law." Taken simply by itself, Kant's political philosophy, being essentially a legal doctrine, rejects by definition the opposition between moral education and the play of passions as alternate foundations for social life. The state is defined as the union of men under law. The state rightly so called is constituted by laws which are necessary a priori because they flow from the very concept of law. A regime can be judged by no other criteria nor be assigned any other functions, than those proper to the lawful order as such." History of Political Philosophy, edited by Leo Strauss and Joseph Cropsey, The University of Chicago Press, 1987, pp. 581582, 603 

He opposed "democracy," which at his time meant direct democracy, believing that majority rule posed a threat to individual liberty. He stated, "...democracy is, properly speaking, necessarily a despotism, because it establishes an executive power in which 'all' decide for or even against one who does not agree; that is, 'all,' who are not quite all, decide, and this is a contradiction of the general will with itself and with freedom." Kant, Immanuel. Perpetual Peace. Trans. Lewis White Beck (352). As with most writers at the time, he distinguished three forms of government i.e. democracy, aristocracy, and monarchy with mixed government as the most ideal form of it.

==Anthropology==
Kant lectured on anthropology for over 25 years. His Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View was published in 1798. (This was the subject of Michel Foucault's doctoral dissertation.) Kant's Lectures on Anthropology were published for the first time in 1997 in German. Thomas Sturm, Kant und die Wissenschaften vom Menschen (Paderborn: Mentis Verlag, 2009). The former was translated into English and published by the Cambridge Texts in the History of Philosophy series in 2006. Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View, ed. Robert B. Louden, introduction by Manfred Kuehn, Cambridge University Press, 2006 

==Influence==

Kant's influence on Western thought has been profound. Prof. Oliver A. Johnson claims that, "With the possible exception of Plato's Republic, (Critique of Pure Reason) is the most important philosophical book ever written." Article on Kant within the collection "Great thinkers of the Western World", Ian P. McGreal, Ed., HarperCollins, 1992. Over and above his influence on specific thinkers, Kant changed the framework within which philosophical inquiry has been carried out. He accomplished a paradigm shift: very little philosophy is now carried out in the style of pre-Kantian philosophy. This shift consists in several closely related innovations that have become axiomatic, in philosophy itself and in the social sciences and humanities generally:
* Kant's "Copernican revolution", that placed the role of the human subject or knower at the center of inquiry into our knowledge, such that it is impossible to philosophize about things as they are independently of us or of how they are for us; See Stephen Palmquist, "The Architectonic Form of Kant's Copernican Logic", Metaphilosophy 17:4 (October 1986), pp. 266288; revised and reprinted as Chapter III of Kant's System of Perspectives: An architectonic interpretation of the Critical philosophy (Lanham: University Press of America, 1993). 
* His invention of critical philosophy, that is of the notion of being able to discover and systematically explore possible inherent limits to our ability to know through philosophical reasoning
* His creation of the concept of "conditions of possibility", as in his notion of "the conditions of possible experience"that is that things, knowledge, and forms of consciousness rest on prior conditions that make them possible, so that, to understand or to know them, we must first understand these conditions
* His theory that objective experience is actively constituted or constructed by the functioning of the human mind
* His notion of moral autonomy as central to humanity
* His assertion of the principle that human beings should be treated as ends rather than as means

Some or all of these Kantian ideas can be seen in schools of thought as different from one another as German Idealism, Marxism, positivism, phenomenology, existentialism, critical theory, linguistic philosophy, structuralism, post-structuralism, and deconstructionism. 

===Historical influence===
Statue of Immanuel Kant in Kaliningrad (Knigsberg), Russia. Replica by of the original by Christian Daniel Rauch lost in 1945.

During his own life, there was much critical attention paid to his thought. He had an influence on Reinhold, Fichte, Schelling, Hegel, and Novalis during the 1780s and 1790s. The school of thinking known as German Idealism developed from his writings. The German Idealists Fichte and Schelling, for example, tried to bring traditional "metaphysically" laden notions like "the Absolute", "God", and "Being" into the scope of Kant's critical thought. There is much debate in the recent scholarship about the extent to which Fichte and Schelling actually overstep the boundaries of Kant's critical philosophy, thus entering the realm of dogmatic or pre-Critical philosophy. Beiser's German Idealism discusses some of these issues. Beiser, Frederick C. German Idealism: The Struggle against Subjectivism, 17811801. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2002. In so doing, the German Idealists tried to reverse Kant's view that we cannot know what we cannot observe.

Hegel was one of Kant's first major critics. In response to what he saw as Kant's abstract and formal account, Hegel brought about an ethic focused on the "ethical life" of the community. Hegel, Natural Law: The Scientific Ways of Treating Natural Law, Its Place in Moral Philosophy, and Its Relation to the Positive Sciences. trans. T. M. Knox. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1975. Hegel's mature view and his concept of "ethical life" is elaborated in his Philosophy of Right. Hegel, Philosophy of Right. trans. T. M. Knox. Oxford University Press, 1967. But Hegel's notion of "ethical life" is meant to subsume, rather than replace, Kantian ethics. And Hegel can be seen as trying to defend Kant's idea of freedom as going beyond finite "desires", by means of reason. Thus, in contrast to later critics like Nietzsche or Russell, Hegel shares some of Kant's most basic concerns. Robert Pippin's Hegel's Idealism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989) emphasizes the continuity of Hegel's concerns with Kant's. Robert Wallace, Hegel's Philosophy of Reality, Freedom, and God (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005) explains how Hegel's Science of Logic defends Kant's idea of freedom as going beyond finite "inclinations", contra skeptics such as David Hume. 

Kant's thinking on religion was used in Britain to challenge the decline in religious faith in the nineteenth century. British Catholic writers, notably G. K. Chesterton and Hilaire Belloc, followed this approach. Ronald Englefield debated this movement, and Kant's use of language. See Englefield's article, Englefield, Ronald, Kant as Defender of the Faith in Nineteenth-century England", Question, 12, 1627, (Pemberton, London) reprinted in Englefield. Englefield, Ronald, Critique of Pure Verbiage, Essays on Abuses of Language in Literary, Religious, and Philosophical Writings, edited by G. A. Wells and D. R. Oppenheimer, Open Court, 1990. Criticisms of Kant were common in the realist views of the new positivism at that time.

Arthur Schopenhauer was strongly influenced by Kant's transcendental idealism. He, like G. E. Schulze, Jacobi, and Fichte before him, was critical of Kant's theory of the thing in itself. Things in themselves, they argued, are neither the cause of what we observe nor are they completely beyond our access. Ever since the first Critique of Pure Reason philosophers have been critical of Kant's theory of the thing in itself. Many have argued, if such a thing exists beyond experience then one cannot posit that it affects us causally, since that would entail stretching the category 'causality' beyond the realm of experience. For a review of this problem and the relevant literature see The Thing in Itself and the Problem of Affection in the revised edition of Henry Allison's Kant's Transcendental Idealism. For Schopenhauer things in themselves do not exist outside the non-rational will. The world, as Schopenhauer would have it, is the striving and largely unconscious will.

With the success and wide influence of Hegel's writings, Kant's influence began to wane, though there was in Germany a movement that hailed a return to Kant in the 1860s, beginning with the publication of Kant und die Epigonen in 1865 by Otto Liebmann. His motto was "Back to Kant", and a re-examination of his ideas began (See Neo-Kantianism). During the turn of the 20th century there was an important revival of Kant's theoretical philosophy, known as the Marburg School, represented in the work of Hermann Cohen, Paul Natorp, Ernst Cassirer, Beck, Lewis White. "Neo-Kantianism". In Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Vol. 56. Macmillan, 1973. Article on Neo-Kantianism by a translator and scholar of Kant. and anti-Neo-Kantian Nicolai Hartmann. Cerf, Walter. "Nicolai Hartmann". In Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Vol. 34. Macmillan, 1973. Nicolai was a realist who later rejected the idealism of Neo-Kantianism, his anti-Neo-Kantian views emerging with the publication of the second volume of Hegel (1929). 

Kant's notion of "Critique" or criticism has been quite influential. The Early German Romantics, especially Friedrich Schlegel in his "Athenaeum Fragments", used Kant's self-reflexive conception of criticism in their Romantic theory of poetry. Schlegel, Friedrich. "Athenaeum Fragments", in Philosophical Fragments. Trans. Peter Firchow. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1991. See especially fragments Nos. 1, 43, 44. Also in Aesthetics, Clement Greenberg, in his classic essay "Modernist Painting", uses Kantian criticism, what Greenberg refers to as "immanent criticism", to justify the aims of Abstract painting, a movement Greenberg saw as aware of the key limitiatonflatnessthat makes up the medium of painting. Greenberg, Clement. "Modernist Painting", in The Philosophy of Art, ed. Alex Neill and Aaron Ridley, McGraw-Hill, 1995. French philosopher Michel Foucault was also greatly influenced by Kant's notion of "Critique" and wrote several pieces on Kant for a re-thinking of the Enlightenment as a form of "critical thought". He went so far as to classify his own philosophy as a "critical history of modernity, rooted in Kant". See "Essential Works of Foucault: 19541984 vol.2: Aesthetics, Method, and Epistemology." ed by James Faubion, Trans. Robert Hurley et al. New York City, New York: The New Press, 1998 (2010 reprint). See essay "Foucault by Maurice Florence" entry by Foucault submitted under pseudonym. 

Kant believed that mathematical truths were forms of synthetic a priori knowledge, which means they are necessary and universal, yet known through intuition. For a discussion and qualified defense of this position, see Stephen Palmquist, "A Priori Knowledge in Perspective: (I) Mathematics, Method and Pure Intuition", The Review of Metaphysics 41:1 (September 1987), pp. 322. Kant's often brief remarks about mathematics influenced the mathematical school known as intuitionism, a movement in philosophy of mathematics opposed to Hilbert's formalism, and the logicism of Frege and Bertrand Russell. Krner, Stephan, The Philosophy of Mathematics, Dover, 1986. For an analysis of Kant's writings on mathematics see, Friedman, Michael, Kant and the Exact Sciences, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1992. 

===Influence on modern thinkers===
West German postage stamp, 1974, commemorating the 250th anniversary of Kant's birth
With his Perpetual Peace, Kant is considered to have foreshadowed many of the ideas that have come to form the democratic peace theory, one of the main controversies in political science. Ray, James Lee. Does Democracy Cause Peace? Annual Review of Political Science 1998. 1:2746. 

Prominent recent Kantians include the British philosopher P. F. Strawson, Strawson, P. F., The Bounds of Sense: An Essay on Kant's Critique of Pure Reason. Routledge: 2004. When first published in 1966, this book forced many Anglo-American philosophers to reconsider Kant's Critique of Pure Reason. the American philosophers Wilfrid Sellars Sellars, Wilfrid, Science and Metaphysics: Variations on Kantian Themes. Ridgeview Publishing Company, 1967 and Christine Korsgaard. Korsgaard, Christine. Creating the Kingdom of Ends. Cambridge; New York, NY, US: Cambridge University Press, 1996. ISBN 0-521-49644-6, ISBN 0-521-49962-3 (pbk.) Not a commentary, but a defense of a broadly Kantian approach to ethics Due to the influence of Strawson and Sellars, among others, there has been a renewed interest in Kant's view of the mind. Central to many debates in philosophy of psychology and cognitive science is Kant's conception of the unity of consciousness. Brook, Andrew. Kant and the Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994. See also, Meerbote, R. "Kant's Functionalism". In: J. C. Smith, ed. Historical Foundations of Cognitive Science. Dordrecht, Holland: Reidel, 1991. Brook has an article on Kant's View of the Mind in the Stanford Encyclopedia 

Jrgen Habermas and John Rawls are two significant political and moral philosophers whose work is strongly influenced by Kant's moral philosophy. See Habermas, J. Moral Consciousness and Communicative Action. Trans. Christian Lenhardt and Shierry Weber Nicholsen. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996. For Rawls see, Rawls, John. Theory of Justice Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1971. Rawls has a well-known essay on Kant's concept of good. See, Rawls, "Themes in Kant's Moral Philosophy" in Kant's Transcendental Deductions. Ed. Eckart Frster. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1989. They have each argued against relativism, Habermas, J. (1994): The Unity of Reason in the Diversity of Its Voices. In: Habermas, J. (Eds.): Postmetaphysical Thinking. Political Essays, Cambridge, Massachusetts: 115148. supporting the Kantian view that universality is essential to any viable moral philosophy. Rawls's intellectual relationship with Kant is explored in , which premired in Oxford in 2013 and which portrays Kant as Rawls's "utilitarian fairy Gottmutter". 

Kant's influence also has extended to the social, behavioral, and physical sciences, as in the sociology of Max Weber, the psychology of Jean Piaget, and the linguistics of Noam Chomsky. Kant's work on mathematics and synthetic a priori knowledge is also cited by theoretical physicist Albert Einstein as an early influence on his intellectual development. Issacson, Walter. "Einstein: His Life and Universe." p. 20. Because of the thoroughness of the Kantian paradigm shift, his influence extends to thinkers who neither specifically refer to his work nor use his terminology.

Scholars have shown that Kant's critical ethos has also inspired nonwestern political thinkers, including the Muslim political reformer Tariq Ramadan. See Tampio, Nicholas. Kantian Courage: Advancing the Enlightenment in Contemporary Political Theory. New York: Fordham University Press, 2012. ISBN 978-0823245017 

==Tomb and statue==
Kant's tomb in Kaliningrad, 2007
5 DM 1974 D silver coin commemorating the 250th birthday of Immanuel Kant in Knigsberg
Kant's tomb is today in a mausoleum adjoining the northeast corner of Knigsberg Cathedral in what is now known as Kaliningrad, Russia. The mausoleum was constructed by the architect Friedrich Lahrs and was finished in 1924 in time for the bicentenary of Kant's birth. Originally, Kant was buried inside the cathedral, but in 1880 his remains were moved outside and placed in a neo-Gothic chapel adjoining the northeast corner of the cathedral. Over the years, the chapel became dilapidated before it was demolished to make way for the mausoleum, which was built on the same spot, where it is today.

The tomb and its mausoleum are among the few artifacts of German times preserved by the Soviets after they conquered and annexed the city. Today, many newlyweds bring flowers to the mausoleum.

Artifacts previously owned by Kant, known as Kantiana, were included in the Knigsberg City Museum. However, the museum was destroyed during World War II.

A replica of the statue of Kant that stood in German times in front of the main University of Knigsberg building was donated by a German entity in the early 1990s and placed in the same grounds.

After the expulsion of Knigsberg's German population at the end of World War II, the University of Knigsberg where Kant taught was replaced by the Russian-language Kaliningrad State University, which took up the campus and surviving buildings of the historic German university. In 2005, the university was renamed Immanuel Kant State University of Russia. The change of name was announced at a ceremony attended by President Vladimir Putin of Russia and Chancellor Gerhard Schrder of Germany, and the university formed a Kant Society, dedicated to the study of Kantianism.

==List of major works==
* (1746, but published in 1749) Thoughts on the True Estimation of Vital Forces (Gedanken von der wahren Schtzung der lebendigen Krfte)
* (1755) A New Elucidation of the First Principles of Metaphysical Cognition (Neue Erhellung der ersten Grundstze metaphysischer Erkenntnisse; Doctoral Thesis: Principiorum primorum cognitionis metaphysicae nova dilucidatio)
* (1755) Universal Natural History and Theory of Heaven (Allgemeine Naturgeschichte und Theorie des Himmels)
* (1756) Monadologia Physica
* (1762) The False Subtlety of the Four Syllogistic Figures (Die falsche Spitzfindigkeit der vier syllogistischen Figuren)
* (1763) The Only Possible Argument in Support of a Demonstration of the Existence of God (Der einzig mgliche Beweisgrund zu einer Demonstration des Daseins Gottes)
* (1763) Attempt to Introduce the Concept of Negative Magnitudes into Philosophy (Versuch den Begriff der negativen Gren in die Weltweisheit einzufhren)
* (1764) Observations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime (Beobachtungen ber das Gefhl des Schnen und Erhabenen)
* (1764) Essay on the Illness of the Head (ber die Krankheit des Kopfes)
* (1764) Inquiry Concerning the Distinctness of the Principles of Natural Theology and Morality (the Prize Essay) (Untersuchungen ber die Deutlichkeit der Grundstze der natrlichen Theologie und der Moral)
* (1766) Dreams of a Spirit Seer (Trume eines Geistersehers)
* (1770) Inaugural Dissertation (De mundi sensibilis atque intelligibilis forma et principiis)
* (1775) On the Different Races of Man (ber die verschiedenen Rassen der Menschen)
* (1781) First edition of the Critique of Pure Reason (Kritik der reinen Vernunft) 
* (1783) "Prolegomena to any Future Metaphysics" http://eserver.org/philosophy/kant-prolegomena.txt (Prolegomena zu einer jeden knftigen Metaphysik)
* (1784) "Is Enlightenment?|An Answer to the Question: What Is Enlightenment?]" (Beantwortung der Frage: Was ist Aufklrung?) 
* (1784) "Idea for a Universal History with a Cosmopolitan Purpose" (Idee zu einer allgemeinen Geschichte in weltbrgerlicher Absicht)
* (1785) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten)
* (1786) Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science (Metaphysische Anfangsgrnde der Naturwissenschaft)
* (1786) Conjectural Beginning of Human History
* (1787) Second edition of the Critique of Pure Reason (Kritik der reinen Vernunft) 
* (1788) Critique of Practical Reason http://eserver.org/philosophy/kant/critique-of-practical-reaso.txt (Kritik der praktischen Vernunft) 
* (1790) Critique of Judgement (Kritik der Urteilskraft) 
* (1793) Religion within the Limits of Reason Alone (Die Religion innerhalb der Grenzen der bloen Vernunft) 
* (1793) On the Old Saw: That may be right in theory, but it won't work in practice (ber den Gemeinspruch: Das mag in der Theorie richtig sein, taugt aber nicht fr die Praxis)
* (1795) Perpetual Peace (Zum ewigen Frieden) 
* (1797) Metaphysics of Morals (Metaphysik der Sitten). First part is The Doctrine of Right, which has often been published separately as The Science of Right.
* (1798) Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View (Anthropologie in pragmatischer Hinsicht)
* (1798) The Contest of Faculties (Der Streit der Fakultten) 
* (1800) Logic (Logik)
* (1803) On Pedagogy (ber Pdagogik) Uni-bremen.de 
* (1804) Opus Postumum
* (1817) Lectures on Philosophical Theology (Immanuel Kants Vorlesungen ber die philosophische Religionslehre edited by K. H. L. Plitz). English edition of A. W. Wood & G. M. Clark (Cornell, 1978) is based on Plitz' second edition, 1830, of these lectures. As noted by Allen Wood in his Introduction, p.12. Wood further speculates that the lectures themselves were delivered in the Winter of 178384. 

==See also==

* Aenesidemus (book)
* Kant Russian State University
* List of liberal theorists
* On Vision and Colors
* Political philosophy of Immanuel Kant
* Rechtsstaat
* Rule according to higher law
* Sola fide

===Criticism===
* Johann Georg Hamann
* Schopenhauer's criticism of the Kantian philosophy
* Schopenhauer's criticism of Kant's Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals

==Footnotes==

==References and further reading==

Any suggestion of further reading on Kant has to take cognizance of the fact that his work has dominated philosophy like no other figure after him. Nevertheless, several guideposts can be made out. In Germany, one important contemporary interpreter of Kant and the movement of German Idealism he began is Dieter Henrich, who has some work available in English. P.F. Strawson's "The Bounds of Sense" (1969) played a significant role in determining the contemporary reception of Kant in England and America. More recent interpreters of note in the English-speaking world include Lewis White Beck, Jonathan Bennett, Henry Allison, Paul Guyer, Christine Korsgaard, Stephen Palmquist, Robert B. Pippin, Roger Scruton, Rudolf Makkreel, and Batrice Longuenesse.

===General introductions to his thought===
* Broad, C. D. Kant: an Introduction. Cambridge University Press, 1978. ISBN 0-521-21755-5, ISBN 0-521-29265-4
* Gardner, Sebastian. Kant and the Critique of Pure Reason. Routledge, 1999. ISBN 0-415-11909-X
* Martin, Gottfried. Kant's Metaphysics and Theory of Science. Greenwood Press, 1955 ISBN 978-0-8371-7154-8 (elucidates Kant's most fundamental concepts in their historical context)
* Perez, Daniel Omar. Kant e o problema da significao. Curitiba: Editora Champagnat, 2008. ISBN 978-85-7292-187-9 (Portuguese)
* Palmquist, Stephen. Kant's System of Perspectives: an architectonic interpretation of the Critical philosophy. Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 1993. ISBN 0-8191-8927-8 (for availability see link)
* Seung, T. K. 2007. Kant: a Guide for the Perplexed. London: Continuum. ISBN 0-8264-8580-4
* Satyananda Giri. Kant. Durham, CT: Strategic Publishing Group, 2010. ISBN 978-1-60911-686-6
* Scruton, Roger. Kant: a Very Short Introduction. Oxford University Press, 2001. ISBN 0-19-280199-6 (provides a brief account of his life, and a lucid introduction to the three major critiques)
* Uleman, Jennifer. An Introduction to Kant's Moral Philosophy. Cambridge University Press, 2010. ISBN 978-0-521-13644-0
* Luchte, James. Kant's Critique of Pure Reason. Bloomsbury Publishing, 2007. ISBN 978-0826493224

===Biography and historical context===
* 
* Beck, Lewis White. Early German Philosophy: Kant and his Predecessors. Harvard University Press, 1969. (a survey of Kant's intellectual background)
* Beiser, Frederick C. The Fate of Reason: German Philosophy from Kant to Fichte. Harvard University Press, 1987.
* Beiser, Frederick C. German Idealism: the Struggle against Subjectivism, 17811801. Harvard University Press, 2002
* Cassirer, Ernst. Kant's Life and Thought. Translation of Kants Leben und Lehre. Trans., Jame S. Haden, intr. Stephan Krner. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1981.
* Chamberlain, Houston Stewart. Immanuel Kanta study and a comparison with Goethe, Leonardo da Vinci, Bruno, Plato and Descartes, the authorised translation from the German by Lord Redesdale, with his 'Introduction', The Bodley Head, London, 1914, (2 volumes).
* Gulyga, Arsenij. Immanuel Kant: His Life and Thought. Trans., Marijan Despaltovi. Boston: Birkhuser, 1987.
* Johnson, G.R. (ed.). Kant on Swedenborg. Dreams of a Spirit-Seer and Other Writings. Swedenborg Foundation, 2002. (new translation and analysis, many supplementary texts)
* Kuehn, Manfred. Kant: a Biography. Cambridge University Press, 2001. ISBN 0-521-49704-3. (now the standard biography of Kant in English)
* Lehner, Ulrich L., Kants Vorsehungskonzept auf dem Hintergrund der deutschen Schulphilosophie und -theologie (Leiden: 2007) (Kant's concept of Providence and its background in German school philosophy and theology)
* Pinkard, Terry. German Philosophy, 17601860: the Legacy of Idealism. Cambridge, 2002.
* Sassen, Brigitte (ed.). Kant's Early Critics: the Empiricist Critique of the Theoretical Philosophy, Cambridge, 2000.
* Schabert, Joseph A. "Kant's Influence on his Successors", The American Catholic Quarterly Review, Vol. XLVII, January 1922.

===Collections of essays===
* Firestone, Chris L. and Palmquist, Stephen (eds.). Kant and the New Philosophy of Religion. Notre Dame: Indiana University Press, 2006. ISBN 0-253-21800-4
* Frster, Eckart (ed.). Kant's Transcendental Deductions:. The Three 'Critiques' and the 'Opus Postumum' Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1989. Includes an important essay by Dieter Henrich.
* Guyer, Paul & Cohen, Ted (eds). Essays in Kant's Aesthetics, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1985.
* Guyer, Paul (ed.). Kant's Critique of the Power of Judgement. Critical Essays, Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield, 2003.
* Guyer, Paul (ed.). The Cambridge Companion to Kant, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992. ISBN 0-521-36587-2, ISBN 0-521-36768-9. Excellent collection of papers that covers most areas of Kant's thought.
* Mohanty, J.N. and Shahan, Robert W. (eds.). Essays on Kant's Critique of Pure Reason. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1982. ISBN 0-8061-1782-6
* Phillips, Dewi et al. (eds.). Kant and Kierkegaard on Religion. New York: Palgrave Macmillian, 2000, ISBN 0-312-23234-9 Collection of essays about Kantian religion and its influence on Kierkegaardian and contemporary philosophy of religion.
* Proceedings of the International Kant Congresses. Several Congresses (numbered) edited by various publishers.

===Theoretical philosophy===
* Allison, Henry. Kant's Transcendental Idealism. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1983, 2004. ISBN 0-300-03629-9, ISBN 0-300-03002-9 (a very influential defense of Kant's idealism, recently revised).
* Ameriks, Karl. Kant's Theory of Mind: An Analysis of the Paralogisms of Pure Reason. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1982 (one of the first detailed studies of the Dialectic in English).
* Banham, Gary. Kant's Transcendental Imagination London and New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006.
* Deleuze, Gilles. Kant's Critical Philosophy. Trans., Hugh Tomlinson and Barbara Habberjam. University of Minnesota Press, 1984. ISBN 0-8166-1341-9, ISBN 0-8166-1436-9
* Farias, Vanderlei de Oliveira. Kants Realismus und der Aussenweltskeptizismus. OLMS. Hildesheim, Zrich, New York. 2006. (German)
* Gram, Moltke S. The Transcendental Turn: The Foundation of Kant's Idealism. Gainesville: University Presses of Florida, 1984. ISBN 0-8130-0787-9
* Greenberg, Robert. Kant's Theory of A Priori Knowledge. Penn State Press, 2001 ISBN 0-271-02083-0
* Guyer, Paul. Kant and the Claims of Knowledge. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987 (modern defense of the view that Kant's theoretical philosophy is a "patchwork" of ill-fitting arguments).
* Guyer, Paul. Knowledge, Reason, and Taste: Kant's Response to Hume. Princeton University Press, 2008.
* Heidegger, Martin. Kant and the Problem of Metaphysics. Trans., Richard Taft. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1997. ISBN 0-253-21067-4
* Henrich, Dieter. The Unity of Reason: Essays on Kant's Philosophy. Ed. with introduction by Richard L. Velkley; trans. Jeffrey Edwards et al. Harvard University Press, 1994. ISBN 0-674-92905-5
* Kemp Smith, Norman. A Commentary to Kant's 'Critique of Pure Reason. London: Macmillan, 1930 (influential commentary on the first Critique, recently reprinted).
* Kitcher, Patricia. Kant's Transcendental Psychology. New York: Oxford University Press, 1990.
* Longuenesse, Batrice. Kant and the Capacity to Judge. Princeton University Press, 1998. ISBN 0-691-04348-5. (argues that the notion of judgment provides the key to understanding the overall argument of the first Critique)
* Melnick, Arthur. Kant's Analogies of Experience. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1973. (important study of Kant's Analogies, including his defense of the principle of causality)
* Paton, H. J. Kant's Metaphysic of Experience: a Commentary on the First Half of the Kritik der reinen Vernunft. Two volumes. London: Macmillan, 1936. (extensive study of Kant's theoretical philosophy)
* Pippin, Robert B.. Kant's Theory of Form: an Essay on the Critique of Pure Reason. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1982. (influential examination of the formal character of Kant's work)
* Sala, Giovanni. Kant, Lonergan und der christliche Glaube (Nordhausen: Bautz, 2005), ed. by Ulrich L. Lehner and Ronald K. Tacelli
* Schopenhauer, Arthur. Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung. Erster Band. Anhang. Kritik der Kantischen Philosophie. F. A. Brockhaus, Leipzig 1859 (In English: Arthur Schopenhauer, New York: Dover Press, Volume I, Appendix, "Criticism of the Kantian Philosophy", ISBN 0-486-21761-2)
* Seung, T. K. Kant's Transcendental Logic. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1969.
* Sgarbi, Marco. La Kritik der reinen Vernunft nel contesto della tradizione logica aristotelica. Hildesheim, Olms 2010
* Strawson, P. F. The Bounds of Sense: an essay on Kant's Critique of Pure Reason. Routledge, 1989 (the work that revitalized the interest of contemporary analytic philosophers in Kant).
* Sturm,Thomas. Kant und die Wissenschaften vom Menschen. Paderborn: Mentis Verlag, 2009. ISBN 3897856085; ISBN 978-3897856080. review (Treats Kant's anthropology and his views on psychology and history in relation to his philosophy of science.)
* Tonelli, Giorgio. Kant's Critique of Pure Reason within the Tradition of Modern Logic. A Commentary on its History. Hildesheim, Olms 1994
* Werkmeister, W.H., Kant: The Architectonic and Development of His Philosophy, Open Court Publishing Co., La Salle, Ill.; 1980 ISBN 0-87548-354-3 (it treats, as a whole, the architectonic and development of Kant's philosophy from 1755 through the Opus postumum.)
* Wolff, Robert Paul. Kant's Theory of Mental Activity: a Commentary on the Transcendental Analytic of the Critique of Pure Reason. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1963. (detailed and influential commentary on the first part of the Critique of Pure Reason)
* Yovel, Yirmiahu. Kant and the Philosophy of History. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1980. (review)

===Practical philosophy===
* Allison, Henry. Kant's Theory of Freedom. Cambridge University Press 1990.
* 
* Banham, Gary. Kant's Practical Philosophy: From Critique to Doctrine. Palgrave Macmillan, 2003.
* Dorschel, Andreas. Die idealistische Kritik des Willens: Versuch ber die Theorie der praktischen Subjektivitt bei Kant und Hegel. Hamburg: Felix Meiner, 1992 (Schriften zur Transzendentalphilosophie 10) ISBN 3-7873-1046-0.
* Koorsgaard, Christine M. The Sources of Normativity. Cambridge University Press, 1996.
* Michalson, Gordon E. Fallen Freedom: Kant on Radical Evil and Moral Regeneration. Cambridge University Press, 1990.
* Michalson, Gordon E. Kant and the Problem of God. Blackwell Publishers, 1999.
* Paton, H. J. The Categorical Imperative: A Study in Kant's Moral Philosophy. University of Pennsylvania Press 1971.
* Rawls, John. Lectures on the History of Moral Philosophy. Cambridge, 2000.
* Seung, T.K. Kant's Platonic Revolution in Moral and Political Philosophy. Johns Hopkins, 1994.
* Wolff, Robert Paul. The Autonomy of Reason: A Commentary on Kant's Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals. New York: HarperCollins, 1974. ISBN 0-06-131792-6.
* Wood, Allen. Kant's Ethical Thought. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1999.

===Aesthetics===
* Allison, Henry. Kant's Theory of Taste: A Reading of the Critique of Aesthetic Judgment. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2001.
* Banham, Gary. Kant and the Ends of Aesthetics. London and New York: Macmillan Press, 2000.
* Clewis, Robert. The Kantian Sublime and the Revelation of Freedom. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2009.
* Crawford, Donald. Kant's Aesthetic Theory. Wisconsin, 1974.
* Guyer, Paul. Kant and the Claims of Taste. Cambridge, MA and London, 1979.
* Hammermeister, Kai. The German Aesthetic Tradition. Cambridge University Press, 2002.
* Immanuel Kant entry in Kelly, Michael (Editor in Chief) (1998) Encyclopedia of Aesthetics. New York, Oxford, Oxford University Press.
* Makkreel, Rudolf, Imagination and Interpretation in Kant. Chicago, 1990.
* McCloskey, Mary. Kant's Aesthetic. SUNY, 1987.
* Schaper, Eva. Studies in Kant's Aesthetics. Edinburgh, 1979.
* Zammito, John H. The Genesis of Kant's Critique of Judgment. Chicago and London: Chicago University Press, 1992.
* Zupancic, Alenka. Ethics of the Real: Kant and Lacan. Verso, 2000.

===Philosophy of religion===
* Palmquist, Stephen. Kant's Critical Religion: Volume Two of Kant's System of Perspectives. Ashgate, 2000. ISBN 0-7546-1333-X
* Perez, Daniel Omar. "Religin, Poltica y Medicina en Kant: El Conflicto de las Proposiciones". Cinta de Moebio. Revista de Epistemologia de Ciencias Sociales, v. 28, p. 91103, 2007. Uchile.cl (Spanish)

===Other works===
* Caygill, Howard. A Kant Dictionary. Oxford, UK; Cambridge, Mass., US: Blackwell Reference, 1995. ISBN 0-631-17534-2, ISBN 0-631-17535-0
* Derrida, Jacques. Mochlos; or, The Conflict of the Faculties. Columbia University, 1980.
* Mosser, Kurt. Necessity and Possibility; The Logical Strategy of Kant's Critique of Pure Reason. Catholic University of America Press, 2008. ISBN 978-0-8132-1532-7
* Perez, D. O. . Os significados dos conceitos de hospitalidade em Kant e a problemtica do estrangeiro. Revista Philosophica (Chile), v. 31, p. 4353, 2007. Tambm em Konvergencias, 2007, nro. 15. UCV.cl, Konvergencias.net
* Perez, D. O. A loucura como questo semntica:uma interpretao kantiana. Trans/Form/Ao, So Paulo, 32(1): 95117, 2009. Scielo.br
* White, Mark D. Kantian Ethics and Economics: Autonomy, Dignity, and Character. Stanford University Press, 2011. ISBN 978-0-8047-6894-8. (Reviewed in The Montreal Review)

===Contemporary philosophy with a Kantian influence===
* Guyer, Paul. Kant and The Claims of Taste. Harvard University Press, 1979. 2nd Edition, Cambridge University Press, 1997.
* Guyer, Paul. Kant and The Claims of Knowledge. Cambridge University Press, 1987.
* Guyer, Paul. Knowledge, Reason, and Taste: Kant's Response to Hume. Princeton University Press, 2008.
* Hanna, Robert, Kant and the Foundations of Analytic Philosophy. Clarendon Press, 2004.
* Hanna, Robert, Kant, Science, and Human Nature. Clarendon Press, 2006.
* Herman, Barbara. The Practice of Moral Judgement. Harvard University Press, 1993.
* Korsgaard, Christine. Creating the Kingdom of Ends. Cambridge; New York, NY, US: Cambridge University Press, 1996. ISBN 0-521-49644-6, ISBN 0-521-49962-3 (pbk.) (not a commentary, but a defense of a broadly Kantian approach to ethics)
* McDowell, John. Mind and World. Harvard University Press, 1994. ISBN 0-674-57609-8. (offers a Kantian solution to a dilemma in contemporary epistemology regarding the relation between mind and world)
* Parfit, Derek. On What Matters (2 vols). New York: Oxford University Press, 2011. ISBN 978-0-19-926592-3
* Pinker, Steven. The Stuff of Thought. Viking Press, 2007. ISBN 978-0-670-06327-7. (Chapter 4 "Cleaving the Air" discusses Kant's anticipation of modern cognitive science)
* Wood, Allen. Kant's Ethical Thought. Cambridge; New York, NY, US: Cambridge University Press, 1999. ISBN 0-521-64836-X. (comprehensive, in-depth study of Kant's ethics, with emphasis on formula of humanity as most accurate formulation of the categorical imperative)

==External links==

* KantPapers, authors and papers database powered by PhilPapers, focused on Kant, and located at Cornell University
* Immanuel Kant at the Encyclopdia Britannica
* 
* Works by Immanuel Kant at Duisburg-Essen University
* 
* Stephen Palmquist's Glossary of Kantian Terminology
* Kant's Ethical Theory Kantian ethics explained, applied and evaluated
* Kant & Ethics Extensive links and discussions from Lawrence Hinman at University of San Diego
* Notes on Utilitarianism A conveniently brief survey of Kant's Utilitarianism
* Kant Studies Online
* Kant and Transcendental Philosophy
* Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy (14 sections on Kant)
* Readable versions of Prolegomena, Groundwork for the Metaphysic of Morals, Critique of Pure Reason, Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science, The Form and Principles of the Sensible and Intelligible World, Perpetual Peace, and Religion within the Bounds of Bare Reason. (J. Bennett translations)
* Kant's Death Mask
* Kant in the Classroom background information for Kant's lectures
* The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy has multiple entries on Kant:
** Immanuel Kant: Aesthetics
** Immanuel Kant: Metaphysics
** Immanuel Kant: Radical Evil
** Immanuel Kant: Religion
* The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy has several entries on Kant:
** Immanuel Kant
** Kant's Philosophical Development
** Kant's Account of Reason
** Kant's Critique of Metaphysics
** Kant's Theory of Judgment
** Kant's Transcendental Arguments
** Kant's View of the Mind and Consciousness of Self
** Kant's Views on Space and Time
** Kant's Aesthetics and Teleology
** Kant's Philosophy of Mathematics
** Kant's Philosophy of Science
** Kant's Philosophy of Religion
** Kant's Moral Philosophy
** Kant's Social and Political Philosophy
** Leibniz's Influence on Kant
** Kant and Hume on Causality
** Kant and Hume on Morality

 

Kantianism
Kantian philosophers



[[History of Indonesia]]

The history of Indonesia has been shaped by its geographic position, its natural resources, a series of human migrations and contacts, wars and conquests, as well as by trade, economics and politics. Indonesia is an archipelagic country of 17,508 islands (6,000 inhabited) stretching along the equator in South East Asia. The country's strategic sea-lane position fostered inter-island and international trade; trade has since fundamentally shaped Indonesian history. The area of Indonesia is populated by peoples of various migrations, creating a diversity of cultures, ethnicities, and languages. The archipelago's landforms and climate significantly influenced agriculture and trade, and the formation of states. The boundaries of the state of Indonesia represent the twentieth century borders of the Dutch East Indies.

Fossilised remains of Homo erectus and his tools, popularly known as the "Java Man", suggest the Indonesian archipelago was inhabited by at least 1.5 million years ago. Austronesian people, who form the majority of the modern population, are thought to have originally been from Taiwan and arrived in Indonesia around 2000 BCE. From the 7th century CE, the powerful Srivijaya naval kingdom flourished bringing Hindu and Buddhist influences with it. The agricultural Buddhist Sailendra and Hindu Mataram dynasties subsequently thrived and declined in inland Java. The last significant non-Muslim kingdom, the Hindu Majapahit kingdom, flourished from the late 13th century, and its influence stretched over much of Indonesia. The earliest evidence of Islamised populations in Indonesia dates to the 13th century in northern Sumatra; other Indonesian areas gradually adopted Islam which became the dominant religion in Java and Sumatra by the end of the 16th century. For the most part, Islam overlaid and mixed with existing cultural and religious influences.

Europeans arrived in Indonesia from the 16th century seeking to monopolise the sources of valuable nutmeg, cloves, and cubeb pepper in Maluku. In 1602 the Dutch established the Dutch East India Company (VOC) and became the dominant European power by 1610. Following bankruptcy, the VOC was formally dissolved in 1800, and the government of the Netherlands established the Dutch East Indies under government control. By the early 20th century, Dutch dominance extended to the current boundaries. The Japanese invasion and subsequent occupation in 1942-45 during WWII ended Dutch rule, and encouraged the previously suppressed Indonesian independence movement. Two days after the surrender of Japan in August 1945, nationalist leader, Sukarno, declared independence and became president. The Netherlands tried to reestablish its rule, but a bitter armed and diplomatic struggle ended in December 1949, when in the face of international pressure, the Dutch formally recognised Indonesian independence.

An attempted coup in 1965 led to a violent army-led anti-communist purge in which over half a million people were killed. General Suharto politically outmanoeuvred President Sukarno, and became president in March 1968. His New Order administration garnered the favour of the West whose investment in Indonesia was a major factor in the subsequent three decades of substantial economic growth. In the late 1990s, however, Indonesia was the country hardest hit by the East Asian Financial Crisis which led to popular protests and Suharto's resignation on 21 May 1998. The Reformasi era following Suharto's resignation, has led to a strengthening of democratic processes, including a regional autonomy program, the secession of East Timor, and the first direct presidential election in 2004. Political and economic instability, social unrest, corruption, natural disasters, and terrorism have slowed progress. Although relations among different religious and ethnic groups are largely harmonious, acute sectarian discontent and violence remain problems in some areas.

==Prehistory==
The replica of Java man skull, originally discovered in Sangiran, Central Java.

In 2007 analysis of cut marks on two bovid bones found in Sangiran, showed them to have been made 1.5 to 1.6 million years ago by clamshell tools. This is the oldest evidence for the presence of early man in Indonesia. Fossilised remains of Homo erectus, popularly known as the "Java Man" were first discovered by the Dutch anatomist Eugne Dubois at Trinil in 1891, and are at least 700,000 years old, at that time the oldest human ancestor ever found. Further Homo erectus fossils of a similar age were found at Sangiran in the 1930`s by the anthropologist Gustav Heinrich Ralph von Koenigswald, who in the same time period also uncovered fossils at Ngandong alongside more advanced tools, re-dated in 2011 to between 550,000 and 143,000 years old. 
cited in ; 
cited in
;

cited in In 1977 another Homo erectus skull was discovered at Sambungmacan http://pages.nycep.org/nmg/pdf/Delson_et_al_%20sm3.pdf 

In 2003, on the island of Flores, fossils of a new small hominid dated between 74,000 and 13,000 years old and named "Flores Man" (Homo floresiensis) were discovered much to the surprise of the scientific community. ; This 3 foot tall hominid is thought to be a species descended from Homo Erectus and reduced in size over thousands of years by a well known process called island dwarfism. Flores Man seems to have shared the island with modern Homo sapiens until only 12,000 years ago, when they became extinct. In 2010 stone tools were discovered on Flores dating from 1 million years ago, which is the oldest evidence anywhere in the world that early man had the technology to make sea crossings at this very early time. 

The archipelago was formed during the thaw after the latest ice age. Early humans to travelled by sea and spread from mainland Asia eastward to New Guinea and Australia. Homo sapiens reached the region by around 45,000 years ago. In 2011 evidence was uncovered in neighbouring East Timor, showing that 42,000 years ago these early settlers had high-level maritime skills, and by implication the technology needed to make ocean crossings to reach Australia and other islands, as they were catching and consuming large numbers of big deep sea fish such as tuna. 

Austronesian people form the majority of the modern population. They may have arrived in Indonesia around 2000 BCE and are thought to have originated in Taiwan. Taylor (2003), pages 57 Dong Son culture spread to Indonesia bringing with it techniques of wet-field rice cultivation, ritual buffalo sacrifice, bronze casting, megalithic practises, and ikat weaving methods. Some of these practices remain in areas including the Batak areas of Sumatra, Toraja in Sulawesi, and several islands in Nusa Tenggara. Early Indonesians were animists who honoured the spirits of the dead as their souls or life force could still help the living.

Ideal agricultural conditions, and the mastering of wet-field rice cultivation as early as the 8th century BCE, 
 allowed villages, towns, and small kingdoms to flourish by the 1st century CE. These kingdoms (little more than collections of villages subservient to petty chieftains) evolved with their own ethnic and tribal religions. Java's hot and even temperature, abundant rain and volcanic soil, was perfect for wet rice cultivation. Such agriculture required a well organized society in contrast to dry-field rice which is a much simpler form of cultivation that doesn't require an elaborate social structure to support it.

Buni culture clay pottery was flourished in coastal northern West Java and Banten around 400 BCE to 100 CE The Buni culture was probably the predecessor of Tarumanagara kingdom, one of the earliest Hindu kingdom in Indonesia that produces numerous inscriptions, which marked the beginning of historical period in Java.

==Hindu-Buddhist civilizations==

===Early kingdoms===
Indonesia like much of Southeast Asia was influenced by Indian culture. Becoming Indian: The Unfinished Revolution of Culture and Identity by Pavan K. Varma p.125 From the second century, through the Indian Dynasties like the Pallava dynasty, Gupta Empire, Pala Empire and Chola Empire in the succeeding centuries up to the 12th century, Indian culture spread across all of Southeast Asia. 
1600-year-old stone inscription from the era of Purnawarman, king of Tarumanagara, founded in Tugu sub-district of Jakarta.
References to the Dvipantara or Yawadvipa, a Hindu kingdom in Java and Sumatra appear in Sanskrit writings from 200 BCE. In India's earliest epic, the Ramayana, Sugriva, the chief of Rama's army dispatched his men to Yawadvipa, the island of Java, in search of Sita. History of Ancient India Kapur, Kamlesh The earliest archeological relic discovered in Indonesia is from the Ujung Kulon National Park, West Java, where an early Hindu statue of Ganesha estimated from the 1st century CE was found on the summit of Mount Raksa in Panaitan island. There is also archeological evidence of Sunda kingdom in West Java dating from the 2nd-century, and Jiwa Temple in Batujaya, Karawang, West Java was probably built around this time. South Indian culture was spread to Southeast Asia by the south Indian Pallava dynasty in the 4th and 5th century. History of Humanity: From the seventh century B.C. to the seventh century A.D. by Sigfried J. de Laet p.395 and by 5th century, stone inscriptions written in Pallava scripts were found in Java and Borneo.

8th century Borobudur buddhist monument, Sailendra dynasty
A number of Hindu and Buddhist states flourished and then declined across Indonesia.

One such early kingdom was Tarumanagara, which flourished between 358 and 669 CE. Located in West Java close to modern-day Jakarta, its 5th century king, Purnawarman, established the earliest known inscriptions in Java, the Ciaruteun inscription located near Bogor. On this monument, King Purnavarman inscribed his name and made an imprint of his footprints, as well as his elephant's footprints. The accompanying inscription reads, "Here are the footprints of King Purnavarman, the heroic conqueror of the world". This inscription is written in Pallava script and in Sanskrit and is still clear after 1500 years. Purnawarman apparently built a canal that changed the course of the Cakung River, and drained a coastal area for agriculture and settlement purpose. In his stone inscriptions, Purnawarman associated himself with Vishnu, and Brahmins ritually secured the hydraulic project. Mary Somers Heidhues. Southeast Asia: A Concise History. London: Thames and Hudson, 2000. Pp. 45 and 63. 

Three rough plinths dating from the beginning of the 4th century are found in Kutai, East Kalimantan, near Mahakam River. The plinths bear an inscription in the Pallava script of India reading "A gift to the Brahmin priests".

The political history of Indonesian archipelago during the 7th to 11th centuries was dominated by Srivijaya based in Sumatra, also Sailendra that dominated central Java and constructed Borobudur, the largest Buddhist monument in the world. The history prior of the 14th and 15th centuries is not well known due to scarcity of evidence. Two major states dominated this period; Majapahit in East Java, the greatest of the pre-Islamic Indonesian states, and Malacca on the west coast of the Malay Peninsula, arguably the greatest of the Muslim trading empires. Ricklefs (1991), page 15 

===Medang===
Prambanan in Java; built during the Sanjaya dynasty of Mataram, it is one of the largest Hindu temple complexes in south-east Asia.

Medang or previously known as Mataram was an Indianized kingdom based in Central Java around modern-day Yogyakarta between the 8th and 10th centuries. The center of the kingdom was moved from central Java to east Java by Mpu Sindok. An eruption of Mount Merapi volcano or a power struggle may have caused the move.

The first king of Mataram was Sri Sanjaya and left inscriptions in stone. The monumental Hindu temple of Prambanan in the vicinity of Yogyakarta was built by Daksa. Dharmawangsa ordered the translation of the Mahabharata into Old Javanese in 996.

The kingdom collapsed into chaos at the end of Dharmawangsa's reign under military pressure from Srivijaya. One of the last major kings of Mataram was Airlangga who reigned from 1016 until 1049. Colin Brown, A Short History of Indonesia (Allen & Unwin Publishers: Crows Nest, New South Wales, Australia, 2003) p. 23. Airlangga was a son of Udayana of Bali and a relative of Dharmawangsa re-established the kingdom including Bali under the name of Kahuripan.

===Srivijaya===

The empire of Srivijaya in Southeast Asia
Srivijaya was an ethnic Malay kingdom on Sumatra which influenced much of the Maritime Southeast Asia. From the 7th century CE, the powerful Srivijaya naval kingdom flourished as a result of trade and the influences of Hinduism and Buddhism that were imported with it. Taylor (2003), pages 2226; Ricklefs (1991), page 3 

As early as the 1st century CE Indonesian vessels made trade voyages as far as Africa. Picture: a ship carved on Borobudur, circa 800 CE.

Srivijaya was centred in the coastal trading centre of present day Palembang. Srivijaya was not a "state" in the modern sense with defined boundaries and a centralized government to which the citizens own allegiance. Ibid., p. 19. Rather Srivijaya was a confederacy form of society centered on a royal heartland. Ibid. It was a thalassocracy and did not extend its influence far beyond the coastal areas of the islands of Southeast Asia. Trade was the driving force of Srivijaya just as it is for most societies throughout history. Ibid., p. 12. The Srivijayan navy controlled the trade that made its way through the Strait of Malacca. 

By the 7th century, the harbors of various vassal states of Srivijaya lined both coasts of the Straits of Melaka. Around this time, Srivijaya had established suzerainty over large areas of Sumatra, western Java, and much of the Malay Peninsula. Dominating the Malacca and Sunda straits, the empire controlled both the Spice Route traffic and local trade. It remained a formidable sea power until the 13th century. This spread the ethnic Malay culture throughout Sumatra, the Malay Peninsula, and western Borneo. A stronghold of Vajrayana Buddhism, Srivijaya attracted pilgrims and scholars from other parts of Asia.

The relation between Srivijaya and the Chola Empire of south India was friendly during the reign of Raja Raja Chola I but during the reign of Rajendra Chola I the Chola Empire attacked Srivijaya cities. Power and Plenty: Trade, War, and the World Economy in the Second Millennium by Ronald Findlay,Kevin H. O'Rourke p.67 A series of Chola raids in the 11th century weakened the Srivijayan hegemony and enabled the formation of regional kingdoms based, like Kediri, on intensive agriculture rather than coastal and long distance trade. Srivijayan influence waned by the 11th century. The island was in frequent conflict with the Javanese kingdoms, first Singhasari and then Majapahit. Islam eventually made its way to the Aceh region of Sumatra, spreading its influence through contacts with Arabs and Indian traders. By the late 13th century, the kingdom of Pasai in northern Sumatra converted to Islam. The last inscription dates to 1374, where a crown prince, Ananggavarman, is mentioned. Srivijaya ceased to exist by 1414, when Parameswara, the kingdom's last prince, converted to Islam and founded the Sultanate of Malacca on the Malay peninsula.

===Singhasari and Majapahit===
Wringin Lawang, the split gate shows the red brick construction, and strong geometric lines of Majapahit architecture. Located at Jatipasar, Trowulan, East Java.

Despite a lack of historical evidence, it is known that Majapahit was the most dominant of Indonesia's pre-Islamic states. Ricklefs (1991), p. 15. The Hindu Majapahit kingdom was founded in eastern Java in the late 13th century, and under Gajah Mada it experienced what is often referred to as a "Golden Age" in Indonesian history, when its influence extended to much of southern Malay Peninsula, Borneo, Sumatra, and Bali from about 1293 to around 1500.

The founder of the Majapahit Empire, Kertarajasa, was the son-in-law of the ruler of the Singhasari kingdom, also based in Java. After Singhasari drove Srivijaya out of Java in 1290, the rising power of Singhasari came to the attention of Kublai Khan in China and he sent emissaries demanding tribute. Kertanagara, ruler of the Singhasari kingdom, refused to pay tribute and the Khan sent a punitive expedition which arrived off the coast of Java in 1293. By that time, a rebel from Kediri, Jayakatwang, had killed Kertanagara. The Majapahit founder allied himself with the Mongols against Jayakatwang and, once the Singhasari kingdom was destroyed, turned and forced his Mongol allies to withdraw in confusion.

Gajah Mada, an ambitious Majapahit prime minister and regent from 1331 to 1364, extended the empire's rule to the surrounding islands. A few years after Gajah Mada's death, the Majapahit navy captured Palembang, putting an end to the Srivijayan kingdom. Although the Majapahit rulers extended their power over other islands and destroyed neighbouring kingdoms, their focus seems to have been on controlling and gaining a larger share of the commercial trade that passed through the archipelago. About the time Majapahit was founded, Muslim traders and proselytisers began entering the area. After its peak in the 14th century, Majapahit power began to decline and was unable to control the rising power of the Sultanate of Malacca. Dates for the end of the Majapahit Empire range from 1478 to 1520. A large number of courtiers, artisans, priests, and members of the royal family moved east to the island of Bali at the end of Majapahit power.

==The age of Islamic states==

===The spread of Islam===

The earliest accounts of the Indonesian archipelago date from the Abbasid Caliphate, according to those early accounts the Indonesian archipelago were famous among early Muslim sailors mainly due to its abundance of precious spice trade commodities such as nutmeg, cloves, galangal and many other spices. 

Although Muslim traders first traveled through South East Asia early in the Islamic era, the spread of Islam among the inhabitants of the Indonesian archipelago dates to the 13th century in northern Sumatra. Ricklefs (1991), pages 3 to 14 Although it is known that the spread of Islam began in the west of the archipelago, the fragmentary evidence does not suggest a rolling wave of conversion through adjacent areas; rather, it suggests the process was complicated and slow. The spread of Islam was driven by increasing trade links outside of the archipelago; in general, traders and the royalty of major kingdoms were the first to adopt the new religion. Ricklefs (1991), pages 1214 

Other Indonesian areas gradually adopted Islam, making it the dominant religion in Java and Sumatra by the end of the 16th century. For the most part, Islam overlaid and mixed with existing cultural and religious influences, which shaped the predominant form of Islam in Indonesia, particularly in Java. Only Bali retained a Hindu majority. In the eastern archipelago, both Christian and Islamic missionaries were active in the 16th and 17th centuries, and, currently, there are large communities of both religions on these islands. 

===Sultanate of Mataram===

The cemetery compound of Mataram Sultans in Kota Gede, Yogyakarta.

The Sultanate of Mataram was the third Sultanate in Java, after the Sultanate of Demak Bintoro and the Sultanate of Pajang.

According to Javanese records, Kyai Gedhe Pamanahan became the ruler of the Mataram area in the 1570s with the support of the kingdom of Pajang to the east, near the current site of Surakarta (Solo). Pamanahan was often referred to as Kyai Gedhe Mataram after his ascension.

Pamanahan's son, Panembahan Senapati Ingalaga, replaced his father on the throne around 1584. Under Senapati the kingdom grew substantially through regular military campaigns against Mataram's neighbors. Shortly after his accession, for example, he conquered his father's patrons in Pajang.

The reign of Panembahan Seda ing Krapyak (c. 16011613), the son of Senapati, was dominated by further warfare, especially against powerful Surabaya, already a major center in East Java. The first contact between Mataram and the Dutch East India Company (VOC) occurred under Krapyak. Dutch activities at the time were limited to trading from limited coastal settlements, so their interactions with the inland Mataram kingdom were limited, although they did form an alliance against Surabaya in 1613. Krapyak died that year.

Krapyak was succeeded by his son, who is known simply as Sultan Agung ("Great Sultan") in Javanese records. Agung was responsible for the great expansion and lasting historical legacy of Mataram due to the extensive military conquests of his long reign from 1613 to 1646.

After years of war Agung finally conquered Surabaya. The city surrounded by land and sea and starved it into submission. With Surabaya brought into the empire, the Mataram kingdom encompassed all of central and eastern Java, and Madura; only in the west did Banten and the Dutch settlement in Batavia remain outside Agung's control. He tried repeatedly in the 1620s and 1630s to drive the Dutch from Batavia, but his armies had met their match, and he was forced to share control over Java.

In 1645 he began building Imogiri, his burial place, about fifteen kilometers south of Yogyakarta. Imogiri remains the resting place of most of the royalty of Yogyakarta and Surakarta to this day. Agung died in the spring of 1646, with his image of royal invincibility shattered by his losses to the Dutch, but he did leave behind an empire that covered most of Java and its neighboring islands.

Upon taking the throne, Agung's son Susuhunan Amangkurat I tried to bring long-term stability to Mataram's realm, murdering local leaders that were insufficiently deferential to him, and closing ports so he alone had control over trade with the Dutch.

By the mid-1670s dissatisfaction with the king fanned into open revolt. Raden Trunajaya, a prince from Madura, lead a revolt fortified by itinerant mercenaries from Makassar that captured the king's court at Mataram in mid-1677. The king escaped to the north coast with his eldest son, the future king Amangkurat II, leaving his younger son Pangeran Puger in Mataram. Apparently more interested in profit and revenge than in running a struggling empire, the rebel Trunajaya looted the court and withdrew to his stronghold in East Java leaving Puger in control of a weak court.

Amangkurat I died just after his expulsion, making Amangkurat II king in 1677. He too was nearly helpless, though, having fled without an army or treasury to build one. In an attempt to regain his kingdom, he made substantial concessions to the Dutch, who then went to war to reinstate him. For the Dutch, a stable Mataram empire that was deeply indebted to them would help ensure continued trade on favorable terms. They were willing to lend their military might to keep the kingdom together. Dutch forces first captured Trunajaya, then forced Puger to recognize the sovereignty of his elder brother Amangkurat II. The kingdom collapsed after a two-year war, in which power plays crippled the Sunan.

===The Sultanate of Banten===

In 152425, Sunan Gunung Jati from Cirebon, together with the armies of Demak Sultanate, seized the port of Banten from the Sunda kingdom, and established The Sultanate of Banten. This was accompanied by Muslim preachers and the adoption of Islam amongst the local population. At its peak in the first half of the 17th century, the Sultanate lasted from 1526 to 1813 AD. The Sultanate left many archaeological remains and historical records. 

==Colonial era==
Beginning in the 16th century, successive waves of Europeansthe Portuguese, Spanish, Dutch and Britishsought to dominate the spice trade at its sources in India and the 'Spice Islands' (Maluku) of Indonesia. This meant finding a way to Asia to cut out Muslim merchants who, with their Venetian outlet in the Mediterranean, monopolised spice imports to Europe. Astronomically priced at the time, spices were highly coveted not only to preserve and make poorly preserved meat palatable, but also as medicines and magic potions.

The arrival of Europeans in South East Asia is often regarded as the watershed moment in its history. Other scholars consider this view untenable, Ricklefs, page 22 arguing that European influence during the times of the early arrivals of the 16th and 17th centuries was limited in both area and depth. This is in part due to Europe not being the most advanced or dynamic area of the world in the early 15th century. Rather, the major expansionist force of this time was Islam; in 1453, for example, the Ottoman Turks conquered Constantinople, while Islam continued to spread through Indonesia and the Philippines. European influence, particularly that of the Dutch, would not have its greatest impact on Indonesia until the 18th and 19th centuries.

===The Portuguese===

The nutmeg plant is native to Indonesia's Banda Islands. Once one of the world's most valuable commodities, it drew the first European colonial powers to Indonesia.

New found Portuguese expertise in navigation, ship building and weaponry allowed them to make daring expeditions of exploration and expansion. Starting with the first exploratory expeditions sent from newly conquered Malacca in 1512, the Portuguese were the first Europeans to arrive in Indonesia, and sought to dominate the sources of valuable spices and to extend the Catholic Church's missionary efforts. The Portuguese turned east to Maluku and through both military conquest and alliance with local rulers, they established trading posts, forts, and missions on the islands of Ternate, Ambon, and Solor among others. The height of Portuguese missionary activities, however, came at the latter half of the 16th century. Ultimately, the Portuguese presence in Indonesia was reduced to Solor, Flores and Timor in modern day Nusa Tenggara, following defeat at the hands of indigenous Ternateans and the Dutch in Maluku, and a general failure to maintain control of trade in the region. In comparison with the original Portuguese ambition to dominate Asian trade, their influence on Indonesian culture was small: the romantic keroncong guitar ballads; a number of Indonesian words which reflect Portugueses role as the lingua franca of the archipelago alongside Malay; and many family names in eastern Indonesia such as da Costa, Dias, de Fretes, Gonsalves, etc. The most significant impacts of the Portuguese arrival were the disruption and disorganisation of the trade network mostly as a result of their conquest of Malacca, and the first significant plantings of Christianity in Indonesia. There have continued to be Christian communities in eastern Indonesia through to the present, which has contributed to a sense of shared interest with Europeans, particularly among the Ambonese. Ricklefs (1991), pages 22 to 26 

===Dutch East-India Company===

An early 18th-century Dutch map from a time when only the north coastal ports of Java were well known to the Dutch

In 1602, the Dutch parliament awarded the VOC a monopoly on trade and colonial activities in the region at a time before the company controlled any territory in Java. In 1619, the VOC conquered the West Javan city of Jayakarta, where they founded the city of Batavia (present-day Jakarta). The VOC became deeply involved in the internal politics of Java in this period, and fought in a number of wars involving the leaders of Mataram and Banten.

The Dutch followed the Portuguese aspirations, courage, brutality and strategies but brought better organization, weapons, ships, and superior financial backing. Although they failed to gain complete control of the Indonesian spice trade, they had much more success than the previous Portuguese efforts. They exploited the factionalisation of the small kingdoms in Java that had replaced Majapahit, establishing a permanent foothold in Java, from which grew a land-based colonial empire which became one of the richest colonial possessions on earth. 

===Dutch state rule===

Batavian (Jakarta) tea factory in the 1860s
After the VOC was dissolved in 1800 following bankruptcy, Ricklefs (1991), page 24 and after a short British rule under Thomas Stamford Raffles, the Dutch state took over the VOC possessions in 1816. A Javanese uprising was crushed in the Java War of 18251830. After 1830 a system of forced cultivations and indentured labour was introduced on Java, the Cultivation System (in Dutch: cultuurstelsel). This system brought the Dutch and their Indonesian allies enormous wealth. The cultivation system tied peasants to their land, forcing them to work in government-owned plantations for 60 days of the year. The system was abolished in a more liberal period after 1870. In 1901 the Dutch adopted what they called the Ethical Policy, which included somewhat increased investment in indigenous education, and modest political reforms.

The Dutch colonialists formed a privileged upper social class of soldiers, administrators, managers, teachers and pioneers. They lived together with the "natives", but at the top of a rigid social and racial caste system. The Dutch East Indies had two legal classes of citizens; European and indigenous. A third class, Foreign Easterners, was added in 1920. 

Upgrading the infrastructure of ports and roads was a high priority for the Dutch, with the goal of modernizing the economy, pumping wages into local areas, facilitating commerce, and speeding up military movements. By 1950 Dutch engineers had built and upgraded a road network with 12,000 km of asphalted surface, 41,000 km of metalled road area and 16,000 km of gravel surfaces. Marie-Louise ten Horn-van Nispen and Wim Ravesteijn, "The road to an empire: Organisation and technology of road construction in the Dutch East Indies, 1800-1940," Journal of Transport History (2009) 10#1 pp 40-57 In addition the Dutch built 7,500 km of railways, bridges, irrigation systems covering 1.4 million hectares (5,400 sq mi) of rice fields, several harbours, and 140 public drinking water systems. These Dutch constructed public works became the economic base of the colonial state; after independence they became the basis of the Indonesian infrastructure. Wim Ravesteijn, "Between Globalization and Localization: The Case of Dutch Civil Engineering in Indonesia, 18001950," Comparative Technology Transfer and Society (2007) 5#1 pp. 3264. online 

For most of the colonial period, Dutch control over its territories in the Indonesian archipelago was tenuous. In some cases, Dutch police and military actions in parts of Indonesia were quite cruel. Recent discussions, for example, of Dutch cruelty in Aceh have encouraged renewed research on these aspects of Dutch rule. Linawati Sidarto, 'Images of a grisly past', The Jakarta Post: Weekender, July 2011 It was only in the early 20th century, three centuries after the first Dutch trading post, that the full extent of the colonial territory was established and direct colonial rule exerted across what would become the boundaries of the modern Indonesian state. Dutch troops were constantly engaged in quelling rebellions both on and off Java. The influence of local leaders such as Prince Diponegoro in central Java, Imam Bonjol in central Sumatra and Pattimura in Maluku, and a bloody thirty-year war in Aceh weakened the Dutch and tied up the colonial military forces.(Schwartz 1999, pages 34) Despite major internal political, social and sectarian divisions during the National Revolution, Indonesians, on the whole, found unity in their fight for independence. Portuguese Timor, now East Timor, remained under Portuguese rule until 1975 when it was invaded by Indonesia. The Indonesian government declared the territory an Indonesian province but relinquished it in 1999.

==The emergence of Indonesia==

===Indonesian National Awakening===

Sukarno, Indonesian Nationalist leader, and later, first president of Indonesia
In October 1908, the first nationalist movement was formed, Budi Utomo. Colin Brown, A Short History of Indonesia (Allen & Unwin Press: Crows nest, New South Wales, 2003) p. 118. On 10 September 1912, the first nationalist mass movement was formed--Sarekat Islam. Ibid., p. 119. By December 1912, Sarekat Islam had 93,000 members. The Dutch responded after the First World War with repressive measures. The nationalist leaders came from a small group of young professionals and students, some of whom had been educated in the Netherlands. In the postWorld War I era, the Indonesian communists who were associated with the Third International started to usurp the nationalist movement. C. Hartley Grattan, The Southwest Pacific since 1900 (University of Michigan Press: Ann Arbor, 1963) p. 452. The repression of the nationalist movement led to many arrests, including Indonesia's first president, Sukarno (190170), who was imprisoned for political activities on 29 December 1929. Colin Brown, A Short History of Indonesia, p. 129. Also arrested was Mohammad Hatta, first Vice-President of Indonesia. Ibid., p. 188. Additionally, Sutan Sjahrir, who later became the first Prime Minister of Indonesia, was arrested on this date. Ibid., p. 123. 

In 1914 the exiled Dutch socialist Henk Sneevliet founded the Indies Social Democratic Association. Initially a small forum of Dutch socialists, it would later evolve into the Communist Party of Indonesia (PKI) in 1924. George McTurnan Kahin, Nationalism and Revolution in Indonesia (Cornell University Press: Ithaca, New York, 1952) p. 84. In the postWorld War I era, the Dutch strongly repressed all attempts at change. This repression led to a growth of the PKI. By December 1924, the PKI had a membership of 1,140. One year later in 1925, the PKI had grown to 3,000 members. In 1926 thru 1927, there was a PKI-led revolt against the Dutch colonialism and the harsh repression based on strikes of urban workers. Ibid., p. 86. However, the strikes and the revolt was put down by the Dutch with some 13,000 nationalists and communists leaders arrested. Some 4,500 were given prison sentences. Ibid. 

Sukarno was released from prison in December 1931. Colin Brown, A Short History of Indonesia, p. 131. However, Sukarno was re-arrested again on 1 August 1933. Ibid., p. 132. 

===Japanese occupation===

The Japanese invasion and subsequent occupation during World War II ended Dutch rule, ; and encouraged the previously suppressed Indonesian independence movement. In May 1940, early in World War II, the Netherlands was occupied by Nazi Germany. The Dutch East Indies declared a state of siege and in July redirected exports for Japan to the US and Britain. Negotiations with the Japanese aimed at securing supplies of aviation fuel collapsed in June 1941, and the Japanese started their conquest of Southeast Asia in December of that year. Klemen, L. 19992000, The Netherlands East Indies 194142, " Forgotten Campaign: The Dutch East Indies Campaign 19411942". That same month, factions from Sumatra sought Japanese assistance for a revolt against the Dutch wartime government. The last Dutch forces were defeated by Japan in March 1942.

In July 1942, Sukarno accepted Japan's offer to rally the public in support of the Japanese war effort. Sukarno and Mohammad Hatta were decorated by the Emperor of Japan in 1943. However, experience of the Japanese occupation of Indonesia varied considerably, depending upon where one lived and one's social position. Many who lived in areas considered important to the war effort experienced torture, sex slavery, arbitrary arrest and execution, and other war crimes. Thousands taken away from Indonesia as war labourers (romusha) suffered or died as a result of ill-treatment and starvation. People of Dutch and mixed Dutch-Indonesian descent were particular targets of the Japanese occupation.

In March 1945 Japan organized an Indonesian committee (BPUPKI) on independence. At its first meeting in May, Soepomo spoke of national integration and against personal individualism; while Muhammad Yamin suggested that the new nation should claim Sarawak, Sabah, Malaya, Portuguese Timor, and all the pre-war territories of the Dutch East Indies. The committee drafted the 1945 Constitution, which remains in force, though now much amended. On 9 August 1945 Sukarno, Hatta, and Radjiman Wediodiningrat were flown to meet Marshal Hisaichi Terauchi in Vietnam. They were told that Japan intended to announce Indonesian independence on 24 August. After the Japanese surrender however, Sukarno unilaterally proclaimed Indonesian independence on 17 August. A later UN report stated that four million people died in Indonesia as a result of the Japanese occupation. Cited in: Dower, John W. War Without Mercy: Race and Power in the Pacific War (1986; Pantheon; ISBN 0-394-75172-8) 

===Indonesian National Revolution===

Indonesian flag raising shortly after the declaration of independence.
Under pressure from radical and politicised pemuda ('youth') groups, Sukarno and Hatta proclaimed Indonesian independence, on 17 August 1945, two days after the Japanese Emperors surrender in the Pacific. The following day, the Central Indonesian National Committee (KNIP) declared Sukarno President, and Hatta Vice President. Ricklefs (1991), page 213; ; ; ; Reid (1973), page 30 Word of the proclamation spread by shortwave and fliers while the Indonesian war-time military (PETA), youths, and others rallied in support of the new republic, often moving to take over government offices from the Japanese.

The Netherlands, initially backed by the British, tried to re-establish their rule, "Indonesian War of Independence" Dutch wanted to reoccupy Indonesia and a bitter armed and diplomatic struggle ended in December 1949, when in the face of international pressure, the Dutch formally recognised Indonesian independence. ; 
Dutch efforts to re-establish complete control met resistance. At the end of World War II, a power vacuum arose, and the nationalists often succeeded in seizing the arms of the demoralised Japanese. A period of unrest with city guerrilla warfare called the Bersiap period ensued. Groups of Indonesian nationalists armed with improvised weapons (like bamboo spears) and firearms attacked returning Allied troops. 3,500 Europeans were killed and 20,000 were missing, meaning there were more European deaths in Indonesia after the war than during the war. After returning to Java, Dutch forces quickly re-occupied the colonial capital of Batavia (now Jakarta), so the city of Yogyakarta in central Java became the capital of the nationalist forces. Negotiations with the nationalists led to two major truce agreements, but disputes about their implementation, and much mutual provocation, led each time to renewed conflict. Within four years the Dutch had recaptured almost the whole of Indonesia, but guerrilla resistance, led on Java by commander Nasution persisted. On 27 December 1949, after four years of sporadic warfare and fierce criticism of the Dutch by the UN, the Netherlands officially recognised Indonesian sovereignty under the federal structure of the United States of Indonesia (RUSI). On 17 August 1950, exactly five years after the proclamation of independence, the last of the federal states were dissolved and Sukarno proclaimed a single unitary Republic of Indonesia. Vickers (2005), page xiii 

==Sukarno's presidency==

===Democratic experiment===

Campaign posters for the 1955 Indonesian election.

With the unifying struggle to secure Indonesia's independence over, divisions in Indonesian society began to appear. These included regional differences in customs, religion, the impact of Christianity and Marxism, and fears of Javanese political domination. Following colonial rule, Japanese occupation, and war against the Dutch, the new country suffered from severe poverty, a ruinous economy, low educational and skills levels, and authoritarian traditions. Ricklefs (1991), page 237; Challenges to the authority of the Republic included the militant Darul Islam who waged a guerrilla struggle against the Republic from 1948 to 1962; the declaration of an independent Republic of South Maluku by Ambonese formerly of the Royal Dutch Indies Army; and rebellions in Sumatra and Sulawesi between 1955 and 1961.

In contrast to the 1945 Constitution, the 1950 constitution mandated a parliamentary system of government, an executive responsible to the parliament, and stipulated at length constitutional guarantees for human rights, drawing heavily on the 1948 United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights. A proliferation of political parties dealing for shares of cabinet seats resulted in a rapid turnover of coalition governments including 17 cabinets between 1945 and 1958. The long-postponed parliamentary elections were held in 1955; the Indonesian National Party (PNI)considered Sukarno's partytopped the poll, and the Communist Party of Indonesia (PKI) received strong support, but no party garnered more than a quarter of the votes, which resulted in short-lived coalitions. 

===Guided Democracy===

Coat of Arms of the Republic of Indonesia, adopted 1950
By 1956, Sukarno was openly criticising parliamentary democracy, stating that it was "based upon inherent conflict" which ran counter to Indonesian notions of harmony as being the natural state of human relationships. Instead, he sought a system based on the traditional village system of discussion and consensus, under the guidance of village elders. He proposed a threefold blend of nasionalisme ('nationalism'), agama ('religion'), and komunisme ('communism') into a co-operative 'Nas-A-Kom' government. This was intended to appease the three main factions in Indonesian politics  the army, Islamic groups, and the communists. With the support of the military, he proclaimed in February 1957, 'Guided Democracy', and proposed a cabinet of representing all the political parties of importance (including the PKI). The US tried and failed to secretly overthrow the President, while Secretary of State Dulles declared before Congress that "we are not interested in the internal affairs of this country." Weiner, Tim."Legacy of Ashes: The History of the CIA" 

Sukarno abrogated the 1950 Constitution on 9 July 1959 by a decree dissolving the Constitutional Assembly and restoring the 1945 Constitution. The elected parliament was replaced by one appointed by, and subject to the will of, the President. Another non-elected body, the Supreme Advisory Council, was the main policy development body, while the National Front was set up in September 1960 and presided over by the president to "mobilise the revolutionary forces of the people". Western-style parliamentary democracy was thus finished in Indonesia until the 1999 elections of the Reformasi era. 

===Sukarno's revolution and nationalism===

Charismatic Sukarno spoke as a romantic revolutionary, and under his increasingly authoritarian rule, Indonesia moved on a course of stormy nationalism. Sukarno was popularly referred to as bung ("older brother"), and he painted himself as a man of the people carrying the aspirations of Indonesia and one who dared take on the West. He instigated a number of large, ideologically driven infrastructure projects and monuments celebrating Indonesia's identity, which were criticised as substitutes for real development in a deteriorating economy. 

Western New Guinea had been part of the Dutch East Indies, and Indonesian nationalists had thus claimed it on this basis. Indonesia was able to instigate a diplomatic and military confrontation with the Dutch over the territory following an Indonesian-Soviet arms agreement in 1960. It was, however, United States pressure on the Netherlands that led to an Indonesian takeover in 1963. Also in 1963, Indonesia commenced Konfrontasi with the new state of Malaysia. The northern states of Borneo, formerly British Sarawak and Sabah, had wavered in joining Malaysia, whilst Indonesia saw itself as the rightful ruler of Austronesian peoples and supported an unsuccessful revolution attempt in Brunei. Reviving the glories of the Indonesian National Revolution, Sukarno rallied against notions of British imperialism mounting military offensives along the Indonesia-Malaysia border in Borneo. As the PKI rallied in Jakarta streets in support, the West became increasingly alarmed at Indonesian foreign policy and the United States withdrew its aid to Indonesia. 

Indonesia's economic position continued to deteriorate; by the mid-1960s, the cash-strapped government had to scrap critical public sector subsidies, inflation was at 1,000%, export revenues were shrinking, infrastructure crumbling, and factories were operating at minimal capacity with negligible investment. Severe poverty and hunger were widespread. Schwarz (1994), pages 5257 

==The New Order==

===Transition to the New Order===

Described as the great dalang ("puppet master"), Sukarno's position depended on balancing the opposing and increasingly hostile forces of the army and PKI. Sukarno's anti-imperial ideology saw Indonesia increasingly dependent on Soviet and then communist China. By 1965, the PKI was the largest communist party in the world outside the Soviet Union or China. Penetrating all levels of government, the party increasingly gained influence at the expense of the army.

On 30 September 1965, six of the most senior generals within the military and other officers were executed in an attempted coup. The insurgents, known later as the 30 September Movement, backed a rival faction of the army and took up positions in the capital, later seizing control of the national radio station. They claimed they were acting against a plot organised by the generals to overthrow Sukarno. Within a few hours, Major General Suharto, commander of the Army Strategic Reserve (Kostrad), mobilised counteraction, and by the evening of 1 October, it was clear the coup, which had little coordination and was largely limited to Jakarta, had failed. Complicated and partisan theories continue to this day over the identity of the attempted coup's organisers and their aims. According to the Indonesian army, the PKI were behind the coup and used disgruntled army officers to carry it out, and this became the official account of Suharto's subsequent New Order administration. Most historians agree that the coup and the surrounding events were not led by a single mastermind controlling all events, and that the full truth will never likely be known.

The PKI was blamed for the coup, and anti-communists, initially following the army's lead went on a violent anti-communist purge across much of the country. The PKI was effectively destroyed, Friend (2003), pages 107109; ; Ricklefs (1991), pages 280283, 284, 287290 and the most widely accepted estimates are that up to 500,000 were killed. ; ; Friend (2003), page 113 The violence was especially brutal in Java and Bali. The PKI was outlawed and possibly more than 1 million of its leaders and affiliates were imprisoned. Friend (2003), page 113 

Throughout the 196566 period, President Sukarno attempted to restore his political position and shift the country back to its pre-October 1965 position but his Guided Democracy balancing act was destroyed with the PKI's destruction. Although he remained president, the weakened Sukarno was forced to transfer key political and military powers to General Suharto, who by that time had become head of the armed forces. In March 1967, the Provisional People's Consultative Assembly (MPRS) named General Suharto acting president. Suharto was formally appointed president in March 1968. Sukarno lived under virtual house arrest until his death in 1970.

===Entrenchment of the New Order===

Suharto was the military president of Indonesia from 1967 to 1998

In the aftermath of Suharto's rise, hundreds of thousands of people were killed or imprisoned by the military and religious groups in a backlash against alleged communist supporters. Roosa, John and Nevins, Joseph (2005) "40 Years Later: The Mass Killings in Indonesia" Suharto's administration is commonly called the New Order era. The Library Congress. "History of Indonesia #10". Suharto invited major foreign investment, which produced substantial, if uneven, economic growth. However, Suharto enriched himself and his family through business dealings and widespread corruption. "Suharto Of Indonesia Embezzled Most Of Any Modern Leader". 

===Annexation of West Irian===

At the time of independence, the Dutch retained control over the western half of New Guinea, and permitted steps toward self-government and a declaration of independence on 1 December 1961. After negotiations with the Dutch on the incorporation of the territory into Indonesia failed, an Indonesian paratroop invasion 18 December preceded armed clashes between Indonesian and Dutch troops in 1961 and 1962. In 1962 the United States pressured the Netherlands into secret talks with Indonesia which in August 1962 produced the New York Agreement, and Indonesia assumed administrative responsibility for West Irian on 1 May 1963.

Rejecting UN supervision, the Indonesian government under Suharto decided to settle the question of West Irian, the former Dutch New Guinea, in their favor. Rather than a referendum of all residents of West Irian as had been agreed under Sukarno, an "Act of Free Choice" was conducted 1969 in which 1,025 Papuan representatives of local councils were selected by the Indonesians. After training in Indonesian language they were warned to vote in favor of Indonesian integration with the group unanimously voting for integration with Indonesia. A subsequent UN General Assembly resolution confirmed the transfer of sovereignty to Indonesia.

West Irian was renamed Irian Jaya ('glorious Irian') in 1973. Opposition to Indonesian administration of Irian Jaya (later known as Papua) gave rise to guerrilla activity in the years following Jakarta's assumption of control.

===Annexation of East Timor===

In 1975, the Carnation Revolution in Portugal caused authorities there to announce plans for decolonisation of Portuguese Timor, the eastern half of the island of Timor whose western half was a part of the Indonesian province of East Nusa Tenggara. In the elections held in 1975, Fretilin, a left-leaning party and UDT, aligned with the local elite, emerged as the largest parties, having previously formed an alliance to campaign for independence from Portugal. Apodeti, a party advocating integration with Indonesia, enjoyed little popular support.

Indonesia alleged that Fretilin was communist, and feared that an independent East Timor would influence separatism in the archipelago. Indonesian military intelligence influenced the break-up of the alliance between Fretilin and UDT, which led to a coup by the UDT on 11 August 1975, and a month-long civil war. During this time, the Portuguese government effectively abandoned the territory, and did not resume the decolonisation process. On 28 November, Fretilin unilaterally declared independence, and proclaimed the 'Democratic Republic of East Timor'. Nine days later, on 7 December, Indonesia invaded East Timor, eventually annexing the tiny country of (then) 680,000 people. Indonesia was supported materially and diplomatically by the United States, Australia and the United Kingdom who regarded Indonesia as an anti-communist ally.

Following the 1998 resignation of Suharto, on 30 August 1999, the people of East Timor voted overwhelmingly for independence in a UN-sponsored referendum. About 99% of the eligible population participated; more than three quarters chose independence despite months of attacks by the Indonesian military and its militia. After the result was announced, elements of the Indonesian military and its militia retaliated by killing approximately 2,000 East Timorese, displacing two-thirds of the population, raping hundreds of women and girls, and destroying much of the country's infrastructure. In October 1999, the Indonesian parliament (MPR) revoked the decree that annexed East Timor, and the United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) assumed responsibility for governing East Timor until it officially became an independent state in May 2002.

===Transmigration===

The Transmigration program (Transmigrasi) was a National Government initiative to move landless people from densely populated areas of Indonesia (such as Java and Bali) to less populous areas of the country including Papua, Kalimantan, Sumatra, and Sulawesi. The stated purpose of this program was to reduce the considerable poverty and overpopulation on Java, to provide opportunities for hard-working poor people, and to provide a workforce to better utilise the resources of the outer islands. The program, however, has been controversial with critics accusing the Indonesian Government of trying to use these migrants to reduce the proportion of native populations in receiving areas, in order to weaken separatist movements. The program has often been cited as a major and ongoing factor in controversies and even conflict and violence between settlers and indigenous populations.

==Reformation Era==

===Pro-democracy movement===
University students and police forces clash in May 1998.

In 1996 Suharto undertook efforts to pre-empt a challenge to the New Order government. The Indonesian Democratic Party (PDI), a legal party that had traditionally propped up the regime had changed direction, and began to assert its independence. Suharto fostered a split over the leadership of PDI, backing a co-opted faction loyal to deputy speaker of the People's Representative Council Suryadi against a faction loyal to Megawati Sukarnoputri, the daughter of Sukarno and the PDI's chairperson.

After the Suryadi faction announced a party congress to sack Megawati would be held in Medan on 2022 June, Megawati proclaimed that her supporters would hold demonstrations in protest. The Suryadi faction went through with its sacking of Megawati, and the demonstrations manifested themselves throughout Indonesia. This led to several confrontations on the streets between protesters and security forces, and recriminations over the violence. The protests culminated in the military allowing Megawati's supporters to take over PDI headquarters in Jakarta, with a pledge of no further demonstrations.

Suharto allowed the occupation of PDI headquarters to go on for almost a month, as attentions were also on Jakarta due to a set of high-profile ASEAN meetings scheduled to take place there. Capitalizing on this, Megawati supporters organized "democracy forums" with several speakers at the site. On 26 July, officers of the military, Suryadi, and Suharto openly aired their disgust with the forums. Aspinall 1996 

On 27 July, police, soldiers, and persons claiming to be Suryadi supporters stormed the headquarters. Several Megawati supporters were killed, and over two-hundred arrested and tried under the Anti-Subversion and Hate-Spreading laws. The day would become known as "Black Saturday" and mark the beginning of a renewed crackdown by the New Order government against supporters of democracy, now called the "Reformasi" or Reformation. Amnesty International 1996 

===Economic crisis and Suharto's resignation===
In 1997 and 1998, Indonesia was the country hardest hit by the East Asian Financial Crisis, which had dire consequences for the Indonesian economy and society, and Suharto's presidency. At the same time, the country suffered a severe drought and some of the largest forest fires in history burned in Kalimantan and Sumatra. The rupiah, the Indonesian currency, took a sharp dive in value. Suharto came under scrutiny from international lending institutions, chiefly the World Bank, International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the United States, over longtime embezzlement of funds and some protectionist policies. In December, Suharto's government signed a letter of intent to the IMF, pledging to enact austerity measures, including cuts to public services and removal of subsidies, in return for receiving the aid of the IMF and other donors. Prices for goods such as kerosene and rice, and fees for public services including education rose dramatically. The effects were exacerbated by widespread corruption. The austerity measures approved by Suharto had started to erode domestic confidence with the New Order 
 and led to popular protests.

Suharto stood for re-election by parliament for the seventh time in March 1998, justifying it on the grounds of the necessity of his leadership during the crisis. The parliament approved a new term. This sparked protests and riots throughout the country, now termed the Indonesian 1998 Revolution. Dissent within the ranks of his own Golkar party and the military finally weakened Suharto, and on 21 May he stood down from power. 
 He was replaced by his deputy Jusuf Habibie.

President Habibie quickly assembled a cabinet. One of its main tasks was to re-establish International Monetary Fund and donor community support for an economic stabilization program. He moved quickly to release political prisoners and lift some controls on freedom of speech and association. Elections for the national, provincial, and sub-provincial parliaments were held on 7 June 1999. For the national parliament, Indonesian Democratic Party-Struggle (PDI-P, led by Sukarno's daughter Megawati Sukarnoputri) won 34% of the vote; Golkar (Suharto's party; formerly the only legal party of government) 22%; United Development Party (PPP, led by Hamzah Haz) 12%; and National Awakening Party (PKB, led by Abdurrahman Wahid) 10%.

===Politics since 1999===
Indonesian 2009 election ballot, since 2004 Indonesian vote their president directly.
In October 1999, the People's Consultative Assembly (MPR), which consists of the 500-member Parliament plus 200 appointed members, elected Abdurrahman Wahid, commonly referred to as "Gus Dur" as President, and Megawati Sukarnoputri as Vice President, for 5-year terms. Wahid named his first Cabinet in early November 1999 and a reshuffled, second Cabinet in August 2000. President Wahid's government continued to pursue democratization and to encourage renewed economic growth under challenging conditions. In addition to continuing economic malaise, his government faced regional, interethnic, and interreligious conflict, particularly in Aceh, the Maluku Islands, and Irian Jaya. In West Timor, the problems of displaced East Timorese and violence by pro-Indonesian East Timorese militias caused considerable humanitarian and social problems. An increasingly assertive Parliament frequently challenged President Wahid's policies and prerogatives, contributing to a lively and sometimes rancorous national political debate.

During the People's Consultative Assembly's first annual session in August 2000, President Wahid gave an account of his government's performance. On 29 January 2001 thousands of student protesters stormed parliament grounds and demanded that President Abdurrahman Wahid resign due to alleged involvement in corruption scandals. Under pressure from the Assembly to improve management and coordination within the government, he issued a presidential decree giving Vice President Megawati control over the day-to-day administration of government. Soon after, Megawati Sukarnoputri assumed the presidency on 23 July. In 2004, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono won Indonesia's first direct Presidential election and in 2009 he was elected to a second term.

===Terrorism===

As a multi-ethnic and multi-culture democratic country with majority of moderate Muslim population, Indonesia faces the challenges to deal with terrorism that linked to global militant Islamic movement. The Jemaah Islamiyah (JI) militant Islamic organization that aspired for the establishment of a Daulah Islamiyah 

 that encompassed whole Southeast Asia including Indonesia, is responsible for series of terrorist attacks in Indonesia. This terrorist organization that linked to Al-Qaeda, was responsible for the Bali bombings in 2002 and 2005, as well as Jakarta bombings in 2003, 2004, and 2009. Indonesian government, people and authorities has ever since tried to crack down the terrorist cells in Indonesia.

===Tsunami disaster and Aceh peace deal===

On 26 December 2004, a massive earthquake and tsunami devastated parts of northern Sumatra, particularly Aceh. Partly as a result of the need for cooperation and peace during the recovery from the tsunami in Aceh, peace talks between the Indonesian government and the Free Aceh Movement (GAM) were restarted. Accords signed in Helsinki created a framework for military de-escalation in which the government has reduced its military presence, as members of GAM's armed wing decommission their weapons and apply for amnesty. The agreement also allows for Acehnese nationalist forces to form their own party, and other autonomy measures.

==See also==

*History of Asia
*History of Southeast Asia
*List of human evolution fossils
*List of Presidents of Indonesia
*Politics of Indonesia

==Notes==

==References==

* Dijk, Kees van. 2001. A country in despair. Indonesia between 1997 and 2000. KITLV Press, Leiden, ISBN 90-6718-160-9
* 
* Ricklefs, M.C. 1991. A History of Modern Indonesia since c.1300. 2nd Edition, Stanford: Stanford University Press. ISBN 0-333-57690-X
* Ricklefs, M.C. 2001. A History of Modern Indonesia since c.1200. 3rd Edition, Stanford: Stanford University Press. ISBN 0-8047-4480-7
* Taylor, Jean Gelman. 2003. Indonesia: Peoples and histories. New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-09709-3
* Schwarz, Adam. 1994. A Nation in Waiting: Indonesia's Search for Stability. 2nd Edition. St Leonards, NSW : Allen & Unwin.
* van Zanden J. L. An Economic History of Indonesia: 1800-2010 (Routledge, 2012)

==Further reading==
* Burhanudin, Jajat, and Kees van Dijk, eds. Islam in Indonesia: Contrasting Images and Interpretations (Amsterdam University Press, distributed by University of Chicago Press; 2013) 279 pages; scholarly articles

* 

==External links==
*Sejarah Indonesia  Detailed timeline of events in Indonesian history
*Decolonisation  History links for the end of the European formal Empires, casahistoria.net

 



[[Geography of Indonesia]]

thumb
Indonesia is an archipelagic island country in Southeast Asia, lying between the Indian Ocean and the Pacific Ocean. It is in a strategic location astride or along major sea lanes from Indian Ocean to Pacific Ocean. The country's variations in culture have been shaped&mdash;although not specifically determined&mdash;by centuries of complex interactions with the physical environment. Although Indonesians are now less vulnerable to the effects of nature as a result of improved technology and social programs, to some extent their social diversity has emerged from traditionally different patterns of adjustment to their physical circumstances.

==Regions==
Detailed map of Indonesia
Indonesia is an archipelagic country extending 5120 km from east to west and 1760 km from north to south. Kuoni - Far East, A world of difference. Page 88. Published 1999 by Kuoni Travel & JPM Publications It encompasses an estimated 17,508 islands, only 6,000 of which are inhabited. It comprises five main islands: Sumatra, Java, Borneo (known as "Kalimantan" in Indonesia), Sulawesi, and New Guinea; two major archipelagos (Nusa Tenggara and the Maluku Islands); and sixty smaller archipelagoes. Four of the islands are shared with other nations: Borneo is shared with Malaysia and Brunei, Sebatik, located eastern coast of Kalimantan, shared with Malaysia, Timor is shared with East Timor, and the newly divided provinces of Papua and West Papua share the island of New Guinea with Papua New Guinea. Indonesia's total land area is 1,919,317 km2. Included in Indonesia's total territory is another 93000 km2 of inland seas (straits, bays, and other bodies of water). The additional surrounding sea areas bring Indonesia's generally recognized territory (land and sea) to about 5 million square kilometers. The government, however, also claims an exclusive economic zone, which brings the total to about 7.9 million square kilometers. Latitude = 5.00 S & Longitude = 120.00 W

==Geology==

Sumatra, Java, Madura, and Kalimantan lie on the Sunda Shelf and geographers have conventionally grouped them, (along with Sulawesi), as the Greater Sunda Islands. At Indonesia's eastern extremity is western New Guinea, which lies on the Sahul Shelf. Sea depths in the Sunda and Sahul shelves average 200 m or less. Between these two shelves lie Sulawesi, Nusa Tenggara (also known as the Lesser Sunda Islands), and the Maluku Islands (or the Moluccas), which form a second island group where the surrounding seas in some places reach 4500 m in depth. The term "Outer Islands" is used inconsistently by various writers but it is usually taken to mean those islands other than Java and Madura.

Volcanoes in Indonesia

Borneo is the third largest island in the world and the original vegetation was mostly Borneo lowland rain forests although much of this has been cleared with wildlife retreating to the Borneo montane rain forests inland.

Nusa Tenggara consists of two strings of islands stretching eastward from Bali toward Papua. The inner arc of Nusa Tenggara is a continuation of the chain of mountains and volcanoes extending from Sumatra through Java, Bali, and Flores, and trailing off in the volcanic Banda Islands, which along with the Kai Islands and the Tanimbar Islands and other small islands in the Banda Sea are typical examples of the Wallacea mixture of Asian and Australasian plant and animal life. . Worldwildlife.org. Retrieved on 2010-09-29. The outer arc of Nusa Tenggara is a geological extension of the chain of islands west of Sumatra that includes Nias, Mentawai, and Enggano. This chain resurfaces in Nusa Tenggara in the ruggedly mountainous islands of Sumba and Timor.

The Maluku Islands (or Moluccas) are geologically among the most complex of the Indonesian islands. They are located in the northeast sector of the archipelago, bounded by the Philippines to the north, Papua to the east, and Nusa Tenggara to the south. The largest of these islands include Halmahera, Seram and Buru, all of which rise steeply out of very deep seas and have unique Wallacea vegetation. . Worldwildlife.org. Retrieved on 2010-09-29. This abrupt relief pattern from sea to high mountains means that there are very few level coastal plains. The islands of North Maluku are the original Spice Islands, a distinct rainforest ecoregion. . Worldwildlife.org. Retrieved on 2010-09-29. 

Geomorphologists believe that the island of New Guinea, of which Papua is a part, may once have been part of the Australian continent. The breakup and tectonic action created towering, snowcapped mountain peaks lining the island's central east-west spine and hot, humid alluvial plains along the coasts. The New Guinea Highlands range some 650 km east to west along the island, forming a mountainous spine between the north and south coasts. A number of islands off the coast of New Guinea have their own distinctive habitats, including the limestone islands of Biak, in the entrance to the large Cenderawasih Bay at the northwest end of the island. . Worldwildlife.org. Retrieved on 2010-09-29. . Worldwildlife.org. Retrieved on 2010-09-29. 

==Mountains and tectonics==

Most of the larger islands are mountainous, with peaks ranging between 3000 and meters above sea level in Sumatra, Java, Bali, Lombok, Sulawesi, and Seram. The country's tallest mountains are located in the Jayawijaya Mountains and the Sudirman Range in Papua. The highest peak, Puncak Jaya (4884 m), is located in the Sudirman Mountains.

Tectonically, Indonesia is highly unstable. It lies on the Pacific Ring of Fire where the Indo-Australian Plate and the Pacific Plate are pushed under the Eurasian plate where they melt at about 100 km deep. A string of volcanoes stretches from Sumatra to the Banda Sea. While the volcanic ash has resulted in fertile soils, it makes agricultural conditions unpredictable in some areas. A string of volcanoes runs through Sumatra, Java, Bali and Nusa Tenggara, and then loops around through to the Banda Islands of Maluku to northeastern Sulawesi. Of the 400 volcanoes, approximately 150 are active. Between 1972 and 1991, twenty-nine volcanic eruptions were recorded, mostly on Java. The two most violent volcanic eruptions in modern times occurred in Indonesia; in 1815 Mount Tambora in Sumbawa erupted killing 92,000 and in 1883, Krakatau, erupted killing 36,000.

== Time zones ==

The keeping of standard time is divided into three time zones: 
*Western Indonesian Time/WIT (Indonesian: Waktu Indonesia Barat/WIB) (UTC+7)
**WIB is observed in islands of Sumatra, Java, provinces of West Kalimantan and Central Kalimantan
*Central Indonesian Time/CIT (Waktu Indonesia Tengah/WITA) (UTC+8)
**WITA is observed in islands of Sulawesi, Bali, provinces of East Nusa Tenggara, West Nusa Tenggara, East Kalimantan and South Kalimantan
*Eastern Indonesian Time/EIT (Waktu Indonesia Timur/WIT) (UTC+9).
**WIT is observed in provinces of Maluku, North Maluku, Papua and West Papua.

== Climate ==

The Lesser Sunda Islands, Indonesia

Lying along the equator, Indonesia's climate tends to be relatively even year-round. The country experiences two seasons&mdash;a wet season and a dry season&mdash;with no extremes of summer or winter. For most of Indonesia, the wet season falls between October and April with the dry season between May and September. Some regions, such as Kalimantan and Sumatra, experience only slight differences in rainfall and temperature between the seasons, whereas others, such as Nusa Tenggara, experience far more pronounced differences with droughts in the dry season, and floods in the wet. Rainfall in Indonesia is plentiful, particularly in west Sumatra, northwest Kalimantan, west Java, and western New Guinea. 

Parts of Sulawesi and some islands closer to Australia, such as Sumba and Timor, are drier, however, these are exceptions. The almost uniformly warm waters that make up 81% of Indonesia's area ensure that temperatures on land remain fairly constant. The coastal plains averaging 28 C, the inland and mountain areas averaging 26 C, and the higher mountain regions, 23 C. The area's relative humidity ranges between 70 and 90%. Winds are moderate and generally predictable, with monsoons usually blowing in from the south and east in June through October and from the northwest in November through March. Typhoons and large scale storms pose little hazard to mariners in Indonesia waters; the major danger comes from swift currents in channels, such as the Lombok and Sape straits.

==Environmental issues==

For centuries, the geographical resources of the Indonesian archipelago have been exploited in ways that fall into consistent social and historical patterns. One cultural pattern consists of the formerly Indianized, rice-growing peasants in the valleys and plains of Sumatra, Java, and Bali; another cultural complex is composed of the largely Islamic coastal commercial sector; a third, more marginal sector consists of the upland forest farming communities which exist by means of subsistence swidden agriculture. To some degree, these patterns can be linked to the geographical resources themselves, with abundant shoreline, generally calm seas, and steady winds favoring the use of sailing vessels, and fertile valleys and plains&mdash;at least in the Greater Sunda Islands&mdash;permitting irrigated rice farming. The heavily forested, mountainous interior hinders overland communication by road or river, but fosters slash-and-burn agriculture.

Indonesia's high population and rapid industrialisation present serious environmental issues, which are often given a lower priority due to high poverty levels and weak, under-resourced governance. Issues include large-scale deforestation (much of it illegal) and related wildfires causing heavy smog over parts of western Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore; over-exploitation of marine resources; and environmental problems associated with rapid urbanization and economic development, including air pollution, traffic congestion, garbage management, and reliable water and waste water services. Deforestation and the destruction of peatlands make Indonesia the world's third largest emitter of greenhouse gases. Habitat destruction threatens the survival of indigenous and endemic species, including 140 species of mammals identified by the World Conservation Union (IUCN) as threatened, and 15 identified as critically endangered, including the Sumatran Orangutan. 

In 1970, 15% of Indonesians lived in cities compared to over 30% today, and this increases pressure on the urban environment. Industrial pollution is increasing, particularly in Java, and the increasing affluence of the growing middle class drives a rapid increase in the number of motor vehicles and associated emissions. Garbage and waste water services are being placed under increasing pressure. Reliance on septic systems or effluent disposal in open canals and river systems remains the norm, and is a major polluter of water resources. Very few Indonesians have access to safe drinking water and must boil it before use.

==Area and boundaries==
Area:
total land area: 1,904,569 km2 (land: 1,811,569 km2,
inland water: 93,000 km2)
territorial area: 5,193,250 km2 
total area (including exclusive economic zone): around 7.9 million km2

Land boundaries:
total: 2,830 km
border countries: Malaysia 1,782 km, Papua New Guinea 820 km, East Timor 228 km
Other nearby countries: India NW of Aceh, Australia, Singapore, Philippines, Brunei.

Coastline: 54,716 km

Maritime claims: measured from claimed archipelagic baselines
exclusive economic zone: 200 nmi
territorial sea: 12 nmi

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m(sea surface level), Wetar Basin in east of Banda Sea at -7,440 m (northwest of Tanimbar Islands & southeast of Ceram Island), where subduction zone is
highest point: Puncak Jaya (also known as Carstenz Pyramid) 4,884 m

Land use:
arable land: 12.34%
permanent crops: 10.5%
other: 77.16% (2011)

Irrigated land: 67,220 km2 (2005)

Total renewable water resources: 2,019 km3 (2011)

== References ==

== External links ==
*Digital Atlas of Indonesian History by Robert Cribb from 17th century and earlier
* "Map of a Part of China, the Philippine Islands, the Isles of Sunda, the Moluccas, the Papuans" features a map of Indonesia from around 1760 

* 
* 

 



[[Demographics of Indonesia]]

The population of Indonesia according to the 2010 national census is 237.6 million, Central Bureau of Statistics: Census 2010, retrieved 17 January 2011 with 58% living on the island of Java, the world's most populous island. 

Despite a fairly effective family planning program that has been in place since the 1967, Indonesia's population is projected to surpass USA and become the biggest after China and India by 2043. For the decade ending in 2010, Indonesia's population growth was 1.49 percent. Some say family planning should be revitalized based on the 1967 program to avoid Indonesia becoming the world's third most populous country, but this aim has faced a hurdle of religiously-based opinion that to follow family planning is equivalent to not being grateful to God. 

Indonesia includes numerous ethnic, cultural and linguistic groups, some of which are related to each other. Since independence, Indonesian (a form of Malay and official national language) is the language of most written communication, education, government, and business. Many local ethnic languages are the first language of most Indonesians and still important.

==Population==

===Population by province===

 Province Population In Cities (%) 
 Aceh 4,486,570 23.6 
 North Sumatra 12,985,075 42.4 
 West Sumatra 4,845,998 29.0 
 Riau 5,543,031 43.7 
 Jambi 3,088,618 28.3 
 South Sumatra 7,446,401 34.4 
 Bengkulu 1,713,393 29.4 
 Lampung 7,596,115 21.0 
 Bangka Belitung 1,223,048 43.0 
 Riau Islands 1,685,698 67.4 
 Banten 10,644,030 52.2 
 Jakarta 9,588,198 100.0 
 West Java 43,021,826 50.3 
 Central Java 32,380,687 40.4 
 Yogyakarta 3,452,390 57.7 
 East Java 37,476,011 40.9 
 Bali 3,891,428 49.8 
 West Nusa Tenggara 4,496,855 34.8 
 East Nusa Tenggara 4,679,316 15.9 
 West Kalimantan 4,393,239 25.1 
 Central Kalimantan 2,202,599 27.5 
 South Kalimantan 3,626,119 36.3 
 East Kalimantan 3,550,586 57.6 
 North Sulawesi 2,265,937 37.0 
 Gorontalo 1,038,585 25.5 
 Central Sulawesi 2,633,420 19.7 
 South Sulawesi 8,032,551 29.4 
 Southeast Sulawesi 2,230,569 20.8 
 West Sulawesi 1,158,336 -- 
 Maluku 1,531,402 25.9 
 North Maluku 1,035,478 29.5 
 Papua 2,851,999 22.2 
 West Papua 760,855 -- 
 Source: Population Census 2010 

===Largest cities===

==Vital statistics==

===UN estimates World Population Prospects: The 2010 Revision ===

 Period Live births per year Deaths per year Natural change per year CBR1 CDR1 NC1 TFR1 IMR1 
 19501955 3,347,000 1,933,000 1,414,000 42.7 24.7 18.0 5.49 191.9 
 19551960 3,897,000 1,888,000 2,009,000 44.8 21.7 23.1 5.67 163.8 
 19601965 4,280,000 1,820,000 2,461,000 43.7 18.6 25.1 5.62 139.3 
 19651970 4,628,000 1,768,000 2,860,000 41.6 15.9 25.7 5.57 117.4 
 19701975 4,842,000 1,691,000 3,151,000 38.4 13.4 25.0 5.30 98.9 
 19751980 4,985,000 1,630,000 3,356,000 35.0 11.4 23.6 4.73 83.2 
 19801985 5,065,000 1,590,000 3,475,000 31.8 10.0 21.8 4.11 69.8 
 19851990 4,853,000 1,555,000 3,298,000 27.5 8.8 18.7 3.40 58.5 
 19901995 4,702,000 1,547,000 3,155,000 24.5 8.1 16.4 2.90 49.1 
 19952000 4,518,000 1,564,000 2,954,000 21.9 7.6 14.3 2.55 41.1 
 20002005 4,638,000 1,620,000 3,018,000 21.0 7.4 13.7 2.38 34.5 
 20052010 4,464,000 1,692,000 2,772,000 19.1 7.2 11.9 2.19 28.8 
 1 CBR = crude birth rate (per 1000); CDR = crude death rate (per 1000); NC = natural change (per 1000); TFR = total fertility rate (number of children per woman); IMR = infant mortality rate per 1000 births 

 Average population (in millions) Live births Deaths Natural change Crude birth rate (per 1,000) Crude death rate (per 1,000) Natural change (per 1,000) Fertility rates 
 2003 213,6 13.4 2.3 
 2004 216,4 13.3 2.3 
 2005 219,8 13.2 2.2 
 2006 222,7 13.0 2.2 
 2007 225,6 12.8 2.18 
 2008 228,5 12.5 2.17 
 2009 231,4 12.2 2.16 
 2010 238,5 13.2 2.39 
 2011 241,0 13.2 2,37 
 2012 244,2 13.1 2,35 

==Ethnic groups==

There are over 300 ethnic groups in Indonesia. 95% of those are of Native Indonesian ancestry. Javanese is the biggest one with 84 million people (42%), followed by Sundanese who amount to nearly 31 million (15%).

==Religions==

Indonesia is the world's most populous Muslim-majority nation, with almost 87.18% of Indonesians declaring Muslim in the 2010 census. Penduduk Menurut Wilayah dan Agama yang Dianut 9.87% of the population is Christian (of which more than 70% are Protestant), 1.69% are Hindu, 0.72% Buddhist, and 0.56 other. Most Indonesian Hindus are Balinese and most Buddhists in modern-day Indonesia are ethnic Chinese. 

==Languages==

Indonesian is the official language but there are many different languages native to Indonesia. According to Ethnologue, there are currently 737 living languages, ethnologue.com the most widely spoken being Javanese.

A number of Chinese dialects, most prominently Min Nan, are also spoken. The public use of Chinese, especially Chinese characters, was officially discouraged between 1966 and 1998.

==Literacy==
definition: age 15 and over and can read and write
total population: 92.81%
male: 95.5%
female: 90.4% (2011 est.)

Education is not free; however, it is compulsory for children through to grade 9. Although about 92% of eligible children are enrolled in primary school, a much smaller percentage attends full-time. About 44% of secondary school-age children attend junior high school, and some others of this age group attend vocational schools.

==CIA World Factbook demographic statistics==

The following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.

Age structure
:0-14 years: 27.7% (male 34,276,146/female 33,094,836)
:15-64 years: 66.2% (male 80,806,409/female 80,065,855)
:65 years and over: 6.1% (male 6,504,559/female 8,220,537) (2010 est.)

:0-14 years: 27.3% (male 34,165,213/female 32,978,841)
:15-64 years: 66.5% (male 82,104,636/female 81,263,055)
:65 years and over: 6.1% (male 6,654,695/female 8,446,603) (2011 est.)

Median age
:total: 27.9 years
:male: 27.4 years
:female: 28.4 years (2010 est.)

:total: 28.2 years
:male: 27.7 years
:female: 28.7 years (2011 est.)

Population growth rate
:1.097% (2010 est.)
:1.04% (2012 est.)

Urbanization
:urban population: 44% of total population (2010)
:rate of urbanization: 3.3% annual rate of change (2005-10 est.)
:rate of urbanization: 1.7% annual rate of change (2010-15 est.)

Sex ratio
:at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
:under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
:15-64 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
:65 years and over: 0.79 male(s)/female
:total population: 1 male(s)/female (2010 est.)

Life expectancy at birth
:total population: 71.05 years
:male: 68.53 years
:female: 73.69 years (2010 est.)

HIV/AIDS
: Adult prevalence rate: 0.2% (2007 est.)
: People living with HIV/AIDS: 270,000 (2007 est.)
: HIV/AIDS deaths: 8,700 (2007 est.)

Nationality
:noun: Indonesian(s)
:adjective: Indonesian
:Ethnic groups: Javanese 40.6%, Sundanese 15%, Madurese 3.3%, Minangkabau 2.7%, Betawi 2.4%, Bugis 2.4%, Banten 2%, Banjar 1.7%, other or unspecified 29.9% (2000 census)

Religions
:Muslim 86.1%, Protestant 5.7%, Roman Catholic 3%, Hindu 1.8%, other or unspecified 3.4% (2000 census)

Languages
:Indonesian (official, a form of Malay influenced from other languages in Indonesia), local languages (the most widely spoken of which is Javanese).

School life expectancy (primary to tertiary education)
:total: 11 years
:male: 12 years
:female: 11 years (2005)

Education expenditures
:3.6% of GDP (2006)

==See also==

* Culture of Indonesia
* Native Indonesians
* Overseas Indonesian
* Transmigration program

==References==

==External links==
*Indonesian Central Bureau of Statistics 
* CIA World Factbook article on Indonesia
* On Indonesians of Arab descent
* United Nations "World Population Prospects": Country Profile - Indonesia

 

[[Politics of Indonesia]]

Politics of Indonesia takes place in a framework of a presidential representative democratic republic, whereby the President of Indonesia is both head of state and head of government, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the two People's Representative Councils. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.
The 1945 constitution provided for a limited separation of executive, legislative and judicial power. The governmental system has been described as "presidential with parliamentary characteristics." King, Blair. A Inside Indonesia:Constitutional tinkering: The search for consensus is taking time access date 2009-05-23 Following the Indonesian riots of May 1998 and the resignation of President Suharto, several political reforms were set in motion via amendments to the Constitution of Indonesia, which resulted in changes to all branches of government.

==Reform process==
Map showing the parties/organisations with the largest vote share per province in Indonesia's elections from 1971 to 2009

A constitutional reform process lasted from 1999 to 2002, with four constitutional amendments producing important changes. Denny Indrayana (2008), pp. 360-361 

Among these are term limits of up to two five-year terms for the President and Vice President, and measures to institute checks and balances. The highest state institution is the People's Consultative Assembly (MPR), whose functions previously included electing the president and vice president (since 2004 the president has been elected directly by the people), establishing broad guidelines of state policy, and amending the constitution. The 695-member MPR includes all 550 members of the People's Representative Council (DPR) (the House of Representatives) plus 130 "regional representatives" elected by the twenty-six provincial parliaments and sixty-five appointed members from societal groups Denny Indrayana (2008), pp. 361-362 

The DPR, which is the premier legislative institution, originally included 462 members elected through a mixed proportional/district representational system and thirty-eight appointed members of the armed forces (TNI) and police (POLRI). TNI/POLRI representation in the DPR and MPR ended in 2004. Societal group representation in the MPR was eliminated in 2004 through further constitutional change. Denny Indrayana (2008), pp. 293-296 

Having served as rubberstamp bodies in the past, the DPR and MPR have gained considerable power and are increasingly assertive in oversight of the executive branch. Under constitutional changes in 2004, the MPR became a bicameral legislature, with the creation of the Dewan Perwakilan Daerah (DPD), in which each province is represented by four members, although its legislative powers are more limited than those of the DPR. Through his appointed cabinet, the president retains the authority to conduct the administration of the government. Denny Indrayana (2008), pp. 265, 361, 441 

A general election in June 1999 produced the first freely elected national, provincial and regional parliaments in over forty years. In October 1999 the MPR elected a compromise candidate, Abdurrahman Wahid, as the country's fourth president, and Megawati Sukarnoputri &mdash; a daughter of Sukarno, the country's first president &mdash; as the vice president. Megawati's PDI-P party had won the largest share of the vote (34%) in the general election, while Golkar, the dominant party during the Soeharto era, came in second (22%). Several other, mostly Islamic parties won shares large enough to be seated in the DPR. Further democratic elections took place in 2004 and 2009.
The Indonesian political system before and after the constitutional amendments

==Executive branch==

|President
|Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono
|DPD
|20 October 2004
|-
|Vice-president
|Boediono
|Non-Party
|20 October 2009

The president and vice president are selected by vote of the citizens for five-year terms. Prior to 2004, they were chosen by People's Consultative Assembly. The last election was held 8 July 2009. The president heads the United Indonesia Cabinet (Kabinet Indonesia Bersatu)
The President of Indonesia is directly elected for a maximum of two five-year terms, and is the head of state, commander-in-chief of Indonesian armed forces and responsible for domestic governance and policy-making and foreign affairs. The president appoints a cabinet, who do not have to be elected members of the legislature. Denny Indrayana (2008), pp. 361, 443, 440 

==Legislative branch==

The legislative building complex
People's Representative Council.
The People's Consultative Assembly (, MPR) is the legislative branch in Indonesia's political system. Following elections in 2004, the MPR became a bicameral parliament, with the creation of the DPD as its second chamber in an effort to increase regional representation. Denny Indrayana (2008), pp. 264-265, 367 The Regional Representatives Council (, DPD) is the upper house of The People's Consultative Assembly. The lower house is The People's Representative Council (, DPR), sometimes referred to as the House of Representatives, which has 550 members, elected for a five-year term by proportional representation in multi-member constituencies.

==Political parties and elections==

The General Elections Commission (, KPU ) is the body responsible for running both parliamentary and presidential elections in Indonesia. Article 22E(5) of the Constitution rules that the Commission is national, permanent, and independent. Prior to the General Election of 2004, KPU was made up of members who were also members of political parties. However, members of KPU must now be non-partisan.

==Judicial branch==
The Indonesian Supreme Court () is the highest level of the judicial branch. Its judges are appointed by the president. The Constitutional Court rules on constitutional and political matters (), while a Judicial Commission () oversees the judges. Denny Indrayana (2008), p266 - 267 

==Foreign relations==

During the regime of president Suharto, Indonesia built strong relations with the United States and had difficult relations with the People's Republic of China owing to Indonesia's anti-communist policies and domestic tensions with the Chinese community. It received international denunciation for its annexation of East Timor in 1978. Indonesia is a founding member of the Association of South East Asian Nations, and thereby a member of both ASEAN+3 and the East Asia Summit. Since the 1980s, Indonesia has worked to develop close political and economic ties between South East Asian nations, and is also influential in the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation. Indonesia was heavily criticized between 1975 and 1999 for allegedly suppressing human rights in East Timor, and for supporting violence against the East Timorese following the latter's secession and independence in 1999. Since 2001, the government of Indonesia has co-operated with the U.S. in cracking down on Islamic fundamentalism and terrorist groups.

==See also==

*Constitution of Indonesia
*Flag of Indonesia
*Administrative divisions of Indonesia
*List of Presidents of Indonesia
*List of Vice Presidents of Indonesia
*Foreign relations of Indonesia
*Corruption in Indonesia

==References==

==Further reading==
*Denny Indrayana (2008) Indonesian Constitutional Reform 1999-2002: An Evaluation of Constitution-Making in Transition, Kompas Book Publishing, Jakarta ISBN 978-979-709-394-5
* O'Rourke, Kevin. 2002. Reformasi: the struggle for power in post-Soeharto Indonesia. Crows Nest, NSW: Allen & Unwin. ISBN 1-86508-754-8
* Schwarz, Adam. 2000. A nation in waiting: Indonesia's search for stability. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. ISBN 0-8133-3650-3

==External links==
*Republic of Indonesia - National portal

 

Indonesia



[[Economy of Indonesia]]

Indonesia has the largest economy in Southeast Asia and is one of the emerging market economies of the world. The country is also a member of G-20 major economies and classified as a newly industrialized country. What is the G-20, g20.org. Retrieved 2009-10-6. It has a market economy in which the government plays a significant role through ownership of state-owned enterprises (the central government owns 141 enterprises) and the administration of prices of a range of basic goods including fuel, rice, and electricity. In the aftermath of the financial and economic crisis that began in mid-1997 the government took custody of a significant portion of private sector assets through acquisition of nonperforming bank loans and corporate assets through the debt restructuring process. Since 1999 the economy has recovered and growth has accelerated to over 4%-6% in recent years. 

Indonesia regained its investment grade rating from Fitch Rating in late 2011, and from Moody's Rating in early 2012, after losing its investment grade rating in December 1997 at the onset of the Asian financial crisis which Indonesia spent more than Rp450 trillion ($50 billion) to bail out lenders from banks. Fitch raised Indonesia's long-term and local currency debt rating to BBB- from BB+ with both ratings is stable. Fitch also predicted that economy will grow at least 6.0% on average per year through 2013, despite a less conducive global economic climate. Moodys raised Indonesia's foreign and local currency bond ratings to Baa3 from Ba1 with a stable outlook. In the year 2012, Indonesia edged out India to emerge as second fastest G-20 major economy just behind China.

==History==
In the 1960s, the economy deteriorated drastically as a result of political instability. They had a young and inexperienced government, which resulted in severe poverty and hunger. By the time of Sukarno's downfall in the mid-1960s, the economy was in chaos with 1,000% annual inflation, shrinking export revenues, crumbling infrastructure, factories operating at minimal capacity, and negligible investment. Following President Sukarno's downfall the New Order administration brought a degree of discipline to economic policy that quickly brought inflation down, stabilized the currency, rescheduled foreign debt, and attracted foreign aid and investment. (See Berkeley Mafia). Indonesia was until recently Southeast Asia's only member of OPEC, and the 1970s oil price raises provided an export revenue windfall that contributed to sustained high economic growth rates, averaging over 7% from 1968 to 1981. Schwarz (1994), pp. 527. High levels of regulation and a dependence on declining oil prices, growth slowed to an average of 4.3% per annum between 1981 and 1988. A range of economic reforms were introduced in the late 1980s including a managed devaluation of the rupiah to improve export competitiveness, and de-regulation of the financial sector, (Schwarz (1994), pages 5257) Foreign investment flowed into Indonesia, particularly into the rapidly developing export-oriented manufacturing sector, and from 1989 to 1997, the Indonesian economy grew by an average of over 7%. Schwarz (1994), pages 5257. 

GDP per capita grew 545% from 1970 to 1980 as a result of the sudden increase in oil export revenues from 1973 to 1979. 

Suharto, the 2nd president of Indonesia. Under his New Order administration, the country enjoyed the sustained economic development from 1970s to 1996.

High levels of economic growth from 19871997 masked a number of structural weaknesses in Indonesia's economy. Growth came at a high cost in terms of weak and corrupt institutions, severe public indebtedness through mismanagement of the financial sector, the rapid depletion of Indonesias natural resources, and a culture of favors and corruption in the business elite. Corruption particularly gained momentum in the 1990s, reaching to the highest levels of the political hierarchy as Suharto became the most corrupt leader according to Transparency International's corrupt leaders list. As a result, the legal system was very weak, and there was no effective way to enforce contracts, collect debts, or sue for bankruptcy. Banking practices were very unsophisticated, with collateral-based lending the norm and widespread violation of prudential regulations, including limits on connected lending. Non-tariff barriers, rent-seeking by state-owned enterprises, domestic subsidies, barriers to domestic trade and export restrictions all created economic distortions.

===Asian Financial Crisis===
The Asian financial crisis that began to affect Indonesia in mid-1997 became an economic and political crisis. Indonesia's initial response was to float the rupiah, raise key domestic interest rates, and tighten fiscal policy. In October 1997, Indonesia and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) reached agreement on an economic reform program aimed at macroeconomic stabilization and elimination of some of the country's most damaging economic policies, such as the National Car Program and the clove monopoly, both involving family members of President Soeharto. The rupiah remained weak, however, and President Soeharto was forced to resign in May 1998. In August 1998, Indonesia and the IMF agreed on an Extended Fund Facility (EFF) under President B.J Habibie that included significant structural reform targets. President Abdurrahman Wahid took office in October 1999, and Indonesia and the IMF signed another EFF in January 2000. The new program also has a range of economic, structural reform and governance targets.

The effects of the financial and economic crisis were severe. By November 1997, rapid currency depreciation had seen public debt reach US$60 bn, imposing severe strains on the government's budget. In 1998, real GDP contracted by 13.1%. The economy reached its low point in mid-1999 and real GDP growth for the year was 0.8%. Inflation reached 72% in 1998 but slowed to 2% in 1999.

The rupiah, which had been in the Rp 2,600/USD1 range at the start of August 1997 fell to 11,000/USD1 by January 1998, with spot rates around 15,000 for brief periods during the first half of 1998. It returned to 8,000/USD1 range at the end of 1998 and has generally traded in the Rp 8,00010,000/USD1 range ever since, with fluctuations that are relatively predictable and gradual.

===Post Suharto===
In late 2004 Indonesia faced a 'mini-crisis' due to international oil prices rises and imports. The currency reached Rp 12,000/USD1 before stabilizing. The government was forced to cut its massive fuel subsidies, which were planned to cost $14 billion for 2005, in October. This led to a more than doubling in the price of consumer fuels, resulting in double-digit inflation. The situation had stabilized, but the economy continued to struggle with inflation at 17% in 2005.

For 2006, Indonesia's economic outlook was more positive. Economic growth accelerated to 5.1% in 2004 and reached 5.6% in 2005. Real per capita income has reached fiscal year 1996/1997 levels. Growth was driven primarily by domestic consumption, which accounts for roughly three-fourths of Indonesia's gross domestic product. The Jakarta Stock Exchange was the best performing market in Asia in 2004 up by 42%. Problems that continue to put a drag on growth include low foreign investment levels, bureaucratic red tape, and very widespread corruption which causes 51.43 trillion Rupiah or 5.6573 billion US Dollar or approximately 1.4% of GDP to be lost on a yearly basis. However, there is very strong optimism with the conclusion of peaceful elections during the year 2004 and the election of the reformist president Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono.

The unemployment rate (in February 2007) was 9.75%. Despite a slowing global economy, Indonesias economic growth accelerated to a ten-year high of 6.3% in 2007. This growth rate was sufficient to reduce poverty from 17.8% to 16.6% based on the Governments poverty line and reversed the recent trend towards jobless growth, with unemployment falling to 8.46% in February 2008. Unlike many of its more export-dependent neighbors, it has managed to skirt the recession, helped by strong domestic demand (which makes up about two-thirds of the economy) and a government fiscal stimulus package of about 1.4% of GDP, announced earlier this year.
After India and China, Indonesia is currently the third fastest growing economy in the Group of Twenty (G20) industrialized and developing economies. The $512 billion economy expanded 4.4% in the first quarter from a year earlier and last month, the IMF revised its 2009 forecast for the country to 3-4% from 2.5%. Indonesia enjoyed stronger fundamentals with the authorities implemented wide-ranging economic and financial reforms, including a rapid reduction in public and external debt, strengthening of corporate and banking sector balance sheets and reducing bank vulnerabilities through higher capitalization and better supervision. 

The current unemployment rate of Indonesia for 2012 is at 6% as per Vice-President of Indonesia Dr. Boediono. 
 
 

==Investment==

Since the late 1980s, Indonesia has made significant changes to its regulatory framework to encourage economic growth. This growth was financed largely from private investment, both foreign and domestic. U.S. investors dominated the oil and gas sector and undertook some of Indonesia's largest mining projects. In addition, the presence of US banks, manufacturers, and service providers expanded, especially after the industrial and financial sector reforms of the 1980s. Other major foreign investors included India, Japan, the United Kingdom, Singapore, the Netherlands, Qatar, Hong Kong, Taiwan and South Korea.

The economic crisis made continued private financing imperative but problematic. New foreign investment approvals fell by almost two-thirds between 1997 and 1999. The crisis further highlighted areas where additional reform was needed. Frequently cited areas for improving the investment climate were establishment of a functioning legal and judicial system, adherence to competitive processes, and adoption of internationally acceptable accounting and disclosure standards. Despite improvements in the laws in recent years, Indonesia's intellectual property rights regime remains weak; lack of effective enforcement is a major concern. Under Suharto, Indonesia had moved toward private provision of public infrastructure, including electric power, toll roads, and telecommunications. The financial crisis brought to light serious weaknesses in the process of dispute resolution, however, particularly in the area of private infrastructure projects. Although Indonesia continued to have the advantages of a large labor force, abundant natural resources and modern infrastructure, private investment in new projects largely ceased during the crisis.

As of 28 June 2010, the Indonesia Stock Exchange had 341 listed companies with a combined market capitalization of $269.9 billion. Bloomberg Terminal As at November 2010, two thirds of the market capitalization was in the form of foreign funds and only around 1% of the Indonesian population have stock investments. Efforts are further being made to improve the business and investment environment. Within the World Bank's Doing Business Survey, Indonesia rose to 122 out of 178 countries in 2010, from 129 in the previous year. Despite these efforts, the rank is still below regional peers and an unfavourable investment climate persists. For example, potential foreign investors and their executive staff cannot maintain own bank accounts in Indonesia, unless they are tax-paying local residents (paying tax in Indonesia for their worldwide income).

From 1990 to 2010, Indonesian companies have been involved in 3,757 mergers and acquisitions as either acquiror or target with a total known value of $137bn. In 2010, 609 transactions have been announced which is a new record. Numbers had increased by 19% compared to 2009. The value of deals in 2010 was 17 bil. USD which is the second highest number ever. In the entire year of 2012, Indonesia realised total investments $32.5 billion, surpassing its annual target $25 billion, Investment Coordinating Board (BKPM) reported on January 22. The primary investments were in the mining, transport and chemicals sectors. 

 

In 2011, the Indonesian government announced a new Masterplan (known as the MP3EI, or Masterplan Perceptatan dan Perluasan Pembangunan Ekonomi Indonesia, the Masterplan to Accelerate and Expand Economic Development in Indonesia). The aim of the Masterplan was to encourage increased investment, particularly in infrastructure projects across Indonesia. A copy of the Masterplan is available at the website of the Indonesian Coordinating Ministry for Economic Affairs. 

==Economic relations with the United States==
Graphical depiction of Indonesia's product exports in 28 color-coded categories.
Indonesian exports in 2006
U.S. exports to Indonesia in 1999 totaled $2.0 billion, down significantly from $4.5 billion in 1997. The main exports were construction equipment, machinery, aviation parts, chemicals, and agricultural products. U.S. imports from Indonesia in 1999 totaled $9.5 billion and consisted primarily of clothing, machinery and transportation equipment, petroleum, natural rubber, and footwear. Economic assistance to Indonesia is coordinated through the Consultative Group on Indonesia (CGI), formed in 1989. It includes 19 donor countries and 13 international organizations that meet annually to coordinate donor assistance.

The U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) has provided development assistance to Indonesia since 1950. Initial assistance focused on the most urgent needs of the new republic, including food aid, infrastructure rehabilitation, health care, and training. Through the 1970s, a time of great economic growth in Indonesia, USAID played a major role in helping the country achieve self-sufficiency in rice production and in reducing the birth rate.

USAID's current program aims to support Indonesia as it recovers from the financial crisis by providing food aid, employment generating activities, and maintaining critical public health services. USAID is also providing technical advisers to help the Indonesian Government implement economic reforms and fiscal decentralization and is supporting democratization and civil society development activities through non-governmental organizations.

==Macro-economic trend==
This is a chart of trend of gross domestic product of Indonesia at market prices by the IMF with figures in millions of rupiah.

 Year GDP USD exchange(rupiah) Inflation index(2007=100) Nominal Per Capita GDP(as % of USA) PPP Per Capita GDP(as % of USA) 1980 60,143.191 627 10 5.25 5.93 1985 112,969.792 1,111 11 3.47 5.98 1990 233,013.290 1,843 16 3.01 6.63 1995 502,249.558 2,249 24 4.11 8.14 2000 1,389,769.700 8,396 53 2.32 6.92 2005 2,678,664.096 9,705 83 3.10 7.51 2010 6,422,918.230 8,555 121 6.38 9.05 

For purchasing power parity comparisons, the US dollar is exchanged at 3,094.57 rupiah only.

Mean wages were $2.32 per manhour in 2009.

===Inflation===
In 2011, Indonesia's inflation rate was 3.79 percent, below the government-set target of 5.65 percent. It was the lowest inflation rate since 1998.

==Structure of the economy==

Structure of the Indonesian economy, 2006 data Gross Domestics Product 

 Sector Subsector Output 2006(Rp trillion) Increase since 2003(%) Agriculture, etc. Food crops 213 35 Estate crops 63 34 Livestock, etc. 51 27 Forestry 30 63 Fisheries 73 60 Mining Oil and gas 188 97 Non oil and gas 131 145 Quarrying 36 87 Manufacturing Oil and gas manufacturing Petroleum refining 120 139 Natural gas 54 94 Quarrying 213 35 Non oil and gas Food, tobacco, beverages 213 38 Textiles, footwear, etc. 91 34 Wood, wood products 44 48 Paper, printing 40 43 Fertilisers, chemicals, rubber 96 68 Cement, non-metallic quarry 29 50 Iron, steel, basic metals 20 52 Transport equipment, machinery 222 87 Other manufacturing 7 67 Electricity, gas, water Electricity 21 51 Gas 5 119 Water supply 4 43 Construction Construction, building 249 98 Trade, hotels, restaurants Trade, wholesale and retail 387 48 Hotels 17 52 Restaurants 92 45 Transport, communication Transport Road 81 106 Sea 16 43 Rivers, ferries 5 54 Air 15 96 Other 2 49 Communication Communications 88 123 Finance, real estate, business Banking 98 31 Non-bank finance 27 87 Associated services 2 82 Real estate 98 72 Business services 47 71 Other services Public sector Government, defence 104 63 Private sector Social, community services 60 92 Amusement, recreation 10 46 Personal, household services 100 69 

Source: Indonesian Statistics Bureau (Biro Pusat Statistik), annual production data.

===Agriculture, livestock, forestry and fishery===

Main statistics on output in 2006 are provided in the table above.

===Hydrocarbons===

Indonesia was the only Asian member of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) outside of the Middle East until 2008 and is currently a net oil importer. In 1999, Crude and condensate output averaged 1.5 Moilbbl per day, and in the 1998 calendar year the oil and gas sector, including refining, contributed approximately 9% to GDP. As of 2005, Indonesian crude oil and condensate output was 1.07 Moilbbl per day. This is a substantial decline from the 1990s, due primarily to aging oil fields and a lack of investment in oil production equipment. This decline in production has been accompanied by a substantial increase in domestic consumption, about 5.4% per year, leading to an estimated US$1.2 billion cost for importing oil in 2005.

The state owns all petroleum and mineral rights. Foreign firms participate through production-sharing and work contracts. Oil and gas contractors are required to finance all exploration, production, and development costs in their contract areas; they are entitled to recover operating, exploration, and development costs out of the oil and gas produced.

Indonesia's fuel production has declined significantly over the years, owing to aging oil fields and lack of investment in new equipment. As a result, despite being an exporter of crude oil, Indonesia is now a net importer of oil products. It had previously subsidized fuel prices to keep prices low, costing US$ 7 billion in 2004 . The current president has mandated a significant reduction of government subsidy of fuel prices in several stages . The government has stated the cuts in subsidies are aimed at reducing the budget deficit to 1% of gross domestic product (GDP) this year, down from around 1.6% last year. At the same time, in order to alleviate economic hardships, the government has offered one-time subsidies to qualified citizens.

Ore trucks in the mining area in West Sumbawa, NTB.

====Non-oil and gas mining====
Indonesia is the world's largest tin market. Although mineral production traditionally centered on bauxite, silver, and tin, Indonesia is expanding its copper, nickel, gold, and coal output for export markets.

In mid-1993, the Department of Mines and Energy reopened the coal sector to foreign investment, with the result that the leading Indonesian coal producer now is a joint venture between UK firms - BP and Rio Tinto. Total coal production reached 74 million metric tons in 1999, including exports of 55 million tons. From January to August 2011, the coal production was 235 million tons and targeted 2011 coal production between 340 to 370 million tons. Not all of the productions can be exported due to there are Domestic Market Obligation (DMO) regulation which should fulfill the domestic market. In 2012, the DMO is 24.72%. And starting 2014, there are no low-grade coal exports allowed, so the upgraded brown coal process which crank up the calorie value of coal from 4,500 kcal/kg to 6,100 kcal/kg will be built in South Kalimantan and South Sumatra. 

Two US firms operate three copper/gold mines in Indonesia, with a Canadian and British firm holding significant other investments in nickel and gold, respectively. In 1998, the value of Indonesian gold production was $1 billion and copper, $843 million. Receipts from gold, copper, and coal comprised 84% of the $3 billion. Earned in 1998 by the mineral mining sector. India fortune groups like Vedanta Resources and Tata Group have significant mining operations in Indonesia.

April 2011: With additional of Tayan, West Kalimantan Alumina project which produce 5% of the world's alumina production, Indonesia will be the world's second largest Alumina producer. The project will not make the ores to become Aluminium due to there are 100 types of Alumina derivatives which can be developed further by other companies in Indonesia. 

====Non-oil and gas manufacturing====
In 2010, Indonesia sales 7.6 million motorcycles, which mainly produce in Indonesia with almost 100% local components. Honda led the market with a 50.95% market share, followed by Yamaha with 41.37% market share. 

In 2011, the retail car sales total was 888,335 units, a 19.26% increase from last year. Toyota dominated the domestic car market by 35.34%, followed by Daihatsu and Mitsubishi with 15.44% and 14.56%, respectively. Since 2011, some origin local car makers have introduced some Indonesian national cars which can be categorized as Low Cost Green Car (LCGC).
In 2012, significant increased by 24.8 percent made automobile sales broke 1 million units with 1.116 million units. 

Indonesian Textile Association has reported that in 2013, the textile sector is likely to attract investment of around $175 million. In 2012, the investment in this sector was $247 million, of which only $51 million was for new textile machinery. 
 
 Exports from the textile sector in 2012 was $13.7 billion.

===Electricity, gas and water supply===

Main statistics on output in 2006 are provided in the table above.

Indonesia has expressed interest recently in possible use of nuclear plants. Indonesia has run 3 research reactors.

Garuda Indonesia airline at Adisutjipto International Airport, Yogyakarta.

===Transportation and communication===

According to Deloitte, in 2011 Internet-related activities in Indonesia have generated 1.6% of the nation's gross domestic product (GDP). This is bigger than electronic and electrical equipment exports and liquified natural gas at 1.51% and 1.45% respectively. 

===Finance, real estate and business services===

====Debt Service Ratio====
At end of June 2011, Indonesia's debt service ratio was 21.6%, well below the dangerous threshold of 30%. 

===Small businesses===
There are 50 million small businesses in Indonesia with online usage growth of 48% in 2010, so Google will open a local office in Indonesia before 2012. 

===Other services===

====General government, Private services====
Up to end of June 2011, the fixed state assets was Rp 1,265 trillion ($128 billion), while the value of state stocks was Rp 50 trillion ($5.0 billion) and other state assets was Rp 24 trillion ($2.4 billion). . 

===Indonesian migrant workers===
The most common destination of Indonesian migrant workers is Malaysia (including illegal workers). In 2010, according to a World Bank report, Indonesia was among the world's top ten remittance receiving countries with value of totalling $7 billion. 

May 2011: There are 6 million Indonesian citizens working overseas, 2.2 million of whom reside in Malaysia and another 1.5 million in Saudi Arabia. 

===Expatriate workers===
In 2011, Indonesia released 55,010 foreigners working visas, increased by 10% compared to 2010, while the number of foreign residents in Indonesia, excluding tourists and foreign emissaries was 111,752 persons, rose by 6% to last year. Who got visas for 6 months to one year were mostly Chinese, Japanese, South Korean, Indian, American and Australian. A few of them were entrepreneur who made a new businesses in Indonesia and all of the foreigners caused restaurants, bars, clubs, hotels, and apartments catering to expatriates developing well. 

==Public expenditure==
Since the Asian financial crisis in the late 1990s which contributed to the end of the Suharto regime in May 1998, Indonesias public finances have undergone a major transformation. The financial crisis caused a huge economic contraction and a commensurate decline in public spending. Debt and public subsidies increased dramatically while development spending was sharply curtailed.

Now, one decade later, Indonesia has moved out of crisis and into a situation in which the country once again has sufficient financial resources to address its development needs. This change has come about as a result of prudent macroeconomic policies, the most important of which has been very low budget deficits. Also, the way in which the government spends money has been transformed by the 2001 "big bang" decentralization, which has resulted in over one-third of all government spending being transferred to sub-national governments by 2006. Equally important, in 2005, spiraling international oil prices caused Indonesias domestic fuel subsidies to run out of control, threatening the countrys hard won macroeconomic stability. Despite the political risks of major price hikes in fuel driving more general inflation, the government took the brave decision to slash fuel subsidies.

This decision freed up an extra US$10 billion for government spending on development programs. Meanwhile, by 2006 an additional US$5 billion had become available thanks to a combination of increased revenues boosted by steady growth of the overall economy, and declining debt service payments, a hangover from the economic crisis. This meant that in 2006 the government had an extra US$15 billion to spend on development programs. The country has not seen fiscal space of such magnitude since the revenue windfall experienced during the oil boom of the mid-1970s. However, an important difference is that the 1970s oil revenue windfall was just that: a lucky and unforeseen financial boon. In contrast, the current fiscal space has been achieved as a direct result of sound and carefully thought through government policy decisions.

However, while Indonesia has made significant progress in freeing up financial resources for its development needs, and this situation is set to continue in the next few years, subsidies continue to place a heavy burden on the governments budget. The 2005 reductions on subsidies notwithstanding, total subsidies still accounted for close to US$ 30 billion in government spending in 2012, or over 15% of the total budget. 

One of the results of the Habibie government (May 1998 to August 2001) to decentralize power across the country in 2001 was that increasingly high shares of government spending have been channeled through sub-national governments. As a result, provincial and district governments in Indonesia now spend around 40% of total public funds, which represents a level of fiscal decentralization that is even higher than the OECD average.

Given the level of decentralization that has occurred in Indonesia and the fiscal space now available, the Indonesian government has a unique opportunity to revamp the countrys neglected public services. If carefully managed, this could allow the lagging regions of eastern Indonesian to catch up with other more affluent areas of the country in terms of social indicators. It could also enable Indonesian to focus on the next generation of reforms, namely improving quality of public services and targeted infrastructure provision. In effect, the correct allocation of public funds and the careful management of those funds once they have been allocated have become the main issues for public spending in Indonesia going forward.

For example, while education spending has now reached 17.2% of total public spending  the highest share of any sector and a share of 3.9% of GDP in 2006, compared with only 2.0% of GDP in 2001  in contrast total public health spending remains below 1.0% of GDP. Meanwhile, public infrastructure investment has still not fully recovered from its post-crisis lows and remains at only 3.4% of GDP. One other area of concern is that the current level of expenditure on administration is excessively high. Standing at 15% in 2006, this suggests a significant waste of public resources. http://www.dlprog.org/ftp/download/Public%20Folder/test%20folder/The%20Politics%20of%20Free%20Public%20Services%20in%20Decentralised%20Indonesia.pdf 

==Economic challenges==
It was only until changes in government in 1965 that triggered off essential progress in lowering the countrys poverty rate. From a steep recession in 1965 with an 8% decline in GDP, the country began to develop economically in the 1970s, earning much benefit from the oil shock. This development continued throughout the 1980s and into the 1990s despite the oil counter-shocks. During these periods, GDP level rose at an average rate of 7.1%. Indonesia saw consistent growth, with the official poverty rate falling from 60% to 15%. Despite this development, an estimated 13.33% of the population (2010 estimate) remains below the poverty line. 

===Labor unrest===
As of 2011 labor militancy was increasing in Indonesia with a major strike at the Grasberg mine and numerous strikes elsewhere. A common issue was attempts by foreign-owned enterprises to evade Indonesia's strict labor laws by calling their employees contract workers. The New York Times expressed concern that Indonesia's cheap labor advantage might be lost. However, a large pool of unemployed who will accept substandard wages and conditions remains available. One factor in the increase of militancy is increased awareness via the internet of prevailing wages in other countries and the generous profits foreign companies are making in Indonesia. 

===Inequality===
Economic disparity and the flow of natural resource profits to Jakarta has led to discontent and even contributed to separatist movements in areas such as Aceh and Irian Jaya. Geographically, the poorest fifth regions account for just 8% of consumption, while the richest fifth account for 45%. While there are new laws on decentralization that may address the problem of uneven growth and satisfaction partially, there are many hindrances in putting this new policy into practice. 

At the Indonesian Chamber of Commerce and Industry (Kadin) meeting at Makassar on April 2011, Disadvantaged Regions Minister said there are 184 regencies classified as disadvantaged areas in Indonesia with around 120 regencies were located in the eastern part of Indonesia. 

===Inflation===
Inflation has long been another problem in Indonesia. Because of political turmoil, the country had once suffered hyperinflation, with 1,000% annual inflation between 1964 and 1967, By the time of Sukarno's downfall in the mid-1960s, the economy was in chaos with 1,000% annual inflation, shrinking export revenues, crumbling infrastructure, factories operating at minimal capacity, and negligible investment. Schwarz (1994), pages 5257 and this had been enough to create severe poverty and hunger. Even though the economy recovered very quickly during the first decade of New Order administration (19701981), never once was the inflation less than 10% annually. The inflation slowed during mid-1980s, however, the economy was also languid due to the decrease of oil price that reduced its export revenue dramatically. The economy was again experiencing rapid growth between 1989-1997 due to the improving export-oriented manufacturing sector, still the inflation rate was higher than economic growth, and this caused widening gap among several Indonesians. The inflation peaked in 1998 during the Asian financial crisis, with over 58%, causing the raise in poverty level as bad as the 1960s crisis. During the economic recovery and growth in recent years, the government has been trying to decline the inflation rate. However, it seems that Indonesian inflation has been affected by the global fluctuation and domestic market competition. As of 2010, the inflation rate was approximately 7%, when its economic growth was 6%. To date, inflation is affecting Indonesian lower middle class, especially those who can't afford food after price hikes. 

==Best performance==
Based on the regional administration implementation performance evaluation of 2009, by an order the best performance were:
* 3 Provinces: North Sulawesi, South Sulawesi and Central Java;
* 10 Districts: Jombang and Bojonegoro in East Java Province, Sragen and Pacitan in Central Java, Boalemo in Gorontalo, Enrekang in South Sulawesi, Buleleng in Bali, Luwu Utara in South Sulawesi, Karanganyar in Central Java and Kulon Progo in Yogyakarta;
* 10 Cities: Surakarta and Semarang in Central Java, Banjar in West Java, Yogyakarta city in Yogyakarta, Cimahi in West Java, Sawahlunto in West Sumatra, Probolinggo and Mojokerto in East java, Sukabumi and Bogor in West Java. 

Based on JBIC Fiscal Year 2010 survey (22nd Annual Survey Report) found that in 2009, Indonesia has the highest satisfaction level in net sales and profits for the Japanese companies. http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2011/06/06/the-power-nature-and-indonesias-economy.html 

==High Net Worth Individuals==
According to Asia Wealth Report, Indonesia has the highest growth rate of High Net Worth Individuals (HNWI) predicted among the 10 most Asian economies. By 2015, Indonesia will have up to 99,000 wealthy individuals with total wealth $478 billion. HNWI means individuals with $1 million or more in investable assets excluding their primary residence. 

==Other data==
Agriculture - products:
rice, cassava (tapioca), peanuts, rubber, cocoa, coffee, palm oil, copra; poultry, beef, pork, eggs

Exchange rates:
Indonesian rupiah (IDR) per US dollar - 9,698.9 (2008), 9,143 (2007), 9,159.3 (2006), 9,704.7 (2005), 8,938.9 (2004)

==See also==

* Bamboo network
* CIVETS countries
* Developing 8 Countries
* European Union-Indonesia trade relations
* G-20 major economies
* G20 developing nations
* Gas subsidies
* List of main infrastructure projects in Indonesia
* Next Eleven
* Taxation in Indonesia
* Tourism in Indonesia

==References==

==Further reading==
*

==External links==
*Indonesia Economic Aftershock from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives
*BKPM - Indonesia Investment Coordinating Board And Indonesia Investment News
*Comprehensive current and historical economic data
*World Bank Summary Trade Statistics Indonesia

 
Indonesia
Indonesia



[[Communications in Indonesia]]

Communications in Indonesia has a complex history due to the need to reach an extended archipelago of over 17,500 islands. The once important non-electronic communication methods of the past have given away to a considerable telecommunications infrastructure in contemporary Indonesia.

== History ==

Indonesia has long been using traditional forms of slayed communications between various islands and villages. It was not until the sixteenth century when the Dutch colonized Indonesia, constructing a more elaborate communication system, both within Indonesia and to other countries. The first connection to Australia was an undersea telegraph cable that was completed on 18 November 1871, connecting Java to Darwin, and eventually to the Australian Overland Telegraph Line across Australia.

After gaining Independence, Indonesia started to develop its own communication systems, generally following the rest of the world. The construction of communication towers and launch of the Palapa series of communication satellites was done during the New Order period.

== Infrastructure ==

A number of lines connect Indonesia to international communication routes. For example, the SEA-ME-WE 3 optical submarine telecommunications cable lands at both Medan and Jakarta connecting Europe with South eastern Asia (several countries up to Japan) and Australia (Perth). 

Domestically, Indonesia has good coverage for media across most major islands, although smaller and less populated Islands do not always receive attention from media companies, and rely on satellite communication.

==Media==

=== Print ===

Indonesia has a long list of print media, in the form of newspapers and magazines. Some, such as Kompas and Koran Tempo are circulated daily and are relatively simple to obtain. Others are island- or city-specific, and are usually not distributed to other regions.

=== Telephone ===

* Telephones - main lines in use: 9.99 million (2004)
* Telephones - mobile cellular: At the end of 2010, the mobile cellular penetration rate was 67 percent (22 percent at end of 2006). "Analysis: Indonesia: Mobile market", Josh Franken, Jakarta Post, 16 May 2011 CDMA use is declining in favor of GSM. 
* Telephone system: domestic service fair, international service good
**domestic: interisland microwave system and HF radio police net; domestic satellite communications system
**international: satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (1 Indian Ocean and 1 Pacific Ocean)

=== Radio ===

* Radio broadcast stations: AM 678, FM 43, shortwave 82 (1998)
* Radios: 31.5 million (1997)

=== Television ===

* Television broadcast stations: 11 national TV, 60 local TV (From AC Nielsen Report - first Semester 2005):
* Televisions: 13.75 million (1997)

=== Internet ===

* Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 24 (1999)
* Country code (Top-level domain): .id

By June 2011, all sub-districts in Indonesia will be connected to the Internet. "Internet service to reach all sub-districts in June", Antara News, 22 May 2011 

==Regulatory environment in Indonesia==

The media in Indonesia is regulated by the Ministry of Communications and Informatics.

LIRNEasia's Telecommunications Regulatory Environment (TRE) index, which summarizes stakeholders perception on certain TRE dimensions, provides insight into how conducive the environment is for further development and progress. The most recent survey was conducted in July 2008 in eight Asian countries, including Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Sri Lanka, Maldives, Pakistan, Thailand, and the Philippines. The tool measured seven dimensions: i) market entry; ii) access to scarce resources; iii) interconnection; iv) tariff regulation; v) anti-competitive practices; and vi) universal services; vii) quality of service, for the fixed, mobile and broadband sectors.

Below-average scores received in all sectors and across dimensions reflect general dissatisfaction of the TRE in Indonesia. However, this does not mean that respondents have ignored recent developments. The relatively healthy growth in mobile sector is reflected in the higher TRE scores received by the sector for most dimensions, when compared to the fixed sector. On average, the mobile sector scores best, with fixed and broadband following. 

==References==

==See also==

* National Press Monument

 



[[Transport in Indonesia]]

Pelni shipping line connects Indonesian islands.

Indonesia's transport system has been shaped over time by the economic resource base of an archipelago with thousands of islands, and the distribution of its more than 200 million people highly concentrated on a single island which is Java. Indonesia's Diversity Revisited http://cip.cornell.edu/Dienst/UI/1.0/Summarize/seap.indo/1107012385 

All transport modes play a role in the countrys transport system and are generally complementary rather than competitive.
Road transport is predominant, with a total system length of 437,759 km in 2008.
The railway system has four unconnected networks in Java and Sumatra primarily dedicated to transport bulk commodities and long-distance passenger traffic.
Sea transport is extremely important for economic integration and for domestic and foreign trade. It is well developed, with each of the major islands having at least one significant port city.
The role of inland waterways is relatively minor and is limited to certain areas of Eastern Sumatra and Kalimantan.
The function of air transport is significant, particularly where land or water transport is deficient or non-existent. It is based on an extensive domestic airline network where all major cities can be reached by passenger plane.

==Merchant marine vessels==
Pelni Shipping Routes 2006
Traditional wooden Pinisi ship still used in inter-Indonesian islands freight service.
Port of Merak, the main port from Banten, Java to Lampung, Sumatera.
Because Indonesia encompasses a sprawling archipelago, maritime shipping provides essential links between different parts of the country. Boats in common use include large container ships, a variety of ferries, passenger ships, sailing ships, and smaller motorized vessels. Traditional wooden vessel pinisi still widely used as the inter-island freight service within Indonesian archipelago. Main pinisi traditional harbours is Sunda Kelapa in Jakarta and Paotere harbour in Makassar.

Frequent ferry services cross the straits between nearby islands, especially in the chain of islands stretching from Sumatra through Java to the Lesser Sunda Islands. On the busy crossings between Sumatra, Java, and Bali, multiple car ferries run frequently twenty-four hours per day. There are also international ferry services between across the Straits of Malacca between Sumatra and Malaysia, and between Singapore and nearby Indonesian islands, such as Batam.

A network of passenger ships makes longer connections to more remote islands, especially in the eastern part of the archipelago. The national shipping line, Pelni, provides passenger service to ports throughout the country on a two to four week schedule. These ships generally provide the least expensive way to cover long distances between islands. Still smaller privately run boats provide service between islands. 

On some islands, major rivers provide a key transportation link in the absence of good roads. On Kalimantan, longboats running on the rivers are the only way to reach many inland areas.

==Waterways==

Indonesia has 21,579 km of navigable waterways (), of which about one half are on Kalimantan, and a quarter each on Sumatra and Papua. Waterways are highly needed because the rivers on these islands are not wide enough to hold medium-sized ships. In addition to this, roads and railways are not good options since Kalimantan and Papua are not like Java, which is a highly developed island. Politics and Business Indonesia http://kerrycollison.net/index.php?/archives/2805-Politics-and-Business-Mix-in-Indonesia.html With the current length of waterways, Indonesia ranked seven on the countries with longest waterways. Rank Order - Waterways https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/rankorder/2093rank.html 

== Ports and harbours ==

Major ports and harbors include Cilacap, Cirebon, Jakarta, Kupang, Palembang, Semarang, Surabaya, and Makassar. Ports are managed by the various Indonesia Port Corporations, of which there are four, numbered I through IV. Each has jurisdiction over various regions of the country, with I in the west and IV in the east.

== Roads and highways ==
Loading cargo onto a minibus
Transjakarta bus rapid transit.
Typical Indonesian style horse and cart transport in Sulawesi
A wide variety of vehicles are used for transportation on Indonesia's roads. Bus services are available in most areas connected to the road network. Between major cities, especially on Sumatra, Java, and Bali, services are frequent and direct; many services are available with no stops until the final destination. In more remote areas, and between smaller towns, most services are provided with minibuses or minivans (angkut). Buses and vans are also the primary form of transportation within cities. Often, these are operated as share taxis, running semi-fixed routes.

Many cities and towns have some form of transportation for hire available as well such as taxis. There are usually also bus services of various kinds such as the Kopaja buses and the more sophisticated Transjakarta bus rapid transit system in Jakarta. Many cities also have motorized autorickshaws (bajaj) of various kinds. Cycle rickshaws, called becak in Indonesia, are common in many cities and provide inexpensive transport. They have been blamed for causing traffic congestion and banned from most parts of central Jakarta. Horse-drawn carts are found in some cities and towns.

Due to the increasing purchasing power of Indonesians, private cars are becoming more common especially in major cities. However the growth of the number of cars increasingly outpaces the construction of new roads, resulting in frequently crippling traffic jams in large parts in major cities especially in Jakarta, which often also happen on highways. Jakarta also has one of the worst traffic jams in the world. 

Bali Mandara Toll Bridge, the longest bridge in Indonesia
Suramadu Bridge, the longest cable stayed bridge in Indonesia.
The AH2 highway is one of Indonesia's main highways. The other one is AH25 in Sumatra.

Indonesia has about 213,649 km of paved highways and about 154,711 km of unpaved highways ( estimate).

Indonesia has some highways, some of them are National Routes (25, currently only in Java and (partially) Sumatera), and some of them are freeways. All the freeways are tolled (toll road). The most expensive is the Cipularang Toll road that connects Jakarta and Bandung via Cikampek and Purwakarta.

For land transportation (including trains), Indonesia will adopt an Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) gradually since 2012. ITS Indonesia was formed in April 26, 2011. http://www.antaranews.com/en/news/74080/ri-to-adopt-its-gradually-starting-in-2012 

===National routes===

===Toll roads===
Taxi in Jakarta.
Java transportation networks
Cipularang Toll Road, part of Trans-Java Toll Road.
Here are some Indonesian toll roads (Jalan tol) :

==== Java ====
* See List of roads and highways of Java
* See Trans-Java toll road

====Sumatra====
* Belawan-Medan-Tanjung Morawa Toll Road (Belmera Toll Road)

Planned :
* Medan-Kuala Namu International Airport-Tebing Tinggi, 80 percent of the land needed for the toll road construction is owned by state plantation which it is easy to take over, whether the remaining 20 percent is owned by local residents which it is difficult to take over due to unreasonably high prices. http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2011/04/25/land-clearing-ignites-inevitable-conflict.html 
* Medan-Binjai Toll Road http://www.bpjt.net/index.php?id=54 
* Pekanbaru-Kandis-Duri-Dumai Toll Road http://www.bpjt.net/index.php?id=54 
* Palembang-Indralaya Toll Road http://www.bpjt.net/index.php?id=54 
* Tegineneng-Babatan Toll Road http://www.bpjt.net/index.php?id=54 

====Sulawesi====
* Makassar-Sultan Hasanuddin International Airport Toll Road
* Makassar Section 1,2,3,4 Toll Road

Planned:
* Manado-Bitung Toll Road http://www.bpjt.net/index.php?id=54 

====Bali====
; Serangan-Tanjung Benoa Toll Road
The toll road between Tanjung Benoa to Airport and from Airport to Serangan, all in direct line (not curve) is 12.7 kilometers and is equipped also with motorcycle lanes. The toll road is formally opened on September 23, 2013, about a week before APEC Summit in Bali is opened. 

== Railways ==
Argo train in Gambir Station.
KRL Commuter Line in Jakarta.

The majority of Indonesia's railway length is on Java, which has two major rail lines running the length of the island, as well as several minor lines. Passenger and freight service runs on these lines. There is also commuter rail service in the Jakarta metropolitan area, known as KRL Jabotabek and in Surabaya. In 2008, the government under PT Kereta Api and Angkasa Pura planned to build the airport railway from Soekarno-Hatta Airport to Manggarai (Jakarta), but project was not started until late 2013. A monorail mass transit system was under construction in Jakarta, but development ceased on 2004 due to lack of fundings, but on October 2013, groundbreaking was done, and the project has started again, which is scheduled to operate on 2016-2017. A mass rapid transit (MRT) system is under construction in Jakarta, which is scheduled to operate on 2018.

The only other areas in Indonesia having railroads are three separate regions of Sumatra, one in the north around Medan, second in the West Sumatra from Pariaman to Padang and the other in the southern trip, from Lubuk Linggau (South Sumatra) to Bandar Lampung, (Lampung).
There are no new railways in Sumatra, except new railways from Medan to the new Kuala Namu International Airport which operates since July 2013. The railways is very important because the toll road is not yet ready and only takes about 45 minutes go with trains.

The island of Kalimantan has or is to get a 122 km long railway for the transport of coal. Railway Gazette International November 2010, p56 

== Pipelines ==
Crude oil 2,505 km; petroleum products 456 km; natural gas 1,703 km (1989)

== Air transport ==
Garuda Indonesia domestic destinations
Air transportation in Indonesia serves as a critical means of connecting the thousands of islands throughout the archipelago. Jakarta's SoekarnoHatta International Airport serves as the country's main air transportation hub. However safety issues continue to be problematic. Several recent accidents have helped make Indonesia's air transport system one of the least safe in the world. "Safety woeful, admits air chief." Sydney Morning Herald online, November 2, 2007 - 2:17PM. In 2011, number of airline passengers in Indonesia stood at 66 million with domestic and international passengers stood at 58.8 million and 7.2 million respectively or a 15-percent increase on 2010s figure. 

===Airports===

Total: 676 (2012)

Airports - with paved runways
*over 3,047 m: 4
*2,438 to 3,047 m: 22
*1,524 to 2,437 m: 51
*914 to 1,523 m: 71
*under 914 m: 37

:Total: 185 (2012)

Airports - with unpaved runways
*1,524 to 2,437 m: 6
*914 to 1,523 m: 24
*under 914 m: 462

:Total: 491 (2012)

Kuala Namu International Airport, in Medan, North Sumatera, opened in July 2013.
===Heliports===
Total: 76 (2012)

===Airlines===
National airline:
*Garuda Indonesia
Other airlines
*List of airlines of Indonesia

== See also ==

* Indonesia
* Ministry of Transportation
* Public transport

==References==

 Transport in Indonesia

[[Indonesian National Armed Forces]]

The Indonesian National Armed Forces (, TNI; formerly Angkatan Bersenjata Republik Indonesia, ABRI) in 2012 comprises approximately 476,000 personnel including the Army (TNI-AD), Navy (TNI-AL) including the Indonesian Marine Corps (Korps Marinir) and the Air Force (TNI-AU).

The Indonesian Army was formed during the Indonesian National Revolution, when it undertook a guerrilla war along with informal militia. As a result of this, and the need to maintain internal security, the Army has been organized along territorial lines, aimed at defeating internal enemies of the state and potential external invaders. *http://www.tni.mil.id 

Under the 1945 Constitution, all citizens are legally entitled and obliged to defend the nation. Conscription is provided for by law, yet the Forces have been able to maintain mandated strength levels without resorting to a draft. Most enlisted personnel are recruited in their own home regions and generally train and serve most of their time in units nearby.

The Indonesian armed forces are voluntary. The available manpower fit for military service of males aged between 16 to 49 is 52,000,000, with a further 2,000,000 new suitable for service annually 

Military spending in the national budget was widely estimated 3% of GDP in 2005, but is supplemented by revenue from many military-run businesses and foundations. The Indonesian Defence force personnel does not include members of law enforcement and paramilitary personnel such as POLRI (Indonesian police) consisting of approximately 590,000 personnel, BRIMOB (police mobile brigade) of around 42,000 armed personnel, the Civil Service Police Unit, MENWA (collegiate military service) 26,000 trained personnel, and HANSIP (civil defense forces), number unknown.

== History ==

=== Formation ===
Indonesian soldiers in front of Borobudur, March 1947

Before the formation of the Indonesian Republic, the military authority in the Dutch East Indies was held by the Royal Dutch East Indies Army (KNIL). Although the KNIL is not directly responsible for the formation of the future Indonesian armed forces, and mainly took the role of foe during Indonesian National Revolution in 1945 to 1949, the KNIL had also provided military training and infrastructure for some of the future TNI officers. There were military training centers, military schools and academies in the Dutch East Indies. Next to Dutch volunteers and European mercenaries, the KNIL also recruited indigenous, especially Ambonese, Kai Islanders, Timorese, and Minahasan people. In 1940 with the Netherlands under German occupation and the Japanese pressing for access to Dutch East Indies oil supplies, the Dutch had opened up the KNIL to large intakes of previously excluded Javanese. McDonald (1980), pages 13 Some of the indigenous soldiers that had enjoyed Dutch KNIL military academy education would later become important TNI officers. For example: Suharto and Nasution.

Indonesian nationalism and militarism started to gain momentum and support in World War II during the Japanese occupation of Indonesia. To gain support from the Indonesian people in their war against the Western Allied force, Japan started to encourage and back Indonesian nationalistic movements by providing Indonesian youth with military training and weapons. On 3 October 1943, the Japanese military formed the Indonesian volunteer army called PETA (Pembela Tanah Air  Defenders of the Homeland). The Japanese intended PETA to assist their forces oppose a possible invasion by the Allies. The Japanese military training for Indonesian youth originally was meant to rally the local's support for the Japanese Empire, but later it became the significant resource for the Republic of Indonesia during Indonesian National Revolution in 1945 to 1949. It also led to the formation of the Indonesian national armed force in 1945.

General Sudirman, first commander of the Indonesian Armed Forces

The Indonesian armed forces have seen significant action since their establishment in 1945. Their first conflict was the 19451949 Indonesian National Revolution, in which the 1945 Battle of Surabaya was especially important.

At first, The Indonesian Army started out as BKR (Badan Keamanan Rakjat  People's Security Corps), which was formed in the 3rd PPKI meeting, 29 August 1945; this was an Organisation of People taking up arms in a united force to ensure security remained intact across the newly declared independent Indonesia, it was created more as a civil defense force than an army. The decision to create a "security corps and not an army, was taken to lessen the probability of the allied forces viewing it as an armed revolution and invading in full force. At surrender the Japanese had promised to return the Asian domains they had conquered to the allies, certainly not to liberate them independently.

When confrontations became sharp and hostile between Indonesia and the Allied forces, in 5 October 1945 TKR (Tentara Keamanan Rakjat  People's Security Army) was formed; this was a move taken to formalize, unite, and organize the splintered pockets of independent troopers ('laskar') across Indonesia, ensuing a more professional military approach, to contend with the Netherlands and the Allied force invaders.

In January 1946, TRI (Tentara Republik Indonesia  Republic of Indonesia Army) was formed, in a further step to professionalize the army and increase its ability to engage systematically.

In June 1947 then, TRI changed its name to TNI (Tentara Nasional Indonesia The Indonesian National Army) which is a merger between the TRI with independent troopers paramilitary people's struggle (laskar) across Indonesia.

=== Independent Indonesia ===
General Nasution congratulating General Suharto on the his appointment as acting president, 12 March 1967
From the 1950s to 1960s the Republic of Indonesia struggled to maintain its unity against local insurgencies and separatist movements in some of its provinces. From 1948 to 1962, the TNI was involved in local warfare in West Java, Aceh, and South Sulawesi against Darul Islam/Tentara Islam Indonesia (DI/TII), a militant movement aimed at establishing an Islamic state in Indonesia. The TNI also helped bring the rebellion of Republic of South Maluku to a close in 1963. Meanwhile the PRRI/Permesta rebellion holds an essential place in Indonesian military history because it was led by army officers in Sumatra and Sulawesi between 1955 and 1961.

From 1961 to 1963, the TNI was involved in the military campaign to incorporate Western New Guinea into Indonesia, which pitted the TNI against Netherlands New Guinea. From 1962 to 1965 TNI fought in the Indonesia-Malaysia Confrontation. The Indonesian killings of 19651966 directly involved the armed forces under Lt. General Suharto fighting against the Communist Party of Indonesia.

Indonesia developed a good relationship with the Soviet Union in the period of 1961-65. The Soviet Union sold 17 ships to the Indonesian Navy, the largest of which was a Sverdlov class cruiser. The size was 16,640 tons, very big compared to the current Indonesian Sigma class corvette at only 1,600 tons. Indonesia procured 12 Whiskey class submarines plus 2 supporting ships. Indonesia had more than a hundred military aircraft, 20 supersonic MiG-21s, 10 supersonic Mig-19, 49 Mig-17 and 30 MiG-15. The Soviets also supplied Indonesia with 26 Tupolev Tu-16 strategic bombers, though it is not clear what the servicability rate was. http://berdikarionline.com/opini/20100906/kejayaan-angkatan-perang-indonesia-pada-masa-bung-karno.html 

=== Under the New Order ===
During the New Order-era, the Indonesian military enjoyed certain privileges and played a significant role in Indonesian politics. The military involvement in Indonesian politics was formulated in the Dwifungsi (Dual function) doctrine of the Indonesian Armed Forces.

During the New Order-regime the "Tentara Nasional Indonesia" (Indonesian National Army/TNI) changed its name to "Angkatan Bersenjata Republik Indonesia" (Republic of Indonesia Armed Forces/ABRI) and incorporated the POLRI (Indonesian National Police).

In 1975 the Indonesia invaded East Timor, followed a year afterward by the Insurgency in Aceh, flaring on-and-off from 1976 to 2005. From the 1970s to 1990s the Indonesian military worked hard to suppress these armed insurgency and separatist movements in the provinces of Aceh and East Timor. In 1991 the Santa Cruz Massacre occurred in East Timor, tarnishing the image of the Indonesian military internationally. This incident led the United States to sever its IMET funding, which supported training for the Indonesian military.

Also in 1992, each service began to form small female units. These all-female Corps are the Women's Army Corps, the Navy Women's Corps, the Air Force Women's Corps, and the Women's Corps of the Police. These were intended to "set to work at places and in functions conform to their feminine disposition." More specifically, women were assigned to administrative work, teaching English and working to improve health and social conditions of armed forces members and their families. The women police were said to "play an important role in solving problems drug addicts and juvenile delinquents." http://lcweb2.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/r?frd/cstdy:@field(DOCID+id0171 

After the Cold War ended the Indonesian Armed Forces began to take part in United Nations peacekeeping missions. These were usually known as 'Garuda' deployments. The first was to the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia, quickly followed by a deployment as part of the United Nations Protection Force in Bosnia Herzegovina. Indonesian troops deployed to both the United Nations Operation in Somalia I and the United Nations Operation in Somalia II.

===Reformation===
Indonesian armed forces work together with US Marines personnel on distributing humanitarian aid for victims of the 2009 Padang earthquake.
After the fall of Suharto in 1998, the democratic and civil movement grew against the acute military role and involvements in Indonesian politics. As the result, the post-Suharto Indonesian military has undergone certain reformations, such as the revocation of Dwifungsi doctrine and the terminations of military controlled business. The reformation also involved the law enforcement in common civil society, which questioned the position of Indonesian police under the military corps umbrella. This reformations led to the separation of the police force from the military. In 2000, the Indonesian National Police officially regained its independence and now is a separate entity from the military. The official name of the Indonesian military also changed from "Angkatan Bersenjata Republik Indonesia" (ABRI) back to "Tentara Nasional Indonesia" (TNI).

Indonesian military continue its involvement and contribution in United Nations peacekeeping missions. After 1999, Indonesian troops went to Africa as part of the United Nations Mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo. The TNI has also served with the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, UNAMID, UNSMIS, MINUSTAH, UNISFA, UNMISS, UNMIL. 15 Prajurit TNI Ikuti Farewell Ceremony di Haiti 

Following the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake, the United States government suspended a spare parts embargo which had been in place for non-lethal equipment and military vehicles, to support the humanitarian effort in the tsunami-devastated regions of Aceh and Nias. Since then, the Indonesian Air Force has signed deals to purchase more C-130 transport aircraft and upgrade the current C-130s in the inventory. On 22 November 2005, the US announced that military ties with Indonesia would be restored in full. The decision had ended the six-year US ban on arms sales. National, World and Business News|Reuters.co.uk 

In 2009, all former Indonesian military businesses are to be surrendered to a specialist body. The Indonesian Military Business Management Body (BPBTNI) was established in effect of a stipulation in Law No.34/2004 on the Indonesian Military (TNI) which will takeover ownership and operation of all businesses owned or run by the TNI by 2009. Unlike the former National Banking Restructuring Agency (BPPN) which burdened the Indonesian state with losses, the BPBTNI would bear all losses alone. *Antara News, "TNI Businesses To Be Taken Over by Special Body", . Retrieved 29 March 2009 

From 2010 onwards, military spending in Indonesia was aligned to the Minimum Essential Force (MEF) strategic plan 2010 - 2014 requirements. Under MEF 2010 - 2014 funds of up to Rp150 trillion ($16.41 billion) to spend over 5 years to procure major weapons systems, Rp50 trillion $5.47 billion) will be used to accelerate achieving the Minimum Essential Force, Rp55 trillion ($6.02 billion) for procurement and Rp45 trillion ($4.92 billion) for maintenance and repair. Subsequent funding would be made available to fund the strategic plans of MEF 2015 - 2019 and MEF 2020 - 2024 in order to achieve the strategic goal of Minimum Essential Force.

==Political role of the military==

During the Suharto era, the military had a "dual function" (dwifungsi in Indonesian) defined as: firstly preservation and enforcement of internal and external security and sovereignty of the State and secondly, as an overseer and arbiter of government policy. This was used to justify substantial military interference in politics. Long-time president Suharto was an army general and was strongly supported by most of the military establishment. Traditionally a significant number of cabinet members had military backgrounds, while active duty and retired military personnel occupied a large number of seats in the legislature. Commanders of the various territorial commands played influential roles in the affairs of their respective regions.

Indonesia has not had a substantial conflict with its neighbours since the 19631965 Indonesia-Malaysia Confrontation, known in Indonesia as Konfrontasi with Malaysia. Possible future disputes relating to competing Malaysian-Indonesian South China Sea claims, where Indonesia has large natural gas reserves, concern the Indonesian government. As of 2007, some regional claims with neighbouring Malaysia have led to some minor sabre-rattling by both sides with a stalemate over the sovereignty of Unarang rock and the maritime boundary in the Ambalat oil block in the Celebes Sea. 

In the post-Suharto period since 1998, civilian and military leaders have advocated removing the military from politics (for example, the military's representation in the House of Representatives was reduced and finally ended), but the military's political influence remains extensive. It regularly comes to armed conflicts between the military and the police. 

==Philosophy and Doctrine==
The Indonesian military philosophy over-riding defense of the archipelago is summarily civilian-military defense, called "Total People's Defense"- consisting of a three-stage war: a short initial period in which invader would defeat a conventional Indonesian military, a long period of territorial guerrilla war followed by a final stage of expulsion- with military acting as a rallying point for defense from grass-roots village level upwards. The doctrine relies on a close bond between villager and soldier to encourage the support of the entire population and enable the military to manage all war-related resources.

The civilian population would provide logistical support, intelligence, and upkeep with some trained to join the guerrilla struggle. The armed forces regularly engage in large-scale community and rural development. The "Armed Forces Enters the Village" (AMD) program, begun in 1983 is held three times annually to organise and assist construction and development of civilian village projects. 

The current developments in Indonesia's defence policies are framed within the concept of achieving "Minimum Essential Force" or MEF by 2024. This concept of MEF was first articulated in Presidential Decree No. 7/2008 on General Policy Guidelines on State Defense Policy (Peraturan Presiden Republik Indonesia No. 7 Tahun 2008 Tentang Kebijakan Umum Pertahanan Negara) http://www.sjdih.depkeu.go.id/fulltext/2008/7TAHUN2008PERPRES.htm which came into effect on 26 January 2008. MEF is defined as a capability based defense and force level that can guarantee the attainment of immediate strategic defense interests, where the procurement priority is given to the improvement of minimum defense strength and/or the replacement of outdated main weapon systems/equipments. To achieve this aim, MEF had been restructured into a series of 3 strategic programmes with timeframes from 2010 to 2014, 2015 to 2019 and 2020 to 2024 as well as spending of up the 1.5 - 2% of the GDP.

==Organization==

The Indonesian armed forces have long been organized around territorial commands. Lowry, Bob (1993). Indonesian Defence Policy and the Indonesian Armed Forces, Canberra Papers on Strategy and Defence No.99, Strategic and Defence Studies Centre, Australian National University, 1993, p.36-40 Following independence, seven were established by 1958. No central reserve formation was formed until 1961 (when the 1st Army Corps of the Army General Reserve, CADUAD, the precursor of today's Kostrad was established). It was only after the attempted coup d'tat of 1 October 1965 and General Suharto's rise to the presidency that it became possible to integrate the armed forces and begin to develop a joint operations structure.

Soldiers of the Indonesian Army
Following a decision in 1985, major reorganization separated the Ministry of Defense and Security from the ABRI headquarters and staff. Library of Congress Country Study, Indonesia, November 1992, Organization and Equipment of the Armed Forces HANKAM was made responsible for planning, acquisition, and management tasks but had no command or control of troop units. The ABRI commander in chief retained command and control of all armed forces and continued by tradition to be the senior military officer in the country. Since the separation of the ministry from the armed forces headquarters in 1985, the HANKAM staff has been composed largely of retired military personnel. The split provided positions of responsibility for highly qualified but relatively young retired officers of the Generation of 1945 while also opening up high level billets in ABRI to younger active-duty officers who had been frustrated by slow rates of promotion.

The administrative structure of HANKAM consisted of a minister, secretary general, inspector general, three directorates-general and a number of functional centers and institutes. The minister, inspector general, and three directors general were retired senior military officers; the secretary general (who acted as deputy minister) and most functional center chiefs were active-duty military officers.

The 1985 reorganization also made significant changes in the armed forces chain of command. The four multiservice Regional Defense Commands (Kowilhans) and the National Strategic Command (Kostranas) were eliminated from the defense structure, establishing the Military Regional Command (Kodam), or area command, as the key organization for strategic, tactical, and territorial operations for all services. The chain of command flowed directly from the ABRI commander in chief to the ten Kodam commanders, and then to subordinate army territorial commands. The former territorial commands of the air force and navy were eliminated from the structure altogether, with each of those services represented on the Kodam staff by a senior liaison officer. The navy and air force territorial commands were replaced by operational commands. The air force formed two Operations Commands (Ko-Ops) while the navy had its Eastern Fleet and Western FleetArmadas. The air force's National Air Defense Command (Kohanudna) remained under the ABRI commander in chief. It had an essentially defensive function that included responsibility for the early warning system.

The officer corps of the armed forces was estimated at 53,000 in 1992. Library of Congress Country Study, Indonesia, 1992, link verified December 2009. Less than 1 percent of these were of general officer rank. The Armed Forces Academy of the Republic of Indonesia (Akademi TNI), the national military academy at Magelang, Jawa Tengah Province trains most military officer corps. Mandatory retirement exists for officers at age fifty-eight and routine periodic reassignments are enforced. 

===Branches===
Indonesian Sukhoi Su-30 fighter
The Indonesian Army was first formed in 1945 following the end of World War II and to protect the newly proclamated country, it initially consisted of local militia and grew to become the regular army of today.

In 1946, Indonesia became the second country (after Thailand/Siam) in South East Asia to acquire an Air Force capability, with the formation of the Indonesian Air Force. Presently, the Indonesian Air Force has 34,930 personnel equipped with 510 aircraft including Su-27 and Su-30 fighters.

The Indonesian Navy was first formed on 22 August 1945, it became the second country (after Thailand/Siam) in South East Asia to acquire a naval capability. Current strength of the Indonesian Navy is around 74,000. In contrast to many other nations and military traditions, the Navy uses Infantry style ranks. Tentara Nasional Indonesia 

The Indonesian Military also have a border security force which guards the international borders of Indonesia and its neighboring country, the force is called KOSTRAD PERBATASAN which means Border Army Strategic Reserve Command. It guards Indonesia's border with Malaysia, Papua New Guinea, and Timor Leste.

All Indonesian Navy aircraft are operated by the Indonesian Naval Aviation Service (Dinas Penerbangan TNI-AL). The Indonesian Navy has also purchased 8 Mi-2 (now based in Surabaya), but only two have arrived because of problems with the Indonesian Navy's bureaucracy. The Navy operates 52 fixed wing aircraft and 23 combat and transport helicopters. 

The Indonesian Navy also includes the Indonesian Marine Corps (Korps Marinir, or KorMar). It was created on 15 November 1945 and has the duties of being the main amphibious warfare force and quick reaction force of defence against enemy invasion.

While not strictly part of the armed forces, the Indonesian National Police often operate in a paramilitary role, independently or in cooperation with the other services on internal security missions. Indonesian Police use the name of POLRI (Kepolisian Republik Indonesia).

==Budget==
Beeson and Bellamy wrote in 2002 that: '..By some estimates 6065% of the military's actual operating expenses come from 'off-budget sources' rather than the government (Cochrane 2002). This is a euphemism for a host of legal and illegal practices that include legitimate involvement in state-owned and private businesses, as well as a range of activities in the 'black economy.' An estimated 30% of government funding of the military 'is lost through corruption in the process of buying military equipment and supplies.'(International Crisis Group 2001: 13)' Mark Beeson and Alex J. Bellamy, 'Securing Southeast Asia: The politics of security sector reform,' Routledge, 2008, ISBN 0-415-41619-1, 134-5. 

In addition, the territorial commands (KODAM) are responsible for 'the bulk of their operational fund-raising.' Beeson and Bellamy, 2008, 138. 

 Fiscal Year Budget (IDR) Budget (USD) 
 2005 Rp 21.97 trillion USD 2.5 billion 
 2006 Rp 23.6 trillion USD 2.6 billion 
 2007 Rp 32.6 trillion USD 3.4 billion 
 2008 Rp 36.39 trillion USD 3.8 billion 
 2009 Rp 33.6 trillion USD 3.3 billion 
 2010 Rp 42.3 trillion USD 4.47 billion 
 2011 Rp 47.5 trillion USD 5.2 billion 
 2012 Rp 64.4 trillion http://www.setneg.go.id/index2.php?option=com_content&do_pdf=1&id=5727 USD 7.5 billion 
 2013 Rp 81.8 trillion http://www.asianewsnet.net/home/news.php?sec=1&id=33629 Margareth S. Aritonang, While education and healthcare suffer, Indonesian army budget soars, The Jakarta Post, 18-07-2012 http://indo-defense.blogspot.com/2012/12/rp-818-triliun-anggaran-militer-2013.html USD 8.44 billion http://defense-studies.blogspot.com/2012/07/indonesia-and-philippines-to-increase.html 
 2014 Rp 83.4 trillion USD 7.91 billion http://www.janes.com/article/25916/indonesian-defence-budget-increases-9 

==List of commanders==

Name Years Notes 
 Lt. Gen. Urip Sumohardjo 17 August 1945  12 November 1945 Position held on an interim basis 
 Gen. Sudirman 12 November 1945  29 January 1950 Position known as Great Commander of the People's Security Army (Panglima Besar Tentara Keamanan Rakyat) 
 Maj. Gen. TB Simatupang 29 January 1950  1952 Position known as Chief of Staff of the Battle Forces (Kepala Staf Angkatan Perang) 
 Vacant 19521955 Position abolished by President Sukarno after the 17 October 1952 incident 
 Maj. Gen. A.H. Nasution December 1955  March 1965 Position known as Chief of Staff of the Battle Forces (Kepala Staf Angkatan Perang) 
 Vacant 196568 Position abolished by President Sukarno after the G30S/PKI incident 
 Gen. Suharto June 1968  March 1973 Position known as Commander of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Indonesia (Panglima ABRI) as long as Minister of Defense and Security 
 Gen. Maraden Panggabean March 1973  April 1978 idem 
 Gen. Mohammad Jusuf April 1978  28 March 1983 idem 
 Gen. Benny Moerdani 28 March 1983  27 February 1988 Also Commander of the Operational Command for the Restoration of Security and Order (Kopkamtib) 
 Gen. Try Sutrisno 27 February 1988  19 February 1993 
 Gen. Edi Sudrajat 19 February 1993  21 May 1993 Also Minister of Defense and Security and Chief of Staff of the Army 
 Gen. Feisal Tanjung 21 May 1993  12 February 1998 
 Gen. Wiranto 16 February 1998  26 October 1999 Position known as Commander of the Indonesian National Armed Forces (Panglima Tentara Nasional Indonesia) in 1999 as long as Minister of Defense and Security 
 Adm. Widodo Adi Sutjipto 26 October 1999  7 June 2002 First Navy and non-Army officer appointed 
 Gen. Endriartono Sutarto 7 June 2002  13 February 2006 
 ACM. Djoko Suyanto 13 February 2006  28 December 2007 First Air Force officer appointed 
 Gen. Djoko Santoso 28 December 2007  28 September 2010 
 Adm. Agus Suhartono Since 28 September 2010 - 30 August 2013 Second Navy officer appointed. 
 Gen. Moeldoko Since 30 August 2013 

==Websites for Indonesia's Military==
* Official Website of TNI
* Official Website of the Department of Defense
* Indonesian military blog
* Indonesia's Army (TNI-AD): http://www.tniad.mil.id/
* Indonesia's Navy (TNI-AL): http://www.tnial.mil.id/
* Indonesia's Air Force (TNI-AU): http://tni-au.mil.id/

==Lists of Indonesia's special and elite forces==
#Kopassus
#Denjaka
#Detachment 88
#INSFOC
#Kesatuan Gurita
#KOPASKA
#Mobile Brigade (Indonesia)
#Paskhas
#Paspampres
#Satgas Atbara
#Taifib

==Notes==

==External links==
* Official Website of TNI
* Official Website of the Department of Defense
* Indonesian military blog
* Indonesian Civil-Military Relations  Civil-Military Relations in Post-Suharto Indonesia and the Implications for Democracy Today: A Preliminary Analysis

==Further reading==

*Bresnan, John. (1993). Managing Indonesia: the modern political economy. New York: Columbia University Press.
**Many topics, including the political role of the military at the height of Suharto's New Order.
*Chandra, Siddharth and Douglas Kammen. (2002). "Generating Reforms and Reforming Generations: Military Politics in Indonesia's Transition to Democracy." World Politics, Vol. 55, No. 1.
*Crouch, Harold. (1988). The army and politics in Indonesia. Ithaca:Cornell University Press.
**First published 1978. Now somewhat dated, but provides an influential overview of the role of the military in consolidating Suharto's power
*"Guerilla Warfare and the Indonesian Strategic Psyche" Small Wars Journal article by Emmet McElhatton
*Israel, Fauzi.(2009)  Advanced Weapon's Infantry Firepower & Accuracy
*Kammen, Douglas and Siddharth Chandra. (1999). A Tour of Duty: Changing Patterns of Military Politics in Indonesia in the 1990s. Ithaca, New York: Cornell Modern Indonesia Project No. 75.
* Kingsbury, Damen. Power Politics and the Indonesian Military, Routledge: 2003 ISBN 0-415-29729-X: 280 pages

 
Indonesia

[[Foreign relations of Indonesia]]

Since independence, Indonesian foreign relations have adhered to a "free and active" foreign policy, seeking to play a role in regional affairs commensurate with its size and location but avoiding involvement in conflicts among major powers. Indonesian foreign policy under the "New Order" government of President Suharto moved away from the stridently anti-Western, anti-American posturing that characterized the latter part of the Sukarno era. Following Suharto's ouster in 1998, Indonesia's government has preserved the broad outlines of Suharto's independent, moderate foreign policy. Preoccupation with domestic problems has not prevented successive presidents from traveling abroad and Indonesia's participation in many international fora.

The invasion of East Timor by Indonesia in December 1975 and its annexation in 1976 and the referendum on independence of East Timor from Indonesia in August 1999 strained Indonesia's relations with the international community. As one of the founding members of Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), established in 1967, and also as the largest nation in Southeast Asia, Indonesia has put ASEAN as the cornerstone of its foreign policy and outlook. After the transformation from Suharto's regime to a relatively open and democratic nation in the 2010s, Indonesia today exercises its influence to promote cooperation, development, democracy, security, peace and stability in the region through its leadership in ASEAN. 
 

Indonesia managed to play a role as a peacemaker in the Cambodia-Thailand conflict over the Preah Vihear temple. Indonesia and other ASEAN member countries collectively have also played a role in encouraging the government of Myanmar to open up its political system and introduce other reforms more quickly. 

==Significant international memberships==

===ASEAN===
The Secretariat of ASEAN in Jakarta, the cornerstone of Indonesian foreign policy.
A cornerstone of Indonesia's contemporary foreign policy is its participation in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), of which it was a founding member in 1967 with Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, and the Philippines. Since then, Brunei, Vietnam, Laos, Burma, and Cambodia also have joined ASEAN. While organized to promote common economic, social, and cultural goals, ASEAN acquired a security dimension after Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia in 1979; this aspect of ASEAN expanded with the establishment of the ASEAN Regional Forum in 1994, which comprises 22 countries, including the U.S.

Indonesian national capital Jakarta is also the seat of ASEAN Secretariat, located at Jalan Sisingamangaraja No.70A, Kebayoran Baru, South Jakarta. Other than serving their diplomatic missions for Indonesia, numbers of foreign embassies and diplomatic mission in Jakarta are also accredited to ASEAN. ASEAN Headquarter has led to the prominence of Jakarta as a diplomatic hub in Southeast Asia.

In late 1990s to early 2000s, Indonesia's continued domestic troubles have distracted it from ASEAN matters and consequently lessened its influence within the organization. However, after the politics and economic transformation, from the turmoil of 1998 Reformasi to the relatively open and democratic civil society with rapid economic growth in the 2010s, Indonesia returned to the region's diplomatic stage by assuming its leadership role in ASEAN in 2011. Indonesia is viewed to has weight, international legitimacy and global appeal to draw support and attention from around the world to the ASEAN. Indonesia believes that ASEAN can contribute positively to the global community, by promoting economic development and cooperation, improving security, peace, stability of ASEAN, and making the Southeast Asia region far from conflicts. 

===Non-Aligned Movement===
Indonesia also was one of the founders of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) and has taken moderate positions in its councils. As NAM Chairman in 1992-95, it led NAM positions away from the rhetoric of North-South confrontation, advocating instead the broadening of North-South cooperation in the area of development. Indonesia continues to be a prominent, and generally helpful, leader of the Non-Aligned Movement.

===Organisation of Islamic Cooperation===
Indonesia has the world's largest Muslim population, and is a member of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC). It carefully considers the interests of Islamic solidarity in its foreign policy decisions but generally has been an influence for moderation in the OIC. President Wahid has pursued better relations with Israel, and in August 2000 he met with former Israeli Prime Minister Peres. However, as of January 2006, there's no formal diplomacy link between Indonesia and Israel. As such, Indonesia, alongside its Malaysian neighbor, conducts its foreign relations with Israel through Singapore. AsiaMedia :: INDONESIA: Israel starts website in Indonesian 

===IGGI and CGI===
After 1966, Indonesia welcomed and maintained close relations with the donor community, particularly the United States, western Europe, Australia, and Japan, through the Intergovernmental Group on Indonesia (IGGI) and its successor, the Consultative Group on Indonesia (CGI), which have provided substantial foreign economic assistance. Problems in Timor and Indonesia's reluctance to implement economic reform, have complicated Indonesia's relationship with donors.

===APEC===
Indonesia has been a strong supporter of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum. Largely through the efforts of President Suharto at the 1994 meeting in Bogor, Indonesia, APEC members agreed to implement free trade in the region by 2010 for industrialized economies and 2020 for developing economies. As the largest economy in Southeast Asia, Indonesia also belongs to another economic groupings such as G-20 major economies (G-20) and Developing 8 Countries (D-8).

==Disputes  international==
The many islands of Indonesia are the source for many pirate groups that regularly attack ships in the Strait of Malacca in the north, BBC and illegal fishing crews known for penetrating Australian and Filipino waters. afma.gov.au; abc.net.au 

* Ambalat Block in dispute with Malaysia (current)
* Sipadan and Ligitan Islands in dispute with Malaysia (closed, part of Malaysia's territory per ICJ's decision)

== Within ASEAN Countries ==
Indonesia consider ASEAN as cornerstone of its foreign policy, through exercising its regional power and influence in peaceful and constructive manner among ASEAN countries.

=== Brunei ===
Brunei
Republic of Indonesia established diplomatic relations with Brunei Darussalam on 1 January 1984. Brunei Darussalam was recognised by Jakarta on independence in 1984.
Although do not shared direct land borders, Indonesia and Brunei shared the island of Borneo. Overall relations between the two countries were progressing well and that both sides continued to enjoy strong ties in a wide spectrum of cooperations; including trade and investment, tourism, agriculture, marine and fisheries, health, defence, transnational crimes, education, youth, culture and people-to-people contacts. 
 

=== Cambodia ===
Cambodia
The relationship between ancient Indonesia and Cambodia dated back from the kingdom of Chenla and Javan Sailendra also Srivijaya; it was mentioned that king Jayavarman II had resided for some times in Java during the reign of Sailendras, and in 802 declare sovereignty of Cambodia from Java and proclaimed himself as universal monarch thus started the Angkor period. in shadows: Sihanouk, the Khmer Rouge, and the United Nations 

During Sukarno reign in the 1960s, the president of Indonesia has visited Cambodia and vice versa prince Norodom Sihanouk also visited Indonesia.
In 1992 Indonesia is among countries that provides troops for United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia. Indonesia also supported Cambodia membership to ASEAN in 1999. Indonesia also among the countries that provide aid to Angkor restoration project, especially the three main gates of Angkor Royal Palace archaeological site near Phimeanakas site. Indonesia is also appointed as observer in CambodianThai border dispute. VOA: Thailand, Cambodia Agree to Indonesian Observers at Border The Jakarta Post: RI ready to send observers to Cambodia, Thailand 

=== Laos ===
Laos
Since established diplomatic relations on 1957, both nations enjoys cordial relations. Indonesia have an embassy in Vientiane, while Laos have an embassy in Jakarta. Indonesia supported and welcomed Laos membership to the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in 1997. Laos and Indonesia agreed to enhance relations to focus on exploring the potential of both nations to cooperate on trade and investment. The two nations expressed a desire to reach further agreements relating to security, tourism, sport, air transport and education. Indonesia through bilateral cooperation assist Laos on capacity building and development in various sectors, trough scholarships and trainings for Laos students. 

=== Malaysia ===
Malaysia 
* Indonesia and Malaysia enjoy friendly relations. The populations of both countries have cordial relations and trade between the two countries has greatly increased over the years.
* Indonesia has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur and consulate generals in Johor Bahru, George Town, Kota Kinabalu and Kuching. Malaysia has an embassy in Jakarta and a consulate general in Medan and Pekanbaru.
* Both nations are founding members of ASEAN and APEC. Both nations are also members of the Non-aligned Movement.
* Relations between the two nations deteriorated under President Sukarno (see IndonesiaMalaysia confrontation, see Indonesian withdrawal from the United Nations), however relations were restored under President Suharto.
* Currently, both nations are in a territorial dispute over the oil rich islands of Ambalat. Previously, they were over territorial disputes over the islands of Sipadan and Ligitan, which were won by Malaysia.
* The Indonesian migrant workers (Indonesian: TKI/Tenaga Kerja Indonesia) have become the important issue between both countries. The problems concerning migrant workers such as illegal immigration, crime, human traficking, abuse, poor treatment and extortion upon migrant workers. Since 2009 Indonesia has temporarily stop sending domestic workers to Malaysia until both countries agree on ways to protect them. Indonesia to halt sending workers to Malaysia Indonesia will resume sending migrant workers to Malaysia in May 2011 as both countries will sign a memorandum of understanding (MoU) about worker protection by the end of April 2011. Indonesia to resume sending workers to Malaysia 

===Myanmar===
Myanmar 
*Both Indonesia and Myanmar are promoting the two countries trade volume. The trade volume is estimated to reach up to $1 billion in 2016. 
*Indonesia has offered to purchase 300,000 tons of rice from Myanmar, with prospects of buying more in the future.
*Indonesia supports Myanmar's democratization process. 

=== Philippines ===
Philippines 
* Indonesia and the Philippines are both archipelagic country and same ethnic population that belongs to Austronesian.
* Indonesia and the Philippines established their bilateral and diplomatic relations in 1949. The Indonesian Government has opened its Consular office in Manila but it was not until the mid-1950s that an Embassy was established headed by an Ambassador.
* A treaty of friendship was signed on 1951. This Treaty constituted the basic relationship of both countries, covering several aspects such as maintenance of peace and friendship, settlement of disputes by diplomatic and peaceful means, traffic arrangements for citizens of both countries and activities to promote cooperation in the area of trade and cultural, which include the political, social-economic and security matters of both countries.
* Both countries are members of the East ASEAN Growth Triangle together with Brunei Darussalam and Malaysia in the BIMP-EAGA.

=== Singapore ===
Singapore 

* In August 2005, Singapore and Indonesia signed a Memorandum of Understanding to expand aviation rights between the two countries. 

* On 3 October 2005, Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong met Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono in Bali, just two days after the Bali bombings. They agreed to strengthen the fight against terrorism and also discussed cooperation in the fields of economy, trade and investment.

* Relations with Indonesia are generally good, though current outstanding issues include the bans on the export of sand, and granite; both of which Singapore's construction industry is reliant on.

=== Thailand ===
Thailand 
* Indonesia is Thailand's third most important trade partner within ASEAN, with bilateral trade worth $8.7 billion in 2007. Thai PM in Jakarta to promote bilateral trade Trade between the two countries is set to grow over the years.

=== Vietnam ===
Vietnam 
* Formal relations started in 1955 for the consulate general level. Soedibjo Wirjowerdojo (former charg d'affaires of Indonesian Embassy in Peking, China from year of 1953 - 1955) was appointed to be The First Indonesian Consul General to Vietnam, and located in Hanoi.
* Vietnam and Indonesia are both members of ASEAN, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
* President Megawati Sukarnoputri of Indonesia visited Vietnam in June 2003. At this time the two countries signed a "Declaration on the Framework of Friendly and Comprehensive Cooperation Entering the 21st Century".
* In May, 2005 President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono of Indonesia visited Vietnam.
* In the December of the same year festivities were organized in the respective capital cities to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic ties.
* http://english.vovnews.vn/Home/Vietnam-Indonesia-aim-for-allround-cooperation-development/20062/37663.vov

== Oceania ==

=== Australia ===
Australia 

Since Indonesian independence, the two countries have maintained mutual diplomatic relations, formalised co-operation (especially in the fields of fisheries conservation, law enforcement, and justice cooperation), a measure of security co-operation, broadening treaty relationships, co-membership of regional forums, and co-participation in several multilateral Treaties of significance. Trade between the two countries has grown over the years.

Recent years have seen a deepening of Australia's aid commitment to Indonesia, and Australia has become a popular venue for Indonesian students. http://www.dfat.gov.au/media/speeches/foreign/1996/austindo.html see reference to '12000 students' from Indonesia 

In 2008-09, Indonesia is the largest recipient of Australian aid at a value of AUD462 million. http://www.dfat.gov.au/geo/indonesia/indonesia_brief.html 

=== East Timor ===
East Timor
East Timor (officially named the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste) and Indonesia share the island of Timor. Indonesia invaded the former Portuguese colony in 1975 and annexed East Timor in 1976, maintaining East Timor as its 27th province until a United Nations-sponsored referendum in 1999, in which the people of East Timor chose independence. Following a United Nations interim administration, East Timor gained independence in 2002.

Despite the traumatic past, relations with Indonesia are very good. Indonesia is by far the largest trading partner of East Timor (Approximately 50% of imports, 2005) and is steadily increasing its share.

Problems to be solved include, East Timor-Indonesia Boundary Committee meetings to survey and delimit land boundary; and Indonesia is seeking resolution of East Timorese refugees in Indonesia.

=== New Zealand ===
New Zealand
Having common interests as democracies and neighbours in the Asia Pacific region, New Zealand and Indonesia are viewed as natural partners. 
 Both countries are members of APEC. Indonesia and New Zealand officially established diplomatic relations in 1950, the diplomatic and economic ties have grown stronger ever since. New Zealand has an embassy in Jakarta and Indonesia has an embassy in Wellington. Indonesias commodity exports to New Zealand consist mainly of energy products and minerals as well as lumber and agriculture, while New Zealand's commodity exports to Indonesia mainly consists of dairy products and meats, such as beef, milk, and cheese.

=== Papua New Guinea ===
Papua New Guinea 
Indonesia shares a 760 km border with Papua New Guinea through its provinces of Papua and West Papua. The common border has raised tensions and ongoing diplomatic issues over many decades. http://countrystudies.us/indonesia/100.htm 

Indonesia is represented in Papua New Guinea with an embassy in Port Moresby and a consulate in Vanimo.

==Asia==

===Bangladesh===

Indonesia is the world largest Muslim country in terms of its population, whereas Bangladesh is the fourth largest Muslim country. Indonesia and Bangladesh are partners in Organisation of Islamic Cooperation and the Developing 8 Countries. Bangladesh has an embassy in Jakarta, whereas Indonesia has an embassy in Dhaka. Since the official bilateral relations were established in 1972, both countries enjoy cordial and friendly relations.

===People's Republic of China===

China and Indonesia established diplomatic relations on April 13, 1950, which was suspended on October 30, 1967 due to the occurrence of the September 30 event of 1965.

The bilateral relations began to ease since the 1980s. Foreign Minister Qian Qichen of China met with President Suharto and State Minister Moerdiono of Indonesia in 1989 to discuss the resumption of diplomatic relations of the two countries. In December 1989, the two sides held talks on the technical issues regarding the normalization of bilateral relations and signed the Minutes. Foreign Minister Ali Alatas of Indonesia visited China on invitation in July 1990 and the two sides issued the Agreement on the Settlement of Indonesia's Debt Obligation to China and the Communique on the Resumption of Diplomatic Relations between the two countries. The two countries issued the "Communiqu on the Restoration of Diplomatic Relations between the Two Countries".

Premier Li Peng visited Indonesia on invitation on August 6, 1990. In his talks with President Suharto, the two sides expressed their willingness to improve relations between the two countries on the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Co-Existence and the Ten Principles of the Bandung Conference. On 8 August, Foreign Ministers of China and Indonesia on behalf of their respective governments, signed the Memorandum of Understanding on the Resumption of Diplomatic Relations. The two sides declared the formal resumption of the diplomatic relations between China and Indonesia on that day.

===India===

In 1950, the first President of Indonesia - Sukarno called upon the peoples of Indonesia and India to "intensify the cordial relations" that had existed between the two countries "for more than 1000 years" before they had been "disrupted" by colonial powers. Foreign Policy of India: Text of Documents 1947-59 (p.54) Fifteen years later in Djakarta, government-inspired mobs were shouting: "Down with India, the servant of imperialists" and "Crush India, our enemy. " I New York Times September 10, 1965 Yet in the spring of 1966, the foreign ministers of both countries began speaking again of an era of friendly relations. India had supported Indonesian independence and Nehru had raised the Indonesian question in the United Nations Security Council.

India has an embassy in Jakarta http://www.embassyofindiajakarta.org/ and Indonesia operates an embassy in Delhi. http://www.indonesianembassy.org.in/ 

===Iran===

Indonesia and Iran are Muslim majority countries, despite the differences in its religious orientation. Indonesian has the largest Muslim Sunni population in the world, while Iran is a predominantly Shiite nation. 

As Islamic countries that have among the largest Muslim populations in the world, Iran and Indonesia hold themselves responsible for promoting Islam as a peaceful religion. Diplomatic relations has been established since 1950. Indonesia has an embassy in Tehran, and Iran has an embassy in Jakarta. Both countries are full members of the World Trade Organization (WTO), The Non-Aligned Movement, Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), and Developing 8 Countries.

Jakarta had offered to help mediate the Iranian nuclear dispute, Jakarta is on good terms with Iran and other Middle East countries, as well as with the West. 

===Iraq===

Indonesia and Iraq shared similarity as the Muslim majority countries. Both nations share their experiences in rebuilding and development. Indonesia has an embassy in Baghdad, while Iraq has an embassy in Jakarta. Both nations are partners in multilateral organizations, such as World Trade Organization (WTO), The Non-Aligned Movement and Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).

After World War II, Iraq had been one of the first countries to recognize Indonesias independence in 1945. The two countries established diplomatic relations in 1950 and have signed around 15 agreements to boost bilateral ties. Indonesia has maintained its embassy in Baghdad during various crises, such as the Iraq-Iran war in the 1980s. However, at the height of the Iraq War, Indonesia was forced to temporarily closed its embassy in Baghdad in 2003, and reopen it in June 2011. 

In 2003, Indonesian Government and people protested against a U.S.-led military campaign against Baghdad. Over 50,000 Indonesian people crowded the streets of the Indonesian capital, Jakarta on Sunday, February 9, 2003, to protest the United States' threat of military action against Iraq. After the war ended and Indonesia reopen its embassy in 2011, relations between the two countries have developed at a fast pace. Iraq invited Indonesia's companies to participate in the reconstruction of Iraq. Traditionally Indonesia sees Iraq as the source of energy, such as oil and gas. On the other hand Iraqi people are familiar with Indonesian exported products such as tires, soaps, spices, furniture, coal, clothing, palm oil, shoes, paper, automobiles, rubber and electronic goods.

===Japan===

* Indonesia and Japan enjoy friendly relations.
* Indonesia has an embassy in Tokyo and a consulate in Osaka. Japan has an embassy in Jakarta and consulates in Medan, Denpasar, Surabaya, and Makassar.
* Japan is Indonesia's largest export partner.
* Both countries are members of the G20 major economies and APEC.
* Indonesia has also offered aid in the recent Japanese earthquake.

===Jordan===

* Jordan and Indonesia often shares similar stances upon issues in the Middle East, such as the Syrian conflict and IsraelPalestine conflict.
* Currently Indonesia is Jordan's largest trade partner in ASEAN. 
* Jordan have an embassy in Jakarta, while Indonesia have an embassy in Amman that also accredited to Palestine.
* Both countries are the member of Organisation of Islamic Cooperation and Non-Aligned Movement.
* Jordan serves as the gate for Indonesian Muslim and Christian pilgrims wishing to visit the holy sites in Palestine and Israel. 

===Nepal===

Since the diplomatic relations was established in 1960, both nations enjoys friendly and cordial relations, although both parties do not established embassies in each counterparts' capitals. Indonesia only establishes honorary consulate in Kathmandu, while its embassy in Dhaka, Bangladesh, is also acredited to Nepal. Nepal on the other hand acredited its embassy in Bangkok, Thailand, also to Indonesia. Both the countries have many cultural proximities and similar view on international issues. Both nations are also partners and founding members of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).

===North Korea===
North Korea

Indonesia is one of the very few countries that still maintain cordial relations with North Korea, despite international sanctions and isolation applied upon North Korea concerning its human rights abuses and nuclear missile program. Indonesia has adopted what it calls a free-and-active foreign policy, which allows it to be consistent in counting on both North and South Korea as friends.

Both nations share a relationship that dates back to the Sukarno and Kim Il-sung era in the 60s. Indonesia has an embassy in Pyongyang, while North Korea has an embassy in Jakarta. Both nations are members of the Non-Aligned Movement.

According to a 2013 BBC World Service Poll, 42% of Indonesians view North Korea's influence positively, with 22% expressing a negative view. This is the second most favorable opinion in the world after Ghana's. 2013 World Service Poll BBC 

===Pakistan===
Pakistan

* Indonesia has its Embassy in Islamabad http://kbri-islamabad.go.id/ and a Consulate in Karachi
* Pakistan has its Embassy in Jakarta http://www.mofa.gov.pk/Indonesia/ and a Consulate in Medan. http://pakistan.visahq.com/embassy/Indonesia/ 
* Both countries are members of the Developing 8 (D-8) countries and the Next Eleven (N-11) Countries. They are also members of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) and the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).
* Bilateral trade between the two countries currently stand at $800 million but both nations are looking at increase this to $2 billion. http://www.developing8.org/2010/03/29/pakistan-ri-trade-could-reach-2-billion/ 

=== Saudi Arabia ===

*Saudi Arabia have an embassy in Jakarta, while Indonesia have an embassy in Riyadh and a consulate in Jeddah.
*Both countries are the member of Organisation of Islamic Cooperation and G-20 major economies.
*Indonesia sent the largest hajj pilgrims among Muslim countries.
*The balance of trade is heavily in favor of Saudi Arabia, because of its oil and gas exports to Indonesia.
*Migrant worker abuse and death sentences faces by Indonesian workers in Saudi Arabia are main problems strained diplomatic relations between two countries.

=== South Korea ===

*Indonesia has an embassy in Seoul.
*South Korea has an embassy in Jakarta.
*Scale of bilateral trade between two nation is US$14.88 billion.
*Indonesia and South Korea have invested in multiple joint military development projects, including the KFX/IFX fighter jet
*South Korean firm Daewoo Shipbuilding and Marine Engineering (DSME) is in final contract negotiations to supply Indonesia with three Type-209 submarines. This will be the largest ever bilateral defense deal, valued at USD1.1 billion.

=== Sri Lanka ===

*Indonesia and Sri Lanka are the founder of the Non-Aligned Movement.
*Since the diplomatic relations were established in 1952, both nations enjoys cordial and friendly relationship
*Indonesia has an embassy in Colombo, while Sri Lanka has an embassy in Jakarta.

===Turkey===
Turkey

* Relations with the Ottoman Empire (Turkey's predecessor state) began with the 16th century Ottoman expedition to Aceh, in with the response to the Aceh Sultanate's request for assistance against the Portuguese in Malacca 
* Indonesia has an embassy in Ankara. Embassy of Indonesia in Turkey 
* Turkey has an embassy in Jakarta. Embassy of Turkey in Indonesia 
* Both countries are full members of the World Trade Organization (WTO), Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), and the G20 major economies.

===United Arab Emirates===
UAE

* The diplomatic relations between Indonesia and United Arab Emirates are important because both share the solidarity as Muslim majority countries, and both countries recognizes the important role of each counterparts in the region.
*Since the diplomatic relations established in 1976, both country enjoy friendly and cordial relationship.
*Indonesia has an embassy in Abu Dhabi, while the United Arab Emirates has an embassy in Jakarta.
*Both countries are partners in multilateral organizations, such as the World Trade Organization (WTO), The Non-Aligned Movement and Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).
*Indonesia uses the UAE as the main gate to enter the Gulf and Middle East market, Indonesia's export to UAE is the largest in the Middle East.
*Indonesian Government has established the trade and investment representative office to promote its products in United Arab Emirates and the entire Middle East region.

===Palestine===
Palestine
* Indonesia has Embassy, non resident in Amman
* Palestine has Embassy in Jakarta

===Israel===

The two countries maintain no formal diplomatic ties. http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2008/11/07/representatives-indonesia-israel-sign-medical-agreement.html?1 http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2006/07/03/indonesia-condemns-israeli-offensive.html 

==Europe==

===Austria===
Austria

* The bilateral relations between Austria an Indonesia officially established in 1954.
* Austria recognizes Indonesia as a stable and reliable partner, and both countries enjoy excellent relations. 
 
* The two nations have agreed to expand relations in business, trade and investment, tourism, culture, environment and green technology. 
 
* Austria has an embassy in Jakarta and consulates in Bandung and Surabaya, while Indonesia has an embassy in Vienna that also accredited to Slovenia as well as multilateral organizations; IAEA, PrepCom CTBTO, UNODC and UNOOSA.

===Bulgaria===
Bulgaria 

* Bulgaria was among the States that recognized Indonesia's independence since its Proclamation of Independence on August 17, 1945. Diplomatic relations started on September 21, 1956.
* Bulgaria has had an embassy in Jakarta since October 1958
* Indonesia has had an embassy in Sofia Since 1960. Official Website of the Embassy of the Republic of Indonesia in Sofia, Bulgaria. 

===Denmark===
Denmark 

===France===
France 

*Indonesia has an Embassy in Paris and France has an Embassy in Jakarta
*The relations between France and Indonesia have been increasing of late, while Indonesia has become increasingly strategic to the government and people of France.
*There are 110 French multinational companies operated in Indonesia. 
*The relations between two nations are important as both are democratic republics and both holds significant geopolitical influences in each regions. France is indispensable member of European Union, as well as Indonesia for Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
*The diplomatic relation between France and Indonesia is also a key element for developing relations between Indonesia and the European Union and between France and the ASEAN. 
*Both nations are the member of G-20 major economies.

===Finland===
Finland 

* Indonesia and Finland enjoy friendly relations. Nokia has a substantial share of the mobile phone market in Indonesia.

===Germany===
Germany 
*Indonesia and Germany have traditionally enjoyed good, intensive and wide-ranging relations.
*Germany and Indonesia, as the largest members of the European Union and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), respectively, take similar positions on many issues relating to the development of the two regional organizations. 
 
*Indonesia has an Embassy in Berlin
*Germany has an Embassy in Jakarta

===Greece===
Greece 

* Diplomatic relations started in 1960.
* The embassy of Indonesia in Athens was opened since 1994. Indonesian embassy in Athens 
* The embassy of Greece in Jakarta was opened in 1997. Greek embassy in Jakarta 
* Greek Foreign Affairs Ministry about relations with Indonesia.

===Holy See===
Holy See

* Indonesia, the worlds largest Muslim majority population, recognize Catholicism as one of its six approved religions.
* The Holy See has a nunciature in Jakarta, while Indonesia has an embassy in Rome. 
* The Holy See recognized the Republic of Indonesia on 6 July 1947 and established an Apostolic delegate in the country. 
* Official relations was established in 1950 with the status of Apostolic Internunciatur. In December 1965, the status changed to Nunciatur Apostolic.
* There have been two papal visits to Indonesia: those of Pope Paul VI in December 1970, and of Pope John Paul II in October 1989. 

===Italy===
Italy

* Both nations has shown strong desire to improve their relations, especially in intercultural understanding and trade. 
* Indonesia recognizes Italy's strategic location and important role in the middle of Mediterranean region, while Italy has favoured relations with Indonesia, and sees Indonesia as the leader in Southeast Asia. 
* The relations between two countries not only important to bridge the two regional communities; European Union and ASEAN, but also vital as intercultural and interfaith dialog, 
* Indonesia has an embassy in Rome, that also accredited to Malta, Cyprus, San Marino, while Italy has an embassy in Jakarta.

=== The Netherlands ===
Netherlands 

*IndonesiaNetherlands relations refers to relations between Indonesia and the Netherlands. The relationship begun during the spice trade as Netherlands started a trading post in what is now Indonesia before colonising it as the Dutch East Indies.
*The Indonesian military still sometimes buys equipment from the Dutch

===Portugal===
Portugal

In 1999, Indonesia and Portugal restored diplomatic relations, which were broken off following the Indonesian invasion of East Timor in 1975

* Indonesia has an embassy in Lisbon Indonesian embassy in Lisbon 
* Portugal has an embassy in Jakarta of Portugal 

===Romania===
Romania
* Indonesia has an embassy in Bucharest Indonesian embassy in Bucharest 
* Romania has an embassy in Jakarta

===Russia===
Russia

* Both Indonesia and Russia are members of the APEC.
* Russia has an embassy in Jakarta. Russian embassy in Jakarta 
* Indonesia has an embassy in Moscow along with a consulate general in Saint Petersburg. Indonesian embassy in Moscow 
* Early in the Cold War, both countries had very strong relations with Indonesian president Sukarno visiting Moscow and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev visiting Jakarta. When Sukarno was overthrown by General Suharto, relations between the two states weren't as close as they were during Sukarno's times.
* In late 2007, Indonesia purchased military weapons from Russia with long term payment. Both countries are also members of the G20 and APEC

===Spain===
Spain

* Spain identifies Indonesia as their natural ally and has named Indonesia as one of priority nation in their foreign relations with Asian region. 
* Indonesia has an embassy in Madrid and consulates in Barcelona and Las Palmas, while Spain has an embassy in Jakarta and a consulate in Denpasar, Bali. 
* Today the cooperation has expanded to various fields, from trade, culture to education and defense technology sector. 
* Since the 1980s Spain and Indonesia have embarked on strategic partnership in aeronautics technology, Spain's CASA and Indonesia's IPTN (formerly known as Nurtanio) co-designed and co-produced the CN-235 medium transport aircraft.

===Switzerland===
Switzerland

* In 2010 the heads of state of the two countries agreed to launch negotiations on a Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (CEPA). 
* Switzerland has named Indonesia as one of seven priority countries for economic development cooperation. 
* Indonesia has an embassy in Bern, while Switzerland has an embassy in Jakarta, also accredited for East Timor and ASEAN.
* On December 6, 1973, the Indonesian and Swiss governments signed an agreement to establish Polytechnic for Mechanics within the Bandung Institute of Technology at Bandung. Today The Swiss Mechanics Polytechnic has transformed into Bandung State Polytechnic for Manufacture.

===Ukraine===
Ukraine
* Indonesia recognized Ukraines independence in 1992 and established diplomatic relations in 1993. Indonesia has an embassy in Kiev. Indonesian embassy in Kiev 
* Ukraine has an embassy in Jakarta. Ukrainian embassy in Jakarta 

===United Kingdom===
United Kingdom

The United Kingdom and Indonesia have maintained strong relations since formal relations were established in 1949. UK-Indonesia relations Indonesia has an embassy in London, News-Indonesianembassy the United Kingdom has an embassy in Jakarta. Our embassy 

The Culture and Tourism Ministry of Indonesia launched a campaign to boost the number of tourists from the UK entering Indonesia. In 2009, 160,000 British tourists visited Indonesia, the aim of the campaign was to boost this number to 200,000. 

In 2006 former British prime-minister Tony Blair met with Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono where they agreed upon "the establishment of a regular Indonesia-UK Partnership Forum to be chaired by the Foreign Ministers, to promote strategic dialogue on bilateral, multilateral and global issues". The first Indonesia-UK forum was held in 2007 and was chaired by British foreign minister Margaret Beckett and Indonesian foreign minister Wirajuda. 

In March 2010 members of the House of Lords praised Indonesia for their progress in democratizing society, media freedom and environmental protection. Ministry of Foreign Affairs - Members of the UKs House of Lords praised Indonesias achievements In a meeting with Indonesian MP Hayono Isman, the Lords stated that they wanted to improve the relationship between the two countries. 

==North America==

===Canada===
Canada 

* Canada has an embassy in Jakarta. Canadian embassy in Jakarta 
* Indonesia has an embassy in Ottawa and consulates-general in Toronto and Vancouver. 
* Both countries are full members of the G-20 major economies, of the Cairns Group and of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation.

===Mexico===
Mexico 

* The diplomatic relations was officially established in 1953, 
* Indonesia has an embassy in Mexico City, while Mexico has an embassy in Jakarta that also accredited to East Timor.
* Both nations sees their counterpart as their strategic partners in each regions. 
* Mexico has renewed its interest on Asia, sees Indonesia's strategic role in ASEAN, and willing to create an economic partnership agreement with Indonesia. 
* Both countries are partners in multilateral organizations such as the WTO, FEALAC, APEC and G-20.

===United States===
United States 

The United States has important economic, commercial, and security interests in Indonesia. It remains a lynchpin of regional security due to its strategic location astride a number of key international maritime straits, particularly the Malacca Strait. Relations between Indonesia and the U.S. are positive and have advanced since the election of President Yudhoyono in October 2004. The U.S. played a role in Indonesian independence in the late 1940s and appreciated Indonesia's role as an anti-communist bulwark during the Cold War. Cooperative relations are maintained today, although no formal security treaties bind the two countries. The United States and Indonesia share the common goal of maintaining peace, security, and stability in the region and engaging in a dialogue on threats to regional security. Cooperation between the U.S. and Indonesia on counter-terrorism has increased steadily since 2002, as terrorist attacks in Bali (October 2002 and October 2005), Jakarta (August 2003 and September 2004) and other regional locations demonstrated the presence of terrorist organizations, principally Jemaah Islamiyah, in Indonesia. The United States has welcomed Indonesia's contributions to regional security, especially its leading role in helping restore democracy in Cambodia and in mediating territorial disputes in the South China Sea.

==South America==

===Argentina===
Argentina

* Since the diplomatic relations established in 1956, the bilateral relations between Argentina and Indonesia were becoming increasingly more strategic. 
* Indonesia supports Argentina on the Malvinas issue. 
* Argentina has an embassy in Jakarta, while Indonesia has an embassy in Buenos Aires. 
* Both countries are members of Group of 77, the G-20 major economies, the G20 developing nations, and Forum of East Asia-Latin America Cooperation.
* Indonesia is the second-largest destination for Argentine exports to Asia after China, and the largest one in Southeast Asia. While Argentina is South America's second-largest importer of Indonesian products after Brazil. 

===Brazil===
Brazil

* Brazil and Indonesia possess the largest tropical rain forest of the world 
 that contains the world's richest biodiversity, which gave them a vital role in global environment issues, such as ensuring tropical forests protection. 
 
* Both countries leading the list of Megadiverse countries with Indonesia second only to Brazil. Biodiversity Theme Report 
* Brazil expects to expand its cooperation with Indonesia in many areas, including agriculture and high-technology industry. 
 
* Both countries are members of World Trade Organization (WTO), Forum of East Asia-Latin America Cooperation and the G20 major economies. 
* By first quarter of 21st-century, both nations are expected to emerge as the rising global power. 
 

===Chile===
Chile

===Colombia===
Colombia

===Cuba===
Cuba

* During the administration Sukarno in the 1960s, Indonesia and Cuba enjoyed exceptionally close relationship. 
* The relations between two nations mostly focussed on sports and health. 
* Cuba has an embassy in Jakarta, while Indonesia has an embassy in Havana that also accredited to the Commonwealth of the Bahamas and the Republic of Jamaica. 
* Both nations are full members of Group of 77, NAM and FEALAC.

===Mexico===
Mexico

===Peru===
Peru

===Suriname===
Suriname

* Indonesia and Suriname had a special relationship, based upon shared common history as former colonies of the Dutch Empire. 
* Large numbers of Javanese migrated to Suriname to work on plantations during the late 19th and early 20th-centuries. 
* Indonesia has an embassy in Paramaribo also accredited to Republic of Guyana, while Suriname has an embassy in Jakarta. 
* Both nations committed to expand and improve their relations covering trade, agriculture and cultural sectors. 
* Indonesia and Suriname are partners in multilateral organizations such as the WTO and FEALAC.

===Venezuela===
Venezuela

* Since the diplomatic relations established in 1959, Indonesia and Venezuela enjoy friendly ties. 
* Both nations agreed to expand the trade and investment relations, especially in tourism, technology, chemicals and natural gas sectors. 
* Indonesia has an embassy in Caracas, while Venezuela has an embassy in Jakarta. 
* Indonesia and Venezuela are partners in multilateral organizations such as the WTO, NAM and FEALAC.

==Africa==

===Algeria===
Algeria

* The relationship between two nations is mostly founded on common religious and anti-colonialism solidarity, as Indonesia and Algeria are Muslim majority countries that also once fell under colonialism. 
* Algeria recognized Indonesia's role on supporting their country on gaining independence in 1962. 
* Both countries agreed on expanding cooperations and strengthening relations. 
* Algeria has an embassy in Jakarta that also accredited to Singapore and Brunei Darussalam, while Indonesia has an embassy in Algiers. 
* Both nations are members of the NAM, Group of 77 and OIC.

===Egypt===
Egypt

* Indonesia has an embassy in Cairo and Egypt has an embassy in Jakarta.
* Egypt was one of the first countries to recognize Indonesia's independence.
* Gamel Abdel Nasser of Egypt and Sukarno of Indonesia were two of the five founding members of the Non-aligned Movement.
* Both countries are members of the OIC, the Non-aligned Movement, and the G20 developing nations.

===Kenya===
Kenya

* Indonesia has an embassy in Nairobi, also acredited to Mauritius, Seychelles, and Uganda, while Kenya did not establishes embassy in Indonesia yet, diplomatic relations with Indonesia is accredited to its embassy in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. 
* Both nations are partners in multilateral organizations, such as the WTO and NAM.

===Liberia===
Liberia

* The diplomatic relations was officially established in 1965, however not until 2013 that both leaders of each countries visited each others to further the cooperations.

===Libya===
Libya
* Indonesia has an embassy in Tripoli and Libya has an embassy in Jakarta.
* Both countries are members of the OIC and the Non-aligned Movement.

===Madagascar===
Madagascar

* The ancestors of Madagascar people came from Indonesia, sailed across Indian Ocean, back in early 8th to 9th century CE. 
* Indonesia have an embassy in Antananarivo, while Madagascar do not established an embassy in Jakarta yet.
* Malagasy language and Indonesian language shared similar words, such as hand: tanan (Malagasy), tangan (Indonesian); skin: hulitse (Malagasy), kulit (Indonesian); white: futi (Malagasy), putih (Indonesian).

===Morocco===
Morocco

* Indonesia and Morocco shared similarity as the Muslim majority countries, Indonesia is the most populous Muslim country in the world, while Morocco also a Muslim majority nation. 
* Morocco praised Indonesia as a strong democratic nation, and pointed that both nations facing the same challenges of separatism and terrorism. 
* Diplomatic relations were established in 1960. Indonesia has an embassy in Rabat and a consulate in Casablanca, while Morocco has an embassy in Jakarta. 
* Both nations are members of the WTO, NAM and OIC.

===Nigeria===
Nigeria

* Indonesia has an embassy in Abuja and Nigeria has an embassy in Jakarta.
* Both countries are members of the OIC, the Non-aligned Movement, the G20 developing nations, and the Next eleven.

===South Africa===
South Africa

* Indonesia has an embassy in Pretoria and South Africa has an embassy in Jakarta.
* Both countries are members of the G20 major economies, the Non-aligned Movement, and the G20 developing nations.

===Tanzania===
Tanzania

* The relations between Indonesia and Tanzania are mostly in agriculture sector, where Indonesia provides training for Tanzanian farmers. 
* Indonesia has an embassy in Dar es Salaam, while Tanzania has a non-resident ambassador in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. 
* Both countries are members of multilateral organisations such as World Trade Organization (WTO), the Group of 77 and Non-Aligned Movement.

===Tunisia===
Tunisia

* Tunisia and Indonesia are partners in capacity building and partnership for democracy. 
* Indonesia hails Tunisia as a shining example of democratic transition in Arab World. 
* The diplomatic relations dated back to the 1950s when Indonesia supports Tunisian independence from France.
* Indonesia have an embassy in Tunis, while Tunisia have an embassy in Jakarta.
* Both countries are the member of Organisation of Islamic Cooperation and Non-Aligned Movement.

==International organization participation==

==See also==

*IndonesiaUnited States relations
*AustraliaIndonesia relations
*List of diplomatic missions in Indonesia
*List of diplomatic missions of Indonesia
*List of Indonesian Ambassadors to Australia
*List of Indonesian Ambassadors to the United Kingdom

== Further reading ==
* 

==Notes==

==External links==
*Politics, Public Opinion, and the U.S.-Indonesian Comprehensive Partnership (NBR Special Report, December 2010)

 

[[List of islands of Indonesia]]

Map of Indonesia

According to a 2002 survey by National Institute of Aeronautics and Space (LAPAN), the Indonesian archipelago has 18,307 islands. According to the CIA factbook there are 17,000 islands. CIA World Factbook 8,844 islands have been named according to estimates made by the Government of Indonesia, with 922 of those permanently inhabited. Based on "Seminar Nasional Penetapan Nama Pulau-pulau Kecil Dalam Presektif Sejarah or "National Seminary of Name For Little Islands From History Side", July 16 to 18 2008 at Palembang, South Sumatra, Indonesia 

== Major islands ==
*Sunda Islands
**Greater Sunda Islands
***Borneo - divided between Indonesian Kalimantan, Brunei, and Malaysia's states of Sabah and Sarawak.
***Java, formerly Jawa Dwipa.
***Sumatra, formerly Swarna Dwipa.
***Sulawesi, formerly Celebes.
**Lesser Sunda Islands
*Maluku Islands
*New Guinea - divided between Indonesian provinces of Papua and West Papua and the independent nation of Papua New Guinea.

== Other islands ==
The following islands are listed by province:

=== Java === 

====Banten====

* Panaitan
* Sangiang
* Tinjil
* Umang

====Central Java====

* Karimun Jawa
* Nusa Kambangan

====DKI Jakarta====

* Thousand Islands (Kepulauan Seribu)

====East Java====

* Bawean
* Kangean Islands
* Madura
* Raas
* Raja Island
* Sempu Island

====West Java====

* Pulau Biawak (Monitor Lizard Island), Indramayu

=== Sumatra ===

====Aceh====

199 islands
* Banyak Islands, 99 islands
** Bali
** Tuangku
* Lasia
* Simeulue
* Weh

====North Sumatra====

479 islands
* Batu Islands (formerly Batoe Eilanden), 51 islands
* Berhala on the Strait of Malacca
* Hinako Islands
* Jake
* Makole
* Masa
* Nias Islands
* Samosir, on Lake Toba

====West Sumatra====

* Mentawai Islands
** North Pagai
** Siberut
** Sipura (Sipora)
** South Pagai
* Pasumpahan
* Sikuai

====Bengkulu====

* Enggano Island
* Mega Island

====Lampung====

* Child of Krakatoa (Anak Krakatau)
* Legundi
* Sebesi
* Sebuku

====Riau====

* Basu
* Bengkalis
* Padang
* Rangsang
* Rupat
* Tebing Tinggi Island

====Riau Islands====

about 3,200 islands
* Natuna Islands (Kepulauan Natuna)
** Anambas Islands
** Natuna Besar Islands
** South Natuna Islands
** Tambelan Islands
*** Badas Islands
* Riau Archipelago
** Batam
** Bintan
** Bulan
** Galang
** Karimun islands
** Great Natuna
** Penyengat
*** Great Karimun
*** Little Karimun
** Kundur
** Rempang
* Lingga Islands
** Lingga with nearby islands:
** Singkep with nearby islands:

====Bangka-Belitung Islands====

* Bangka
* Belitung

=== Kalimantan ===

====Central Kalimantan====

* Damar
* Palau Baning
* Palau Buaya
* Palau Burung

====East Kalimantan====

* Balabalagan Islands
* Bunyu
* Derawan Islands
** Kakaban
* Sebatik
* Tarakan

====South Kalimantan====

* Laut
* Laut Kecil Islands
* Sebuku

====West Kalimantan====

* Bawal
* Galam
* Karimata Islands
** Karimata
* Maya Karimata (Maya)

=== Sulawesi ===

====Central Sulawesi====

* Banggai Islands
** Banggai
** Bowokan Islands (Kepulauan Treko)
** Peleng
* Togian Islands
** Togian

====North Sulawesi====

* Bangka
* Bunaken
* Lembeh
* Manado Tua
* Nain
* Sangihe Islands
** Nanipa
** Bukide
** Sangir Besar (Sangir)
** Siau
** Tagulandang
* Talaud Islands
** Kabaruan
** Karakelang
** Salibabu
* Talise

====South Sulawesi====

* Pabbiring Islands
* Sabalana Islands
* Selayar Islands
** Selayar Island
* Takabonerate Islands
* Tengah Islands

====Southeast Sulawesi ====
* Buton
* Kabaena
* Muna
* Tukangbesi Islands
** Wakatobi
*** Wangiwangi
* Wowoni

=== Lesser Sunda Islands ===

====Bali====

* Bali
* Menjangan Island
* Nusa Lembongan
* Nusa Penida
* Serangan Island

====East Nusa Tenggara====

* Alor Islands, 14 islands + 1 (East Timor)
** Alor
** Kepa
** Pantar
* Flores
** Babi
* Komodo
* Palu'e (Palu)
* Rinca
* Rote Island
* Savu (Sawu)
* Solor Islands
** Adonara
** Lembata (Lomblen)
** Solor
* Sumba
* Timor, divided between Indonesia (West Timor) and the independent nation of East Timor

====West Nusa Tenggara====

* Gili Air
* Banta Island
* Gili Biaha
* Gili Meno
* Gili Mimpang
* Gili Selang
* Gili Tepekong
* Gili Trawangan
* Lombok
* Medang Island
* Moyo Island
* Nusa Ceningan
* Pulau Menjangan
* Sangeang
* Satonda
* Sumbawa

=== Maluku ===

====Maluku====

* Aru Islands
** Enu
** Kobroor
** Maikoor
** Trangan
** Wokam
* Babar
* Banda
* Barat Daya Islands
** Damer
** Liran
** Romang
** Wetar
* Boano
* Buru
* Gorong archipelago
* Kai Islands
* Kelang
* Leti Islands
** Lakor
** Leti (island)
** Moa
* Manipa
* Seram
** Ambon (Amboyna)
** Saparua
* Tanimbar Islands
** Selaru
** Yamdena
* Small volcanic islands in Banda Sea
* Tayandu Islands (Kepulauan Tayahad)
* Watubela archipelago

====North Maluku====

* Bacan
* Er Islands
* Halmahera, with nearby islands:
** Machian (Makian)
** Morotai
** Ternate
** Tidore
* Morotai
* Obi Islands
* Sula islands
* Widi Islands

=== New Guinea ===

islands near the Indonesian half of New Guinea island

====West Papua====

610 islands, 35 inhabited
* Asia Islands
* Ayu Islands
** Palau Ayu
** Palau Reni
* Karas
* Raja Ampat Islands
** Batanta
** Boo Islands
** Fam Islands
** Misool
** Waigeo
*** Gam
*** Kawe
* Semai

====Papua====

* Biak Islands
** Biak
** Mios Num
** Numfor
** Supiori
** Yapen
* Komoran
* Yos Sudarso

== See also ==

* Geography of Indonesia

== References ==

#

 
Indonesia
Islands
 

[[Iran]]

Iran ( or ; ), also known as Persia ( or ), officially the Islamic Republic of Iran, is a country in Western Asia. It is bordered on the north by Turkmenistan, with Kazakhstan and Russia across the Caspian Sea; on the east by Afghanistan and Pakistan; on the south by the Persian Gulf and the Gulf of Oman; on the west by Iraq; and on the northwest by Armenia, Azerbaijan and Turkey. Comprising a land area of 1648195 km2, it is the second-largest nation in the Middle East and the 18th-largest in the world; with over 77 million inhabitants, Iran is the world's 17th most populous nation. It is the only country that has both a Caspian Sea and Indian Ocean coastline. Iran has been of geostrategic importance because of its central location in Eurasia and Western Asia and the Strait of Hormuz.

Iran is home to one of the world's oldest civilizations, Christopher A Whatley (2001). Bought and Sold for English Gold: The Union of 1707 (Tuckwell Press, 2001) beginning with the formation of the Proto-Elamite and Elamite kingdom in 32002800 BCE. The Iranian Medes unified the country into the first of many empires in 625 BCE, after which it became the dominant cultural and political power in the region. Iran reached the pinnacle of its power during the Achaemenid Empire (First Persian Empire) founded by Cyrus the Great in 550 BCE, which at its greatest extent comprised major portions of the ancient world, stretching from parts of the Balkans (Bulgaria-Pannonia) and Thrace-Macedonia in the west, to the Indus Valley in the east, making it the largest empire the world had yet seen. The empire collapsed in 330 BCE following the conquests of Alexander the Great. The area eventually regained influence under the Parthian Empire and rose to prominence once more after the establishment of the Sasanian dynasty (Neo-Persian empire) in 224 CE, under which Iran again became one of the leading powers in the world along with the Byzantine Empire for the next four centuries. 

Manichaeism and Zoroastrianism were largely replaced after Rashidun Muslims invaded Persia in 633 CE, and conquered it by 651 CE. Iran thereafter played a vital role in the subsequent Islamic Golden Age, producing numerous influential scientists, scholars, artists, and thinkers. The emergence in 1501 of the Safavid dynasty, which promoted the Twelver school of thought as the official religion, marked one of the most important turning points in Iranian and Muslim history. R.M. Savory, Safavids, Encyclopaedia of Islam, 2nd edition It also culminated into tensions, which in 1514 led to the Battle of Chaldiran. Starting in 1736 under Nader Shah, Iran would for the last time rise to high prominence, reaching its greatest territorial extent since the Sassanid Empire, and briefly possessing over what was probably the most powerful empire in the world. The Persian Constitutional Revolution of 1906 established the nation's first parliament, which operated within a constitutional monarchy. Following a coup d'tat instigated by the UK and the US in 1953, Iran gradually became autocratic. Growing dissent against foreign influence and political repression culminated in the Iranian Revolution, which led to the establishment of an Islamic republic on 1 April 1979. 

Tehran is the capital and largest city, serving as the cultural, commercial, and industrial center of the nation. Iran is a major regional and middle power, exerting considerable influence in international energy security and the world economy through its large reserves of fossil fuels, which include the largest natural gas supply in the world and the fourth-largest proven petroleum reserves. It hosts Asia's fourth-largest number of UNESCO World Heritage Sites. World Heritage List, UNESCO World Heritage Sites official sites Globally, it ranks 8th in the world for the amount of books published per year, and was ranked first in scientific progress in the world in 2011. PSA target metrics for the UK research base". Department of Trade and Industry. December 2005 Book stats released by ministry of cultural affairs retrieved 21 December 2013 

Iran is a founding member of the UN, NAM, OIC and OPEC. Its unique political system, based on the 1979 constitution, combines elements of a parliamentary democracy with a religious theocracy run by the country's clergy, wherein the Supreme Leader wields significant influence. A multicultural nation comprising numerous ethnic and linguistic groups, most inhabitants are Shi'ites, the Iranian rial is its currency, and Persian is the official language. 

==Etymology==

The name of Iran () is the Modern Persian derivative from the Proto-Iranian term Aryn, meaning "Land of the Aryans", first attested in Zoroastrianism's Avesta tradition. The term rn is found to refer to Iran in a 3rd-century Sassanid inscription, and the Parthian inscription that accompanies it uses the Parthian term "aryn" in reference to Iranians. 

Historically Iran has been referred to as "Persia" or similar (La Perse, Persien, Perzi, etc.) by the Western world, mainly due to the writings of Greek historians who called Iran Persis (), meaning land of the Persians. As the most extensive and close interaction the Ancient Greeks ever had with any outsider was that with the Persians, the termination became coined forever, even long after the Persian rule in Ancient Greece and beyond had ended and other dynasties were now ruling the regions. In 1935 Rez Shh requested that the international community refer to the country as Iran. Opposition to the name change led to the reversal of the decision, and in 1959 both names were to be used interchangeably. Today both "Persia" and "Iran" are used interchangeably in cultural contexts; however, "Iran" is the name used officially in political contexts. 

The historical and cultural wider usage of "Iran" is not restricted to the modern state proper. Irnshahr Mr Khvnd, Muammad ibn Khvandshh, Trkh-i rawzat al-af. Tanf Mr Muammad ibn Sayyid Burhn al-Dn Khvand Shh al-shahr bi-Mr Khvnd. Az r-yi nusakh-i mutaaddadah-i muqbilah garddah va fihrist-i asm va alm va qabyil va kutub b chph-yi digar mutamyiz mbshad. Markaz-i Khayym Prz .            . Iranshahr stretches from the Euphrates to the Oxus, and it is the center of the prosperity of the World or Irnzamn (Greater Iran) corresponded to territories of Iranian cultural or linguistic zones. Besides modern Iran, it included portions of the Caucasus, Mesopotamia, Eastern Arabia, the Indian subcontinent and Central Asia.

==History==

===Early history in Iran===

The earliest archaeological artifacts in Iran, like those excavated at the Kashafrud and Ganj Par sites, attest to a human presence in Iran since the Lower Paleolithic era. Neanderthal artifacts dating back to the Middle Paleolithic period have been found mainly in the Zagros region at sites such as Warwasi and Yafteh Cave. Early agricultural communities began to flourish in Iran at around 8000 BCE, with settlements such as Chogha Bonut, Susa and Chogha Mish developing in the Zagros region. 

The emergence of Susa as a city is determined by C14 dating as early as 4395 BCE. There are dozens of pre-historic sites across the Iranian plateau pointing to the existence of ancient cultures and urban settlements in the fourth millennium BCE. Iranian.ws, "Archaeologists: Modern civilization began in Iran based on new evidence", 12 August 2007. Retrieved 1 October 2007. During the Bronze age Iran was home to several civilisations such as Elam, Jiroft and Zayandeh Rud civilisations. Elam, the most prominent of these civilisations developed in the southwest of Iran alongside those in Mesopotamia. The development of writing in Elam in fourth millennium BCE paralleled that in Sumer. The Elamite kingdom continued its existence until the emergence of the Median and Achaemenid Empires.

===Classical Era===

Ruins of the Achaemenid palace of Persepolis, now a UNESCO World Heritage Site 
Modern impression of Achaemenid cylinder seal, 5th century BCE. A winged solar disc legitimises the Persian king who subdues two rampant Mesopotamian lamassu figures.

During the second millennium BCE, Proto-Iranian tribes arrived in Iran from the Eurasian steppes, rivaling the native settlers of the country. As these tribes dispersed into the wider area of Greater Iran and beyond, the boundaries of modern Iran were dominated by the Persian, Parthian, and Median tribes. 
From the late 10th to late 7th centuries BCE, these Iranian peoples, together with the pre Iranian kingdoms, fell under the domination of the Assyrian Empire, based in northern Mesopotamia. Georges Roux  Ancient Iraq Under king Cyaxares, the Medes and Persians entered into an alliance with Nabopolassar of Babylon, as well as the Scythians, Cimmerians, and Arameans, and together they attacked the Assyrian Empire. The civil war ravaged Assyrian Empire between 616 BCE and 605 BCE, thus freeing their respective peoples from three centuries of Assyrian rule. 
The unification of the Median tribes under a single ruler in 728 BCE led to the creation of a Median empire which, by 612 BCE, controlled the whole of Iran as well as eastern Anatolia. 

In 550 BCE, Cyrus the Great from the state of Anshan took over the Median empire, and founded the Achaemenid empire by unifying other city states. The conquest of Media was a result of what is called the Persian revolt; the brouhaha was initially triggered by the actions of the Median ruler Astyages and quickly spread to other provinces as they allied with the Persians. Later conquests under Cyrus and his successors expanded the empire to include Lydia, Babylon, Egypt, and the lands to the west of the Indus and Oxus rivers. At its greatest extent, the empire included the modern territories of Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Syria, Jordan, Israel, Palestine, Lebanon, all significant population centers of ancient Egypt as far west as Libya, Turkey, Thrace and Macedonia, much of the Black Sea coastal regions, Armenia, Georgia, Azerbaijan, much of Central Asia, Afghanistan, northern Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, and parts of Oman and the UAE, making it the first world empire. http://www.livius.org/maa-mam/maka/maka.html http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Full_translation_of_the_Behistun_Inscription Conflict on the western borders began with the famous Greco-Persian Wars which continued through the first half of the 5th century BCE and ended with the Persian withdrawal from all of their European territories. The empire had a centralised, bureaucratic administration under the Emperor and a large professional army and civil services, inspiring similar developments in later empires. 
Achaemenid Empire around the time of Darius the Great and Xerxes.
In 334 BCE, Alexander the Great invaded the Achaemenid Empire, defeating the last Achaemenid Emperor Darius III at the Battle of Issus in 333 BCE. Following the premature death of Alexander, Iran came under the control of Hellenistic Seleucid Empire. In the middle of the 2nd century BCE, the Parthian Empire rose to become the main power in Iran and continued as a feudal monarchy for nearly five centuries until 224 CE, when it was succeeded by the Sassanid Empire. The Sassanids established an empire roughly within the frontiers achieved by the Achaemenids, with the capital at Ctesiphon, and were alongside the Byzantines the two most dominant powers in the world for nearly four centuries. Most of the period of the Parthian and Sassanid Empires were overshadowed by the Roman-Persian Wars, which raged on their western borders for over 700 years. These wars exhausted both Romans and Sassanids, which arguably led to the defeat of both at the hands of the invading Muslim Arabs.

===Middle Ages (6521501)===

The prolonged Roman-Persian wars, as well as social conflict within the Empire opened the way for an Islamic invasion of Iran in the 7th century. Gundeshapur was the most important medical centre of the ancient world at the time of the Islamic conquest. Initially defeated by the Rashidun Caliphate, Iran later came under the rule of their successors the Ummayad and Abbasid Caliphates. The process of conversion of Iranians to Islam which followed was prolonged and gradual. Under the new Arab elite of the Rashidun and later Ummayad Caliphates Iranians, both Muslim (mawali) and non-Muslim (Dhimmi), were discriminated against, being excluded from government and military, and having to pay a special tax. H. Patrick Glenn, Legal Traditions of the World. Oxford University Press, 2007, pg. 218219. In 750 the Abbasids succeeded in overthrowing the Ummayad Caliphate, mainly due to the support from dissatisfied Iranian mawali. The mawali formed the majority of the rebel army, which was led by the Iranian general Abu Muslim. After two centuries of Arab rule semi-independent and independent Iranian kingdoms (such as the Tahirids, Saffarids, Samanids and Buyids) began to appear on the fringes of the declining Abbasid Caliphate. By the Samanid era in the 9th and 10th centuries Iran's efforts to regain its independence had been well solidified. 

Persian miniature depicting Timur's campaign in India
The arrival of the Abbasid Caliphs saw a revival of Persian culture and influence, and a move away from Arabic culture. The role of the old Arab aristocracy was slowly replaced by a Persian bureaucracy. The blossoming Persian literature, philosophy, medicine, and art became major elements in the forming of a Muslim civilization during the Islamic Golden Age. The Islamic Golden Age reached its peak in the 10th and 11th centuries, during which Persia was the main theatre of scientific activity. After the 10th century, Persian, alongside Arabic, was used for scientific, philosophical, historical, mathematical, musical, and medical works, as important Iranian writers such as Nasir al-Din al-Tusi, Avicenna, Qotb al-Din Shirazi, Naser Khusraw and Biruni made contributions to Persian scientific writing.

The cultural revival that began in the Abbasid period led to a resurfacing of Iranian national identity, and so earlier attempts of Arabization never succeeded in Iran. The Iranian Shuubiyah movement became a catalyst for Iranians to regain their independence in their relations with the Arab invaders. The most notable effect of the movement was the continuation of the Persian language attested to the epic poet Ferdowsi, now regarded as the most important figure in Persian literature.

The 10th century saw a mass migration of Turkic tribes from Central Asia into the Iranian plateau. Turkic tribesmen were first used in the Abbasid army as slave-warriors (Mamluks), replacing Persian and Arab elements within the army. As a result the Mamluks gained significant political power. In 999, large parts of Iran came briefly under the rule of the Ghaznavid dynasty, whose rulers were of Mamluk Turk origin, and longer subsequently under the Turkish Seljuk and Khwarezmian Empires. These Turks had been fully Persianised and had adopted Persian models of administration and rulership. The result of the adoption and patronage of Persian culture by Turkish rulers was the development of a distinct Turko-Persian tradition.

In 121921 the Khwarezmian Empire suffered a devastating invasion by Genghis Khan's Mongol army. According to Steven R. Ward, "Mongol violence and depredations killed up to three-fourths of the population of the Iranian Plateau, possibly 10 to 15 million people. Some historians have estimated that Iran's population did not again reach its pre-Mongol levels until the mid-20th century." Following the fracture of the Mongol Empire in 1256 Hulagu Khan, Genghis Khan's grandson, established the Ilkhanate dynasty in Iran. In 1370 yet another conqueror, Timur, commonly known as Tamerlane in the West, followed Hulagu's example, establishing the Timurid Dynasty which lasted for another 156 years. In 1387, Timur ordered the complete massacre of Isfahan, reportedly killing 70,000 citizens. Hulagu, Timur and their successors soon came to adopt the ways and customs of the Persians, choosing to surround themselves with a culture that was distinctively Persian. 

===Dynasties (15011979)===
Shah Ismail I, the founder of the Safavid Dynasty (15011736)

At the start of the 1500s, Shah Ismail I established the Safavid Dynasty in western Persia and Azerbaijan. He subsequently extended his authority over all of Persia, and established intermittent Persian hegemony over vast nearby regions which would last for many centuries onwards. Ismail instigated a forced conversion from Sunni to Shi'a Islam. The rivalry between Safavid Persia and the Ottoman Empire led to numerous OttomanPersian Wars. The Safavid era peaked in the reign of the brilliant soldier, statesman and administrator Shah Abbas I (15871629), surpassing their Ottoman arch rivals in strength, and making the empire a leading hub in Western Eurasia for the sciences and arts. The Safavid era also saw the start of the creation of new layers in Persian society, composed of hundreds of thousands of ethnic Georgians, Circassians, Armenians, and other peoples of the Caucasus. Following a slow decline in the late 1600s and early 1700s by internal strife, royal intrigues, continuous wars between them and their Ottoman arch rivals, and foreign interference (most notably by the Russians) the Safavid dynasty was ended by Pashtun rebels who besieged Isfahan and defeated Soltan Hosein in 1722.
Nadir Shah was the founder of the Afsharid dynasty. 
In 1729, an Iranian Khorasan chieftain and military genius, Nader Shah, successfully drove out, then conquered the Pashtun invaders. During Nader Shah's reign, Iran reached its greatest extent since the Sassanian Empire, reestablishing Persian hegemony over all of the Caucasus, other major parts of West Asia, Central Asia and parts of South Asia, and briefly possessing over what was probably the most powerful empire in the world. 

In 1738-39, he invaded India and sacked Delhi, bringing great loot back to Persia. Nader Shah's assassination sparked a brief period of civil war and turmoil, after which Karim Khan came to power in 1750, bringing a period of relative peace and prosperity. 

Another civil war ensued after Karim Khan's death in 1779, out of which Aga Muhammad Khan emerged victorious, founding the Qajar Dynasty in 1794. In 1795, following the disobedience of their Georgian subjects and their alliance with the Russians, the Qajars sacked and ravaged Tblisi, and drove the Russians out of the entire Caucasus, reestablishing Persian suzerainty over the region.

It indirectly sparked another series of Russo-Persian Wars led by subsequent Shahs and Tsars, after the last of which Russia would eventually prevail. Apart from Agha Mohammad Khan, Qajar rule is characterised as a century of misrule. 

Around 1.5 million people, or 2025% of Persia's population, died as a result of the Great Persian Famine of 18701871. 

Whilst resisting efforts to be colonised, Iran suffered in the 1800s as a result of Russian and British empire-building, known as 'The Great Game', losing much of its territory in the Russo-Persian and the Anglo-Persian Wars. A series of protests took place in response to the sale of concessions to foreigners by Nasser al-Din Shah and Mozaffar ad-Din Shah between 1872 and 1905, the last of which resulted in the Iranian Constitutional Revolution and establishment of Iran's first national parliament in 1906, which was abolished in 1908. The struggle continued until 1911, when Mohammad Ali was defeated and forced to abdicate. On the pretext of restoring order, the Russians occupied northern Iran in 1911. During World War I, the British occupied much of western Iran, not fully withdrawing until 1921.
Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi and US President Jimmy Carter
Mohammad Mosaddegh, democracy advocate and deposed Prime Minister of Iran
In 1921, Reza Khan, Prime Minister of Iran and former general of the Persian Cossack Brigade, overthrew the Qajar Dynasty and became Shah. In 1941 he was forced to abdicate in favour of his son, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, after Iran came under British and Russian occupation following the Anglo-Soviet invasion that established the Persian Corridor and would last until 1946.

In 1951 Mohammad Mosaddegh was elected prime minister. He became enormously popular in Iran after he nationalized Iran's petroleum industry and oil reserves. He was deposed in the 1953 Iranian coup d'tat, an Anglo-American covert operation that marked the first time the US had overthrown a foreign government during the Cold War. 

After the coup, the Shah became increasingly autocratic. Arbitrary arrests and torture by his secret police, SAVAK, were used to crush all forms of political opposition. Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini became an active critic of the Shah's White Revolution and publicly denounced the government. Khomeini was arrested and imprisoned for 18 months. After his release in 1964, Khomeini publicly criticized the United States government. The Shah sent him into exile. He went first to Turkey, then to Iraq and finally to France. By the mid-1970s, there was growing unrest with the Shah's repressive regime.

===After the Iranian Revolution (1979)===

Ayatollah Khomeini returns to Iran after 14 years exile on 1 February 1979.
Mass demonstration in Tehran during Iranian Revolution.
The Iranian Revolution, also known as the Islamic Revolution, Fereydoun Hoveyda, The Shah and the Ayatollah: Iranian Mythology and Islamic Revolution ISBN 0-275-97858-3, Praeger Publishers began in January 1978 with the first major demonstrations against the Shah. 

After strikes and demonstrations paralyzed the country and its economy, the Shah fled the country in January 1979 and Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini returned from exile to Tehran, and promises were told to people in order to build new government. Nationwide uprisings against the new system erupted in Kordestan, Khuzestan, Balochistan and other areas, though they were eventually subdued.

In April 1979 Iran officially became an Islamic Republic, after its establishment was supported in a referendum. A second referendum in December 1979 approved a theocratic constitution. Although both nationalists and Marxists joined with Islamic traditionalists to overthrow the Shah, tens of thousands were executed by the Islamic regime afterward. 

On 4 November 1979, a group of Iranian students seized US embassy personnel after the US refused to return Mohammad Reza Pahlavi to Iran to face trial. He was in hospital in Texas at the time. Attempts by the Jimmy Carter administration to negotiate for their release or rescue them were unsuccessful. In January 1981 the hostages were finally set free according to the Algiers Accords.

Iranian soldiers in Khorramshahr during the Iran-Iraq War.
Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein decided to take advantage of the disorder in the wake of the Revolution by acquiring territories that Iraq had claimed earlier from Iran during the Shah's rule.

On 22 September 1980 the Iraqi army invaded Iran at Khuzestan, precipitating the IranIraq War. Although Saddam Hussein's forces made several early advances, by 1982 the Iranian forces successfully managed to drive the Iraqi army back into Iraq. Despite receiving large amounts of foreign financial and military aid (including chemical weapons), all of Saddam's subsequent offensives were thrown back.

The war continued until 1988, when Khomeini accepted a truce mediated by the UN. The total Iranian casualties in the war were estimated to be 123,220160,000 KIA, 60,711 MIA and 11,000-16,000 civilians. 

Following the IranIraq War, President Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani and his administration concentrated on a pragmatic pro-business policy of rebuilding and strengthening the economy without making any dramatic break with the ideology of the revolution. Rafsanjani served until 1997. Rafsanjani was succeeded by the moderate reformist Mohammad Khatami. However, Khatami is widely regarded as having been unsuccessful in achieving his goal of making Iran more free and democratic. 

In the 2005 presidential elections the conservative populist candidate Mahmoud Ahmadinejad was elected. In the 2009 Iranian presidential election the Interior Ministry announced incumbent president Ahmadinejad had won 62.63% of the vote, while Mir-Hossein Mousavi had come in second place with 33.75%. Allegations of large irregularities provoked the 20092010 Iranian election protests both within Iran and in major capitals in the West. 

Hassan Rouhani was elected as President of Iran on 15 June 2013, defeating Mohammad Bagher Ghalibaf and four other candidates. 

The electoral victory of new Iranian President Hassan Rouhani has improved Iran's relations with other countries. Strategic Asia 2013-14: Asia in the Second Nuclear Age - Page 229, Abraham M. Denmark, Travis Tanner - 2013 

==Geography==

Topography of Iran

Iran is the eighteenth largest country in the world, with an area of 1648195 km2. Its area roughly equals that of the United Kingdom, France, Spain, and Germany combined, or somewhat more than the US state of Alaska. Iran lies between latitudes 24 and 40 N, and longitudes 44 and 64 E. Its borders are with Azerbaijan (611 km) (with Azerbaijan-Naxcivan exclave (179 km )) and Armenia (35 km) to the north-west; the Caspian Sea to the north; Turkmenistan (992 km) to the north-east; Pakistan (909 km) and Afghanistan (936 km) to the east; Turkey (499 km) and Iraq (1458 km) to the west; and finally the waters of the Persian Gulf and the Gulf of Oman to the south.

Mount Damavand, Iran's highest point, is located in Amol County, Mazanderan.
Iran consists of the Iranian Plateau with the exception of the coasts of the Caspian Sea and Khuzestan Province. It is one of the world's most mountainous countries, its landscape dominated by rugged mountain ranges that separate various basins or plateaux from one another. The populous western part is the most mountainous, with ranges such as the Caucasus, Zagros and Alborz Mountains; the last contains Iran's highest point, Mount Damavand at 5610 m, which is also the highest mountain on the Eurasian landmass west of the Hindu Kush. 

The northern part of Iran is covered by dense rain forests called Shomal or the Jungles of Iran. The eastern part consists mostly of desert basins such as the Dasht-e Kavir, Iran's largest desert, in the north-central portion of the country, and the Dasht-e Lut, in the east, as well as some salt lakes. This is because the mountain ranges are too high for rain clouds to reach these regions.

The only large plains are found along the coast of the Caspian Sea and at the northern end of the Persian Gulf, where Iran borders the mouth of the Arvand river. Smaller, discontinuous plains are found along the remaining coast of the Persian Gulf, the Strait of Hormuz and the Gulf of Oman.

File:Badab-e Surt Samaee.jpg|Badab-e Surt
File:LATON17.jpg|Laton Waterfall in Gilan
File:Haraz river.jpg|Haraz River in Amol
File:Bandar-e Anzali coast.jpg|Bandar-e Anzali
File:Shad kam.jpg|Fars Province
File:Kaluts, Iran (5072510138).jpg|Dasht-e Lut desert

===Climate===

}
Iran's climate ranges from arid or semiarid, to subtropical along the Caspian coast and the northern forests. On the northern edge of the country (the Caspian coastal plain) temperatures rarely fall below freezing and the area remains humid for the rest of the year. Summer temperatures rarely exceed 29 C. Annual precipitation is 680 mm in the eastern part of the plain and more than 1700 mm in the western part.

To the west, settlements in the Zagros basin experience lower temperatures, severe winters with below zero average daily temperatures and heavy snowfall. The eastern and central basins are arid, with less than 200 mm of rain, and have occasional deserts. Average summer temperatures exceed 38 C. The coastal plains of the Persian Gulf and Gulf of Oman in southern Iran have mild winters, and very humid and hot summers. The annual precipitation ranges from 135 to. 

===Fauna===

Persian Leopard

Iran's wildlife is composed of several animal species including bears, gazelles, wild pigs, wolves, jackals, panthers, Eurasian Lynx, and foxes.

Domestic animals include, sheep, goats, cattle, horses, water buffalo, donkeys, and camels. The pheasant, partridge, stork, eagles and falcon are also native to Iran.

One of the most famous members of Iranian wildlife is the critically endangered Asiatic cheetah, also known as the Iranian Cheetah, whose numbers were greatly reduced after the Iranian Revolution.

Today there are ongoing efforts to increase its population and introduce it back in India. Iran had lost all its Asiatic Lion and the now extinct Caspian Tigers by the earlier part of the 20th century. 

===Provinces and cities===

Iran is divided into thirty one provinces (ostn), each governed by an appointed governor (, ostndr). The provinces are divided into counties (shahrestn), and subdivided into districts (bakhsh) and sub-districts (dehestn).

Iran has one of the highest urban growth rates in the world. From 1950 to 2002, the urban proportion of the population increased from 27% to 60%. The United Nations predicts that by 2030, 80% of the population will be urban. Most internal migrants have settled near the cities of Tehran, Isfahan, Ahvaz, and Qom. The listed populations are from the 2006/07 (1385 AP) census. Tehran, with a population of 7,705,036, is the largest city in Iran and is the capital. Tehran, like many big cities, suffers from severe air pollution. It is the hub of the country's communication and transport network.

Mashhad, with a population of 2,410,800, is the second largest Iranian city and the centre of the Razavi Khorasan Province. Mashhad is one of the holiest Shia cities in the world as it is the site of the Imam Reza shrine. It is the centre of tourism in Iran, and between 15 and 20 million pilgrims go to the Imam Reza's shrine every year. Religious Tourism Potentials Rich. Retrieved 28 February 2008. 

Another major Iranian city is Isfahan (population 1,583,609), which is the capital of Isfahan Province. The Naqsh-e Jahan Square in Isfahan has been designated by UNESCO as a World Heritage Site. The city contains a wide variety of Islamic architectural sites ranging from the 11th to the 19th century. The growth of the suburban area around the city has turned Isfahan into Iran's second most populous metropolitan area (3,430,353). Iran  Statistical Centre. Retrieved 27 February 2008. 

The fourth major city of Iran is Tabriz (population 1,378,935), the capital of the East Azerbaijan Province. It is also the second industrial city of Iran after Tehran. Tabriz had been the second largest city in Iran until the late 1960s and one of its former capitals and residence of the crown prince under the Qajar dynasty. The city has proven extremely influential in the countrys recent history.

The fifth major city is Karaj (population 1,377,450), located in Alborz Province and situated 20 km west of Tehran, at the foot of the Alborz mountains; however, the city is increasingly becoming an extension of metropolitan Tehran.

The sixth major Iranian city is Shiraz (population 1,214,808); it is the capital of Fars Province. The Elamite civilization to the west greatly influenced the area, which soon came to be known as Persis. The ancient Persians were present in the region from about the 9th century BCE, and became rulers of a large empire under the Achaemenid dynasty in the 6th century BCE. The ruins of Persepolis and Pasargadae, two of the four capitals of the Achaemenid Empire, are located in or near Shiraz. Persepolis was the ceremonial capital of the Achaemenid Empire and is situated 70 km northeast of modern Shiraz. UNESCO declared the citadel of Persepolis a World Heritage Site in 1979.

==Government and politics==

Supreme leader Khamenei with former Brazilian president Luiz Incio Lula da Silva.
Iran's syncretic political system combines elements of a modern Islamic theocracy with democracy.

The political system of the Islamic Republic is based on the 1979 Constitution, and comprises several intricately connected governing bodies. The Leader of the Revolution ("Supreme Leader") is responsible for delineation and supervision of the general policies of the Islamic Republic of Iran. 
The Supreme Leader is Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces, controls the military intelligence and security operations; and has sole power to declare war or peace. The heads of the judiciary, state radio and television networks, the commanders of the police and military forces and six of the twelve members of the Guardian Council are appointed by the Supreme Leader. The Assembly of Experts elects and dismisses the Supreme Leader on the basis of qualifications and popular esteem. 

After the Supreme Leader, the Constitution defines the President of Iran as the highest state authority. The President is elected by universal suffrage for a term of four years and can only be re-elected for one term. Presidential candidates must be approved by the Guardian Council prior to running in order to ensure their allegiance to the ideals of the Islamic revolution. 

The President is responsible for the implementation of the Constitution and for the exercise of executive powers, except for matters directly related to the Supreme Leader, who has the final say in all matters. The President appoints and supervises the Council of Ministers, coordinates government decisions, and selects government policies to be placed before the legislature. Eight Vice-Presidents serve under the President, as well as a cabinet of twenty two ministers, who must all be approved by the legislature. 

The legislature of Iran (known in English as the Islamic Consultative Assembly) is a unicameral body. The Majlis of Iran comprises 290 members elected for four-year terms. The Majlis drafts legislation, ratifies international treaties, and approves the national budget. All Majlis candidates and all legislation from the assembly must be approved by the Guardian Council. 

The Guardian Council comprises twelve jurists including six appointed by the Supreme Leader. The others are elected by the Parliament from among the jurists nominated by the Head of the Judiciary. The Council interprets the constitution and may veto Parliament. If a law is deemed incompatible with the constitution or Sharia (Islamic law), it is referred back to Parliament for revision. The Expediency Council has the authority to mediate disputes between Parliament and the Guardian Council, and serves as an advisory body to the Supreme Leader, making it one of the most powerful governing bodies in the country. Local city councils are elected by public vote to four-year terms in all cities and villages of Iran.

===Law===

The current building of The Iranian Parliament
The Supreme Leader appoints the head of Iran's judiciary, who in turn appoints the head of the Supreme Court and the chief public prosecutor. There are several types of courts including public courts that deal with civil and criminal cases, and revolutionary courts which deal with certain categories of offenses, including crimes against national security. The decisions of the revolutionary courts are final and cannot be appealed. The Special Clerical Court handles crimes allegedly committed by clerics, although it has also taken on cases involving lay people. The Special Clerical Court functions independently of the regular judicial framework and is accountable only to the Supreme Leader. The Court's rulings are final and cannot be appealed. The Assembly of Experts, which meets for one week annually, comprises 86 "virtuous and learned" clerics elected by adult suffrage for eight-year terms. As with the presidential and parliamentary elections, the Guardian Council determines candidates' eligibility. The Assembly elects the Supreme Leader and has the constitutional authority to remove the Supreme Leader from power at any time. It has not challenged any of the Supreme Leader's decisions. 

The state-owned Telecommunication Company of Iran handles telecommunications. The media of Iran is a mixture of private and state-owned, but books and movies must be approved by the The ministry of Ershaad before being released to the public. Iran originally received access to the internet in 1993, and it has become enormously popular among the Iranian youth. Iran is now the world's fourth largest country of bloggers. 

===Foreign relations===

Iranian President Hassan Rouhani meeting with Russian President Vladimir Putin. Iran and Russia are strategic allies, and form an axis in the Caucasus alongside Armenia.
Iran's stated goal is to establish a new world order based on world peace, global collective security and justice. Iran urges NAM to make collective bids to establish global peace. PressTV, 26 August 2012. Retrieved 20 November 2012. Ahmadinejad calls for new world order based on justice. PressTV 26 May 2012. Retrieved 20 November 2012. Iran's foreign relations are based on two strategic principles: eliminating outside influences in the region and pursuing extensive diplomatic contacts with developing and non-aligned countries. Iran maintains diplomatic relations with almost every member of the United Nations, except for Israel, which Iran does not recognize, and the United States since the Iranian Revolution. Since 2005, Iran's nuclear program has become the subject of contention with the Western world due to suspicions that Iran could divert the civilian nuclear technology to a weapons program. This has led the UN Security Council to impose sanctions against Iran on select companies linked to this program, thus furthering its economic isolation on the international scene. The US Director of National Intelligence said in February 2009 that Iran would not realistically be able to a get a nuclear weapon until 2013, if it chose to develop one. 

===Military===

Fotros (UCAV) is considered the largest in Iran's arsenal of unmanned aerial vehicles. Iran has made several UAVs indigenously
The Islamic Republic of Iran has two types of armed forces: the regular forces Islamic Republic of Iran Army, Islamic Republic of Iran Air Force, Islamic Republic of Iran Navy and the Revolutionary Guards, totaling about 545,000 active troops. Iran also has around 350,000 Reserve Force totaling around 900,000 trained troops. IISS Military Balance 2006, Routledge for the IISS, London, 2006, p.187 Iran has a paramilitary, volunteer militia force within the IRGC, called the Basij, which includes about 90,000 full-time, active-duty uniformed members. Up to 11 million men and women are members of the Basij who could potentially be called up for service; GlobalSecurity.org estimates Iran could mobilize "up to one million men". This would be among the largest troop mobilizations in the world. In 2007, Iran's military spending represented 2.6% of the GDP or $102 per capita, the lowest figure of the Persian Gulf nations. Iran's military doctrine is based on deterrence. 

Since the Iranian Revolution, to overcome foreign embargo, Iran has developed its own military industry, produced its own tanks, armored personnel carriers, guided missiles, submarines, military vessels, guided missile destroyer, radar systems, helicopters and fighter planes. In recent years, official announcements have highlighted the development of weapons such as the Hoot, Kowsar, Zelzal, Fateh-110, Shahab-3 and Sejjil missiles, and a variety of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). The Fajr-3 (MIRV) is currently Iran's most advanced ballistic missile, it is a liquid fuel missile with an undisclosed range which was developed and produced domestically.

==Economy==

Tehran is the country's capital. Tehran hosts 45% of Iran's industries. 
Iran's economy is a mixture of central planning, state ownership of oil and other large enterprises, village agriculture, and small-scale private trading and service ventures. In 2011 GDP was $482.4 billion ($1.003 trillion at PPP), or $13,200 at PPP per capita. Iran is ranked as an upper-middle income economy by the World Bank. In the early 21st century the service sector contributed the largest percentage of the GDP, followed by industry (mining and manufacturing) and agriculture. Iran Investment Monthly. Turquoise Partners (April 2012). Retrieved 24 July 2012. The Central Bank of the Islamic Republic of Iran is responsible for developing and maintaining the Iranian rial, which serves as the country's currency. The government doesn't recognize trade unions other than the Islamic Labour Councils, which are subject to the approval of employers and the security services. The minimum wage in June 2013 was 487 million rials a month (US$ 134). Unemployment has remained above 10% since 1997, and the unemployment rate for women is almost double that of the men. 

In 2006, about 45% of the government's budget came from oil and natural gas revenues, and 31% came from taxes and fees. As of 2007, Iran had earned $70 billion in foreign exchange reserves mostly (80%) from crude oil exports. Iranian budget deficits have been a chronic problem, mostly due to large-scale state subsidies, that include foodstuffs and especially gasoline, totaling more than $84 billion in 2008 for the energy sector alone. In 2010, the economic reform plan was approved by parliament to cut subsidies gradually and replace them with targeted social assistance. The objective is to move towards free market prices in a 5-year period and increase productivity and social justice. 

The administration continues to follow the market reform plans of the previous one and indicated that it will diversify Iran's oil-reliant economy. Iran has also developed a biotechnology, nanotechnology, and pharmaceuticals industry. However, nationalized industries such as the bonyads have often been managed badly, making them ineffective and uncompetitive with years. Currently, the government is trying to privatize these industries, and, despite successes, there are still several problems to be overcome, such as the lagging corruption in the public sector and lack of competitiveness. In 2010, Iran was ranked 69, out of 139 nations, in the Global Competitiveness Report. 

Iran has leading manufacturing industries in the fields of car-manufacture and transportation, construction materials, home appliances, food and agricultural goods, armaments, pharmaceuticals, information technology, power and petrochemicals in the Middle East. 

Economic sanctions against Iran, such as the embargo against Iranian crude oil, have affected the economy. Sanctions have led to a steep fall in the value of the rial, and as of April 2013 one US dollar is worth 36,000 rial, compared with 16,000 in early 2012. 

About 1,659,000 foreign tourists visited Iran in 2004; most came from Asian countries, including the republics of Central Asia, while a small share came from the countries of the European Union and North America. Iran currently ranks 89th in tourist income, but is rated among the "10 most touristic countries" in the world in terms of its historical sites. Weak advertising, unstable regional conditions, a poor public image in some parts of the world, and absence of efficient planning schemes in the tourism sector have all hindered the growth of tourism.

===Energy===

Iran holds 10% of the world's proven oil reserves and 15% of its gas. It is OPEC's second largest exporter and the world's fourth oil producer.
Iran has the largest proved gas reserves in the world, with 33.6 trillion cubic metres. It also ranks third in oil reserves. It is OPEC's 2nd largest oil exporter and is an energy superpower. 
In 2005, Iran spent US$4 billion on fuel imports, because of contraband and inefficient domestic use. Oil industry output averaged 4 Moilbbl/d in 2005, compared with the peak of six million barrels per day reached in 1974. In the early years of the 2000s (decade), industry infrastructure was increasingly inefficient because of technological lags. Few exploratory wells were drilled in 2005.

In 2004, a large share of natural gas reserves in Iran were untapped. The addition of new hydroelectric stations and the streamlining of conventional coal and oil-fired stations increased installed capacity to 33,000 megawatts. Of that amount, about 75% was based on natural gas, 18% on oil, and 7% on hydroelectric power. In 2004, Iran opened its first wind-powered and geothermal plants, and the first solar thermal plant is to come online in 2009. Iran is the third country in the world to have developed GTL technology. 

Demographic trends and intensified industrialization have caused electric power demand to grow by 8% per year. The governments goal of 53,000 megawatts of installed capacity by 2010 is to be reached by bringing on line new gas-fired plants and by adding hydroelectric, and nuclear power generating capacity. Irans first nuclear power plant at Bushehr went online in 2011. 

===Education and science===
An 18th century Persian astrolabe

Education in Iran is highly centralized. K-12 education is supervised by the Ministry of Education and higher education is under supervision of Ministry of Science and Technology. The adult literacy rate in 2008 was 85.0%, up from 36.5% in 1976. 

Higher education is sanctioned by different levels of diplomas: Fogh-e-Diplom or Krdni after 2 years of higher education, Krshensi (also known under the name licence) is delivered after 4 years of higher education (Bachelor's degree). Krshensi-ye Arshad is delivered after 2 more years of study (Master's degree). After which, another exam allows the candidate to pursue a doctoral program (PhD). 

According to the Webometrics Ranking of World Universities, the top-ranking universities in the country are the University of Tehran (468th worldwide), the Tehran University of Medical Sciences (612th) and Ferdowsi University of Mashhad (815th). 

Iran has increased its publication output nearly tenfold from 1996 through 2004, and has been ranked first in terms of output growth rate followed by China. According to SCImago, Iran could rank fourth in the world in terms of research output by 2018. 

Omid satellite. Iran is the 9th country to put a domestically built satellite into orbit and the sixth to send animals in space.

In 2009, a SUSE Linux-based HPC system made by the Aerospace Research Institute of Iran (ARI) was launched with 32 cores and now runs 96 cores. Its performance was pegged at 192 GFLOPS. Sorena 2 Robot, which was designed by engineers at University of Tehran, was unveiled in 2010. The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) has placed the name of Surena among the five prominent robots of the world after analyzing its performance. 

In the biomedical sciences, Iran's Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics is a UNESCO chair in biology. In late 2006, Iranian scientists successfully cloned a sheep by somatic cell nuclear transfer, at the Rouyan research centre in Tehran. According to a study by David Morrison and Ali Khademhosseini (Harvard-MIT and Cambridge), stem cell research in Iran is amongst the top 10 in the world. Iran ranks 15th in the world in nanotechnologies. 

Iran placed its domestically built satellite, Omid into orbit on the 30th anniversary of the Iranian Revolution, on 2 February 2009, through Safir rocket, becoming the ninth country in the world capable of both producing a satellite and sending it into space from a domestically made launcher. 

The Iranian nuclear program was launched in the 1950s. Iran is the 7th country in production of uranium hexafluoride and controls the entire nuclear fuel cycle. 

==Demographics==

Population of Iran
Iran is a diverse country, consisting of many different religious and ethnic groups that are unified through a shared Persian language and culture. 

Iran's population grew rapidly during the latter half of the 20th century, increasing from about 19 million in 1956 to around 75 million by 2009. However, Iran's birth rate has dropped significantly in recent years, leading to a population growth raterecorded from July 2012of about 1.29 percent. Studies project that Iran's rate of growth will continue to slow until it stabilizes above 105 million by 2050. 

Iran hosts one of the largest refugee populations in the world, with more than one million refugees, mostly from Afghanistan and Iraq. Since 2006, Iranian officials have been working with the UNHCR and Afghan officials for their repatriation. According to estimates, about five million Iranian citizens have emigrated to other countries, mostly since the Iranian Revolution in 1979. 

According to the Iranian Constitution, the government is required to provide every citizen of the country with access to social security that covers retirement, unemployment, old age, disability, accidents, calamities, health and medical treatment and care services. This is covered by tax revenues and income derived from public contributions. According to the World Health Organization, Iran ranked 58 in national health metrics and 93 in the overall performance of its healthcare system in 2000. 

===Languages===

Geographic distribution of the modern Iranian languages: Persian (green), Pashto (purple) and Kurdish (turquoise), as well as smaller communities of other Iranian languages

The majority of the population speaks the Persian language, which is also the official language of the country, as well as other Iranian languages or dialects. Turkic languages and dialects, most importantly Azerbaijani language, are spoken in different areas in Iran. In southwestern and southern Iran, the Luri language and Lari language are spoken. In Kurdistan Province and nearby area's Kurdish is widely spoken. In Khuzestan, many distinct Persian dialects are spoken. Arabic is also spoken in Khuzestan. Notable minority languages in Iran include Armenian, Georgian, and Neo-Aramaic. Circassian was also once widely used by the large Circassian minority, but due to assimilation over the many years no sizable number of Circassians speak the language anymore. Excerpted from:

* 

===Ethnic groups===

Iran's ethnoreligious distribution
The exact ethnic composition of Iran is unknown, as there is no official data. The CIA World Factbook has estimated that Persians constitute 61% of the population, Azerbaijanis at 16%, Kurds 10%, Lurs 6%, Arabs 2%, Balochs 2%, Turkmens and Turkic tribes 2%, and others 1% (such as Armenians, Georgians, Circassians, and Assyrians). It found Persian to be first language of 53% of the population, Azeri and other Turkic dialect being spoken by 18%, Kurdish by 10%, Gilaki and Mazandarani by 7%, Luri by 6%, Balochi by 2%, Arabic by 2%, and other languages at 2%. 

The Library of Congress issued slightly different estimates: Persians 65%, Azerbaijanis 16%, Kurds 7%, Lurs 6%, Arabs 2%, Baluchi 2%, Turkmens 1%, Turkic tribal groups such as the Qashqai 1%, and non-Iranian, non-Turkic groups such as Armenians, Georgians, Assyrians, and Circassians less than 1%. It determined that Persian is language of at least 65% of the Iran population and also as the second language for most of the remaining 35% Iranians. 

===Religion===

A Zoroastrian Fire temple.
Zoroastrianism, was the state religion of the Achaemenid, Parthian, and Sasanian empires. It was an ancient Iranian religion, the first monotheistic religion in the world, and has influenced other later religions including Judaism, Gnosticism, Christianity and Islam.
Zoroastrians in Iran are the oldest religious community of the nation, with a long history continuing up to the present day.
After the fall of the Sasanian Zoroastrian empire by the Muslim conquest of Persia, Zoroastrians have periodically faced extreme religious oppression including forced conversions, massacres, harassment, and other forms of discrimination.

Today, religion in Iran is dominated by the Twelver Shia branch of Islam, which is the official state religion and to which about 90% to 95% of Iranians belong. About 4% to 8% of Iranians belong to the Sunni branch of Islam, mainly Kurds and Iran's Balochi Sunni. The remaining 2% are non-Muslim religious minorities, including Bah's, Mandeans, Hindus, Yezidis, Yarsanis, Zoroastrians, Jews, and Christians. 

The latter three minority religions are officially recognized and protected, and have reserved seats in the Iranian Parliament. However the Bah' Faith, Iran's largest religious minority, is not officially recognized, and has been persecuted during its existence in Iran since the 19th century. Since the 1979 revolution the persecution of Bah's has increased with executions, the denial of civil rights and liberties, and the denial of access to higher education and employment. The government has not released statistics regarding the irreligious. The irreligiosity figures in the diaspora are higher, notably among Iranian-Americans. Public Opinion Survey of Iranian Americans. Public Affairs Alliance of Iranian Americans (PAAIA)/Zogby, December 2008. Retrieved April 11, 2014. 

==Culture==

Safavid-era painting kept at the Grand Shah Abbas Caravanserai hotel in Spadana City
As the first sentence of prominent Iranologist Richard Nelson Frye's latest book on Persia reads: "Iran's prize possession has been its culture." Greater Iran, Mazda Publishers, 2005. ISBN 1-56859-177-2 p. xi 

Persian culture has long been a predominant culture of the region, with Persian considered the language of intellectuals during much of the 2nd millennium, and the language of religion and the populace before that.

The Sassanid era was an important and influential historical period in Iran as Iranian culture influenced China, India and Roman civilization considerably, and so influenced as far as Western Europe and Africa. 

This influence played a prominent role in the formation of both Asiatic and European medieval art. This influence carried forward to the Islamic world. Much of what later became known as Islamic learning, such as philology, literature, jurisprudence, philosophy, medicine, architecture and the sciences were based on some of the practises taken from the Sassanid Persians to the broader Muslim world. 

===Art===

Iranian art has one of the richest art heritages in world history and encompasses many disciplines including architecture, painting, weaving, pottery, calligraphy, metalworking and stonemasonry. There is also a very vibrant Iranian modern and contemporary art scene.

Iran is home to one of the richest artistic traditions in world history and encompasses many disciplines, including architecture, painting, weaving, pottery, calligraphy, metalworking and stonemasonry. Carpet-weaving is one of the most distinguished manifestations of Persian culture and art, and dates back to ancient Persia.

===Architecture===

The ceiling of the Sheikh Lotfollah Mosque in Spadana City
According to Persian historian and archaeologist Arthur Pope, the supreme Iranian art, in the proper meaning of the word, has always been its architecture. The supremacy of architecture applies to both pre-and post-Islamic periods. Arthur Pope, Introducing Persian Architecture. Oxford University Press. London. 1971. The history of architecture of Iran goes back to seventh millennium BC. This art has been completed by various issues, particularly the rituals.

Iranian architecture generally displays great variety, both structural and aesthetic, developing gradually and coherently out of earlier traditions and experience. Without sudden innovations, and despite the repeated trauma of invasions and cultural shocks, it has achieved "an individuality distinct from that of other Muslim countries". Arthur Upham Pope. Persian Architecture. George Braziller, New York, 1965. p.266 Its paramount virtues are several: "a marked feeling for form and scale; structural inventiveness, especially in vault and dome construction; a genius for decoration with a freedom and success not rivaled in any other architecture". Arthur Upham Pope. Persian Architecture. George Braziller, New York, 1965. p.266 

Persians were among the first to use mathematics, geometry, and astronomy in architecture and also have extraordinary skills in making massive domes which can be seen frequently in the structure of bazaars and mosques. This greatly inspired the architecture of Iran's neighbors as well. The main building types of classical Iranian architecture are the mosque and the palace. Besides being home to a large number of art houses and galleries, Iran also holds one of the largest and most valuable jewel collections in the world.
Iran ranks seventh among countries in the world with the most archeological architectural ruins and attractions from antiquity as recognized by UNESCO. Fifteen of UNESCO's World Heritage Sites are creations of Iranian architecture.

File:Persepolis001.jpg|The ruins of Persepolis
File:Persepolis_06.jpg|The ruins of Persepolis
File:Gonbad-Soltaniyeh-IRAN.jpg|The dome of Soltaniyeh
File:Baghe Eram Shiraz.jpg|The Eram Garden in Shiraz City
File:Nasirolmolk mosque warm light.jpg|Nasir ol Molk Mosque
File:Azadi Monument.jpg|The Liberty Tower in Tehran City

===Literature===

Tomb of Hafez in Shiraz City
Persian literature is one of the world's oldest literatures. It dates back to the poetry of Avesta, about 1000 years BC. 
These poems which were a part of the oral traditions of ancient Iran, were orally transferred, and later created parts of the Avestas book during the Sassanid era.
Its sources have been within historical Persia where the Persian language has historically been the national language.

Persian literature inspired Goethe, Ralph Waldo Emerson, and many others, and it has been often dubbed as a most worthy language to serve as a conduit for poetry. Dialects of Persian are sporadically spoken throughout the region from China to Syria to Russia, though mainly in the Iranian Plateau.

Poetry is used in many Persian classical works, whether from literature, science, or metaphysics. Persian literature has been considered by such thinkers as Goethe as one of the four main bodies of world literature. The Persian language has produced a number of famous poets; however, only a few poets as Rumi and Omar Khayym have surfaced among western popular readership, even though the likes of Hafez, Saadi, Nizami, Attar, Sanai, Nasir Khusraw and Jami are considered by many Iranians to be just as influential.

===Philosophy===

The Fravarti symbol from Persepolis
Iranian philosophy can be traced back as far as to Old Iranian philosophical traditions and thoughts which originated in ancient Indo-Iranian roots and were considerably influenced by Zarathustra's teachings. According to the Oxford Dictionary of Philosophy, the chronology of the subject and science of philosophy starts with the Indo-Iranians, dating this event to 1500 BC. The Oxford dictionary also states, "Zarathushtra's philosophy entered to influence Western tradition through Judaism, and therefore on Middle Platonism."

Throughout Iranian history and due to remarkable political and social changes such as the Arab and Mongol invasions of Persia, a wide spectrum of schools of thoughts showed a variety of views on philosophical questions extending from Old Iranian and mainly Zoroastrianism-related traditions, to schools appearing in the late pre-Islamic era such as Manicheism and Mazdakism as well as various post-Islamic schools. Iranian philosophy after Arab invasion of Persia, is characterized by different interactions with the Old Iranian philosophy, the Greek philosophy and with the development of Islamic philosophy. The Illumination School and the Transcendent Philosophy are regarded as two of the main philosophical traditions of that era in Persia.

===Mythology===

Persian mythology are traditional tales and stories of ancient origin, all involving extraordinary or supernatural beings. Drawn from the legendary past of Iran, they reflect the attitudes of the society to which they first belonged - attitudes towards the confrontation of good and evil, the actions of the gods, yazats (lesser gods), and the exploits of heroes and fabulous creatures. Myths play a crucial part in Iranian culture and our understanding of them is increased when we consider them within the context of Iranian history.

Rostam slaying the dragon by Adel Adili
For this purpose we must ignore modern political boundaries and look at historical developments in the Greater Iran, a vast area covering the Caucasus, and Central Asia, beyond the frontiers of present-day Iran. The geography of this region, with its high mountain ranges, plays a significant role in many of the mythological stories. The second millennium BCE is usually regarded as the age of migration because of the emergence in western Iran of a new form of Iranian pottery, similar to earlier wares of north-eastern Iran, suggesting the arrival of the Ancient Iranian peoples. This pottery, light grey to black in colour, appeared around 1400 BCE. It is called Early Grey Ware or Iron I, the latter name indicating the beginning of the Iron Age in this area. Sarkhosh-Curtis, V., Persian Myths (1993) London, ISBN 0-7141-2082-0 

The central collection of Persian mythology is the Shahnameh of Ferdowsi, written over a thousand years ago. Ferdowsi's work draws heavily, with attribution, on the stories and characters of Mazdaism and Zoroastrianism, not only from the Avesta, but from later texts such as the Bundahishn and the Denkard as well as many others.

===Observances===

A painting representing a Qajar family gathering for Iranian new year celebration called Nowruz, and sitting around the Haft-Sin table
The Iranian New Year, Nowruz, is an ancient tradition celebrated on 21 March to mark the beginning of spring in Iran. 
Nowrouz was registered on the list of Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity and described as the Persian New Year by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) in 2009.

Other notable Persian national festivals include Wednesday of Fire (A prelude to Nowrouz), Sizdah Be Dar (Leaving the house on the thirteenth day of Farvardin.), Birth of Mithra (Longest night of the year on the eve of the Winter Solstice.), Tregan (Coinciding with the mid summer festivals.), Mehregan (A festival to honor the Yazata) and Sepandarmazgan (24 February, dedicated to women, and men would make them "liberal presents".).

===Theater===

Tehran City Theater at night.
Theater background in Persia goes back to antiquity (641&ndash;1000 BC). The first initiation of theater and phenomena of acting in people of the land could be traced in ceremonial theaters to glorify legendary and national heroes and humiliate the enemy like "Soug Sivash" or "Mogh Koshi" (Megakhouni), and also dances and theater narrations, musical history of mythological and love stories that have been reported by Herodotos and Gezenphon.

There were many dramatic performance arts popular before the advent of cinema in Persia. A few examples include Khayme Shab Bazi (Puppetry), Saye-bazi (Shadow play), Rouhozi (Comical acts) and Ta'zieh (Shi'i martyr plays).

Rostam and Sohrab puppet opera is an example of the most notable performance in modern day Iran.

===Music===

Taq-e Bostan carving, Women playing Chang (instrument) while the king is standing in a boat holding his bow and arrows, from 6th century Sassanian Iran.

Iranian music, as evidenced by the archeological records of Elam, the most ancient culture in southwestern Iran, dates back thousands of years.
In ancient Iran musicians held socially respectable positions. The Elamites and the Achemenians certainly made use of musicians.

The history of musical performance in Sassanid Iran is however better documented than earlier periods. This is specially more evident in the context of Zoroastrian ritual. iv. First millennium C.E. (1) Sasanian music, 224651. 

By the time of Xusro Parviz the Sassanid royal court was the host of prominent musicians such as Ramtin, Bamshad, Nakisa, Azad, Sarkash, and Barbad.

Like that of most of the worlds cultures, the music of Persia has depended on oral/aural transmission and learning. 

Persian Symphonic Music has also a long history. In fact Opera originated from Persia, much before its emergence in Europe. Iranians traditionally performed Tazieh, which in many respects resembles the European Opera. Iranian performance of Beethoven's 9th Symphony (BBC Persian) 

Iran's main orchestra include: National Orchestra, Tehran Symphony Orchestra and Melal Orchestra (Nations Orchestra).

Today, the musical culture of Persia, while distinct, is closely related to other musical systems of the West and Central Asia. It has also affinities to the music cultures of the Indian subcontinent, to a certain degree even to those of Africa, and in the period after 1850 particularly, to that of Europe. Its history can be traced to some extent through these relationships.

===Cinema===

Leila Hatami, a famous Iranian actress, at the Cannes Film Festival.
Iranian cinema has thrived in modern Iran, and many Iranian directors have garnered worldwide recognition for their work.
Along with China, Iran has been lauded as one of the best exporters of cinema in the 1990s. Abbas Kiarostami: Articles & Interviews 

Some critics now rank Iran as the world's most important national cinema, artistically, with a significance that invites comparison to Italian neorealism and similar movements in past decades. The Iranian Cinema 
Iranian movies have won over three hundred awards in the past twenty-five years including Oscars.

Few of the best known Iranian directors are Abbas Kiarostami, Mohsen Makhmalbaf, Majid Majidi and Asghar Farhadi.

Film festivals have a rather long history in Iran that goes back to 1950s. The first Tehran International Film Festival opened in April 1973, and managed to become well known as a class A festival. The Fajr Film Festival has taken place since 1983. It was intended to be as magnificent and spectacular as possible from its very onset. It had a background as powerful as that of the Tehran International Film Festival and wanted to remain on the same track.

===Cuisine===

Kuku Sabzi with herbs, topped with barberries and walnuts.
The cuisine of Iran is diverse, with each province featuring dishes, as well as culinary traditions and styles, distinct to their regions. The main Persian cuisines are combinations of rice with meat, chicken or fish and some onion, vegetables, nuts, and herbs. Herbs are frequently used along with fruits such as plums, pomegranates, quince, prunes, apricots, and raisins.

Iranians also usually eat plain yogurt () with lunch and dinner; it is a staple of the diet in Iran. To achieve a balanced taste, characteristic flavourings such as saffron, dried limes, cinnamon, and parsley are mixed delicately and used in some special dishes. Onions and garlic are normally used in the preparation of the accompanying course, but are also served separately during meals, either in raw or pickled form. Iranian cuisine has also greatly inspired its neighbors.

Iran is also famous for its caviar. 

===Sports===

Football is among the favorite sports in Iran.
With two thirds of Iran's population under the age of 25, many sports are practised in Iran, both traditional and modern.

Iran is the birthplace of polo, (Naqsh-i Jahan Square in Isfahan is a polo field which was built by king Abbas I in the 17th century.) and Varzesh-e Pahlavani. Freestyle wrestling has been traditionally regarded as Iran's national sport.

However, the most popular sport in Iran is football with the country having won the Asian Cup on three occasions. Basketball is also very popular in Iran where the national team won two of the last three Asian Championships. In 1974, Iran became the first country in West Asia to host the Asian Games.

Today, 13 ski resorts operate in Iran, the most famous being Tochal, Dizin, and Shemshak. All are within one to three hours traveling time of Tehran. Potentially suitable terrain can also be found in Lorestan, Mazandaran, and other provinces.

Skiers at the Dizin ski resort.
Iran is home to several unique skiing resorts. 13 ski resorts operate in Iran, the most famous being Tochal, Dizin, and Shemshak. All are within one to three hours traveling time of Tehran. Tochal resort is the world's fifth-highest ski resort (3730 m at its highest station). Being a mountainous country, Iran is a venue for hiking, rock climbing, and mountain climbing. 

Among the most popular athletes in the country is Hossein Rezazadeh. Mohammad Mousavi is also a famous Volleyball player who plays as a middle-blocker for the Men's National Team and was named Best Blocker at the 2008 Olympic Qualification Tournament. Sportspeople in the Iranian diaspora, such as Leila Vaziri, Adam Gemili, Andre Agassi and Iron Sheik are also popular. Anthropology of the Middle East and North Africa, - Page 312, Sherine Hafez, Susan Slyomovics - 2013 

==See also==
* Outline of Iran
* Index of Iran-related articles

==Bibliography==
* Iran: A Country Study. 2008, Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress, 354 pp.

==References==

==External links==

* The e-office of the Supreme Leader of Iran
* The President of Iran
* Iran.ir
* 
* 
* 
* 

; Videos
* IranWeekly program that explores Iran's past, present and future with exclusive reports. (PressTV)

 



[[History of Iraq]]

Iraq, known in classical antiquity as Mesopotamia, was home to the oldest civilizations in the world, with a cultural history of over 10,000 years, http://www.timeforkids.com/TFK/teachers/wr/article/0,27972,447386,00.html http://www.iraqidinar123.com/history-of-iraqi-dinar/ hence its common epithet, the Cradle of Civilization. Mesopotamia, as part of the larger Fertile Crescent, was a significant part of the Ancient Near East throughout the Bronze Age and the Iron Age. 

Arabs have been the majority of the population in Iraq since the Sassanid Empire, which pre-dates the Muslim conquest of Mesopotamia. Iraq was successfully ruled by the Sumerian, Akkadian, Babylonian, Assyrian, Median, Achaemenid, Seleucid, Parthian and Sassanian empires during the Iron Age and Classical Antiquity, before Iraq was conquered by the Muslim Rashidun Caliphate in the 7th century, and became a center of the Islamic Golden Age during the medieval Abbasid Caliphate. After a series of invasions and conquest by the Mongols and Turks, Iraq fell under Ottoman rule in the 16th century, intermittently falling under Iranian Safavid and Mamluk control.

Ottoman rule ended with World War I, and Iraq came to be administered by the British Empire until the establishment of the Kingdom of Iraq in 1921. The Republic of Iraq was established in 1958 following a coup d'tat. The Republic was controlled by Saddam Hussein from 1979 to 2003, into which period falls the Iran-Iraq war and the Persian Gulf War. Saddam Hussein was deposed following the 2003 US-led invasion of the country. Following the invasion, the situation deteriorated to the extent that in 20062007, Iraq was on the brink of civil war. However, conditions improved following a surge in U.S. troops in 20072008, and the war was declared formally over in December 2011, with the U.S. troops leaving the country.

==Prehistory==
Shanidar 1
During 19571961 Shanidar Cave was excavated by Ralph Solecki and his team from Columbia University, and nine skeletons of Neanderthal man of varying ages and states of preservation and completeness (labelled Shanidar I  IX) were discovered dating from 6080,000 years BP. A tenth individual was recently discovered by M. Zeder during examination of a faunal assemblage from the site at the Smithsonian Institution. The remains seemed to Zeder to suggest that Neandertals had funeral ceremonies, burying their dead with flowers (although the flowers are now thought to be a modern contaminant), and that they took care of injured and elderly individuals.

== Ancient Mesopotamia ==

Mesopotamia is the site of the earliest developments of the Neolithic Revolution from around 10,000 BC. It has been identified as having "inspired some of the most important developments in human history including the invention of the wheel, the planting of the first cereal crops and the development of cursive script, Mathematics, Astronomy and Agriculture." 

=== Sumer and Akkad ===

Sumer was a civilization and historical region in southern Iraq. It is the earliest known civilization in the world, making Iraq one of the Cradles of Civilization. The Sumerian civilization spanned over 3000 years and began with the first settlement of Eridu in the Ubaid period (mid-6th millennium BC) through the Uruk period (4th millennium BC) and the Early Dynastic periods (3rd millennium BC) until the rise of Assyria and Babylonia in the late 3rd and early 2nd millennium BC respectively.

The Ubaid period marks the Pottery Neolithic to Chalcolithic phase in Mesopotamia, which represents the earliest settlement on the alluvial plain in the south. Early urbanization begins with the Ubaid period, around 5300 BC. The Ubaid culture gives way to the Uruk period from c. 4000 BC. The invention of the wheel and the beginning of the Chalcolithic period fall into the Ubaid period. The Sumerian historical record remains obscure until the Early Dynastic period, when a now deciphered syllabary writing system was developed, which has allowed archaeologists to read contemporary records and inscriptions.

Classical Sumer ends with the rise of the Semitic Akkadian kings in the 24th century BC. Following the Gutian period, there is a brief Sumerian renaissance in the 21st century, cut short in the 20th century BC by Amorite invasions, a Semitic people from the north east Levant who founded Babylon as an independent state in 1894 BC. The Amorite dynasty of Isin persisted until c. 1600 BC, when southern Mesopotamia was united under Kassite Babylonian rule.

The north of Mesopotamia had become the Akkadian speaking state of Assyria by the late 25th century BC. Along with the rest of Mesopotamia it was ruled by the Akkadian kings from the late 24th to mid 22nd centuries BC, after which it once again became independent. George Roux - Ancient Iraq 

* Ubaid period: 5300  4100 BC (Pottery Neolithic to Chalcolithic)
* Uruk period: 4100  2900 BC (Late Chalcolithic to Early Bronze Age I)
** Uruk XIV-V: 4100  3300 BC
** Uruk IV period: 3300  3000 BC
** Jemdet Nasr period (Uruk III): 3100  2900 BC 
* Early Dynastic period (Early Bronze Age II-IV)
** Early Dynastic I period: 29002800 BC
** Early Dynastic II period: 28002600 BC (Gilgamesh)
** Early Dynastic IIIa period: 26002500 BC
** Early Dynastic IIIb period: c. 25002334 BC
* Akkadian Empire period: c. 23342218 BC (Sargon)
* Gutian period: c. 22182047 BC (Early Bronze Age IV)
* Ur III period: c. 20471940 BC

=== Babylonia and Assyria ===

Babylonia was a state in central and southern Iraq with Babylon as its capital. It was founded as an independent state by an Amorite king named Sumuabum in 1894 BC. Georges Roux - Ancient Iraq During the 3rd millennium BCE, there developed a very intimate cultural symbiosis between the Sumerians and the Akkadians, which included widespread bilingualism. The influence of Sumerian on Akkadian (and vice versa) is evident in all areas, from lexical borrowing on a massive scale, to syntactic, morphological, and phonological convergence. This has prompted scholars to refer to Sumerian and Akkadian in the 3rd millennium BC as a sprachbund. 

Akkadian gradually replaced Sumerian as the spoken language of Mesopotamia somewhere around the turn of the 3rd and the 2nd millennium BCE (the exact dating being a matter of debate), C. 2006 Bilingualism, Scribal Learning, and the Death of Sumerian. In S.L. Sanders (ed) Margins of Writing, Origins of Culture: 91-120 Chicago but Sumerian continued to be used as a sacred, ceremonial, literary and scientific language in Mesopotamia until the 1st century CE.

Babylonia emerged from the Amorite dynasties (c. 1900 BC) when Hammurabi (c. 17921750 BC), unified the territories of the former kingdoms of Sumer and Akkad. The Babylonian (and Assyrian) culture was a synthesis of Akkadian and Sumerian culture. Babylonians spoke the Akkadian language, and retained the Sumerian language for religious use, which by Hammurabi's time was declining as a spoken language. The rulers of Babylonia carried the title "King of Sumer and Akkad".

The earliest mention of the city of Babylon can be found in a tablet from the reign of Sargon of Akkad, dating back to the 24th century BC.
Following the collapse of the Ur-III dynasty at the hands of the Elamites (2002 BC traditional, 1940 BC short), the Amorites gained control over most of Mesopotamia, where they formed a series of small kingdoms. During the 1st centuries of what is called the "Amorite period", the most powerful city states were Isin and Larsa, although Shamshi-Adad I came close to uniting the more northern regions around Assur and Mari. One of these Amorite dynasties was established in the city-state of Babylon, which would ultimately take over the others and form the first Babylonian empire, during what is also called the Old Babylonian Period.

===Assyria===

Assyria was a Semitic Akkadian kingdom in what is now Northern Iraq, extant as a nation state from the late 25th or early24th century BC to 608 BC. centred on the Upper Tigris river, in northern Mesopotamia (present day northern Iraq), that came to rule regional empires a number of times through history. It was named for its original capital, the ancient city of Assur (Akkadian: ; Aramaic: ; Hebrew: ; Arabic: ).

Of the early history of the kingdom of Assyria, little is positively known. In the Assyrian King List, the earliest king recorded was Tudiya. He was a contemporary of Ibrium of Ebla who appears to have lived in the late 25th or early 24th century BC, according to the king list. The foundation of the first true urbanised Assyrian monarchy was traditionally ascribed to Ushpia a contemporary of Ishbi-Erra of Isin and Naplanum of Larsa. According to the Assyrian King List and Georges Roux, Ancient Iraq, p. 187. c. 2030 BC. Assyria had a period of empire from the 19th to 18th centuries BC. From the 14th to 11th centuries BC Assyria once more became a major power with the rise of the Middle Assyrian Empire which dominated the whole of Mesopotamia and much of the Near East and Anatolia. After an interregnum of a hundred or so years, Assyria began to expand once more with the rise of the Neo Assyrian Empire.

The Neo-Assyrian rulers is usually considered to have begun with the accession of Adad-nirari II, in 911 BC, lasting until the fall of Nineveh at the hands of the Babylonians in 612 BC. [http://www.allempires.info/article/index.php?q=AE_Chart Chart of World Kingdoms, Nations and Empires  All Empires 

Beginning with the campaigns of Adad-nirari II in the 10th century BC, Assyria became a great regional power, growing to be the largest empire the world had yet seen, conquering the 25th dynasty Egypt and much of the Near East, Asia Minor, the Caucasus, Arabia, Egypt and the eastern Mediterranean. It began reaching the peak of its power with the reforms of Tiglath-Pileser III (ruled 745  727 BC). Assyrian Eponym List Tadmor, H. (1994). The Inscriptions of Tiglath-Pileser III, King of Assyria.pp.29 This period is well-referenced in several sources, including the Assyro-Babylonian Chronicles and the Hebrew Bible. Assyria finally succumbed to a combined attack by the Babylonians, Medes and Scythians, following a bitter series of weakening civil wars within Assyria itself. Nineveh was sacked in 612 BC, Harran overrun in 608 BC and a final defeat was suffered at Carchemish in 605 BC. 

=== Neo-Babylonian Empire ===

Eventually, during the 9th century BC, one of the most powerful tribes outside Babylon, the Semitic Chaldeans (Latin Chaldaeus, Greek Khaldaios, Assyrian Kaldu), gained prominence in the far south east of Mesopotamia, and along with the Elamites made a number of failed attempts to loosen the Assyrian grip on Babylon.

In 620 BC, the Chaldeans helped Nabopolassar to take power in Babylonia. At that time, Assyria riven by a series of bitter civil wars being fought for control of the kingdom after the death of its last great ruler, Ashurbanipal. Nabo-Polassar allied Babylonia with the Medes, Persians and Scythians. A weakened Assyria could not withstand this added pressure, and in 612 BC, Nineveh, the capital of Assyria, fell. The entire city, was sacked.

Later, Nebuchadnezzar II (Nabopolassar's son) inherited a proportion of the former Assyrian empire for Babylonia. He added territory to Babylonia and undertook much building work in the city.

In the 6th century BC (586 BC), Nebuchadnezzar II conquered Judea (Judah), destroyed Jerusalem; Solomon's Temple was also destroyed; Nebuchadnezzar II carried away an estimated 15,000 captives, and sent most of its population into exile in Babylonia. Nebuchadnezzar II (604-562 BC) is credited for building the legendary Hanging Gardens of Babylon, one of the Seven Wonders of the World.

Chaldean rule eventually ended in Babylon, its final king Nabonidus was ironically from the final Assyrian capital of Harran. 

== Classical Antiquity ==

=== Achaemenid and Seleucid rule ===

Various invaders conquered Mesopotamia after the death of Nabonidus, including Cyrus the Great in 539 BC and Alexander of Macedon in 331 BC, who died there in 323 BC. In the 6th century BC, it became part of the Achaemenid Empire, then was conquered by Alexander and remained under Greek rule under the Seleucid dynasty for nearly two centuries. Babylon declined after the founding of Seleucia on the Tigris, the new Seleucid Empire capital. Assyria continued to exist as a Geo-Political entity, and was known as Athura by the Achaemenids.

=== Parthian and Roman rule ===

The Seleucids were succeeded by the Parthian Empire in the 3rd century BC. At the beginning of the 2nd century AD, the Romans, led by emperor Trajan, invaded Parthia and conquered Mesopotamia, making it an imperial province. It was returned to the Parthians shortly after by Trajan's successor, Hadrian.

Christianity entered Mesopotamia in the 1st century AD, and Assyria in particular became the center of Eastern Rite Christianity and the Syriac literary tradition. Native Mesopotamian Religion began to die out during this period, although temples were still being dedicated to the Assyrian national god Ashur in his home city as late as the 4th century. 

=== Sassanid Empire ===

In the 3rd century AD, the Parthians were in turn succeeded by the Sassanid dynasty, which ruled Mesopotamia until the 7th century Islamic caliphate rule, after which point Assyria (Assuristan) was dissolved.

In the mid-6th century the Persian Empire under the Sassanid dynasty was divided by Khosrow I into four quarters, of which the western one, called Khvrvarn, included most of modern Iraq, and subdivided to provinces of Mishn, Asuristn (Assyria), Adiabene (which was for a time an independent Assyrian state) and Lower Media. The term Iraq is widely used in the medieval Arabic sources for the area in the center and south of the modern republic as a geographic rather than a political term, implying no greater precision of boundaries than the term "Mesopotamia" or, indeed, many of the names of modern states before the 20th century.

The area of modern Iraq north of Tikrit was known in Arab Muslim times as Al-Jazirah, which means "The Island" and refers to the "island" between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers. To the south and west lay the Arabian deserts, inhabited largely by Arab tribesmen who occasionally acknowledged the overlordship of the Sassanian Emperors.

Until 602, the desert frontier of the Persian Empire had been guarded by the Arab Lakhmid kings of Al-Hirah, who were themselves Arabs but who ruled a settled buffer state. In that year Shahanshah Khosrow II Aparviz (Persian  ) rashly abolished the Lakhmid kingdom and laid the frontier open to nomad incursions. Farther north, the western quarter was bounded by the Byzantine Empire. The frontier more or less followed the modern Syria-Iraq border and continued northward into modern Turkey, leaving Nisibis (modern Nusaybin) as the Sassanian frontier fortress while the Byzantines held Dara and nearby Amida (modern Diyarbakr).

== Muslim Rule and the Abbasid Caliphate ==

The Age of the Caliphs 
This earthenware dish was made in 9th century Iraq. It is housed in the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C.

The first organised conflict between local Arab tribes and Persian forces seems to have been in 634, when the Arabs were defeated at the Battle of the Bridge. There was a force of some 5,000 Muslims under Ab `Ubayd ath-Thaqaf, which was routed by the Persians. This was followed by Khalid ibn al-Walid's successful campaign which saw all of Iraq come under Arab rule within a year, with the exception of the Persian Empire's capital, Ctesiphon. Around 636, a larger Arab Muslim force under Sa`d ibn Ab Waqqs defeated the main Persian army at the Battle of al-Qdisiyyah and moved on to capture the Persian capital of Ctesiphon. By the end of 638, the Muslims had conquered all of the Western Sassanid provinces (including modern Iraq), and the last Sassanid Emperor, Yazdegerd III, had fled to central and then northern Persia, where he was killed in 651.

The Islamic invasion was followed by immigration from the Arabian Peninsula. Though this was by no means the first of such emigrations, as migration from the Arabian peninsula to the Fertile Crescent has been a pattern of human behaviour since antiquity, the Islamic expansions constituted the largest of the Semitic expansions in history. These new arrivals did not disperse and settle throughout the country; instead they established two new garrison cities, at al-Kfah, near ancient Babylon, and at Basrah in the south.

Iraq thus became a province of the Muslim caliphate. The city of Baghdad was built in the 8th century and became the capital of the Abbasid Caliphate. During this period, Baghdad served as the intellectual center of the Muslim world for several centuries, up until the sack of Baghdad in 1258. Many famous Muslim scientists, philosophers, inventors, poets and writers were active in Iraq during the 8th to 13th centuries.

==Mongol conquest==

== Ottoman Iraq and Mamluk rule ==

During the late 14th and early 15th centuries, the Black Sheep Turkmen ruled the area now known as Iraq. In 1466, the White Sheep Turkmen defeated the Black Sheep and took control. In the 16th century, most of the territory of present-day Iraq came under the control of Ottoman Empire as the pashalik of Baghdad. Throughout most of the period of Ottoman rule (1533-1918) the territory of present-day Iraq was a battle zone between the rival regional empires and tribal alliances.
Iraq was divided into three vilayets:
* Mosul Province
* Baghdad Province
* Basra Province

The Safavid dynasty of Iran briefly asserted their hegemony over Iraq in the periods of 1508-1533 and 1622-1638. During the years 1747-1831 Iraq was ruled by the Mamluk officers of Georgian origin who succeeded in obtaining autonomy from the Ottoman Empire, suppressed tribal revolts, curbed the power of the Janissaries, restored order and introduced a program of modernization of economy and military. In 1831, the Ottomans managed to overthrow the Mamluk regime and again imposed their direct control over Iraq. Iraq. (2007). In Encyclopdia Britannica. Retrieved 15 October 2007, from Encyclopdia Britannica Online. 

== 20th century ==

=== British mandate===

Ottoman rule over Iraq lasted until World War I, when the Ottomans sided with Germany and the Central Powers. In the Mesopotamian campaign against the Central Powers, British forces invaded the country and suffered a major defeat at the hands of the Turkish army during the Siege of Kut (191516). Finally winning in the Mesopotamian Campaign with the capture of Baghdad in March 1917. After the war the Ottoman Empire was divided up, and the British Mandate of Mesopotamia was established by League of Nations mandate. Britain imposed a Hshimite monarchy on Iraq and defined the territorial limits of Iraq without taking into account the politics of the different ethnic and religious groups in the country, in particular those of the Kurds and the Assyrians to the north. During the British occupation, the Shi'ites and Kurds fought for independence. Iraq also became an oligarchy government at this time.

Although the monarch Faisal I of Iraq was legitimized and proclaimed King by a plebiscite in 1921, independence was achieved in 1932, when the British Mandate officially ended.

===Independent Kingdom of Iraq ===
Establishment of Arab Sunni domination in Iraq was followed by Assyrian, Yazidi and Shi'a unrests, which were all brutally suppressed. In 1936, the first military coup took place in the Kingdom of Iraq, as Bakr Sidqi succeeded in replacing the acting Prime Minister with his associate. Multiple coups followed in a period of political instability, peaking in 1941.

During World War II, Iraqi regime of Regent 'Abd al-Ilah was overthrown in 1941 by the Golden Square officers, headed by Rashid Ali. The short lived pro-Nazi government of Iraq was defeated in May 1941 by the allied forces in Anglo-Iraqi War. Iraq was later used as a base for allied attacks on Vichy-French held Mandate of Syria and support for the Anglo-Soviet invasion of Iran. 

In 1945, Iraq joined the United Nations and became a founding member of the Arab League. At the same time, the Kurdish leader Mustafa Barzani led a rebellion against the central government in Baghdad. After the failure of the uprising Barzani and his followers fled to the Soviet Union.

In 1948, massive violent protests, known as the Al-Wathbah uprising broke out across Baghdad as a popular demand against the government treaty with the British, and with communist part support. More protests continued in spring, but were interrupted in May, with the marshal law, when Iraq entered the 1948 Arab-Israeli War along with other members of the Arab League.

In February 1958, King Hussein of Jordan and `Abd al-Ilh proposed a union of Hshimite monarchies to counter the recently formed Egyptian-Syrian union. The prime minister Nuri as-Said wanted Kuwait to be part of the proposed Arab-Hshimite Union. Shaykh `Abd-Allh as-Salm, the ruler of Kuwait, was invited to Baghdad to discuss Kuwait's future. This policy brought the government of Iraq into direct conflict with Britain, which did not want to grant independence to Kuwait. At that point, the monarchy found itself completely isolated. Nuri as-Said was able to contain the rising discontent only by resorting to even greater political oppression.

=== Republic of Iraq ===

Inspired by Nasser, officers from the Nineteenth Brigade, 3rd Division known as "The Four Colonials", under the leadership of Brigadier Abd al-Karm Qsim (known as "az-Za`m", 'the leader') and Colonel Abdul Salam Arif overthrew the Hashimite monarchy on July 14, 1958. The new government proclaimed Iraq to be a republic and rejected the idea of a union with Jordan. Iraq's activity in the Baghdad Pact ceased.

In 1961, Kuwait gained independence from Britain and Iraq claimed sovereignty over Kuwait. A period of considerable instability followed. The same year, Mustafa Barzani, who had been invited to return to Iraq by Qasim three years earlier, began engaging Iraqi government forces and establishing Kurdish control in the north in what was the beginning of the First Kurdish Iraqi War.

====Ba'athist Iraq====

Qsim was assassinated in February 1963, when the Ba'ath Party took power under the leadership of General Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr (prime minister) and Colonel Abdul Salam Arif (president). In June 1963, Syria, which meanwhile had also fell under Ba'athist rule, took part in the Iraqi military campaign against the Kurds by providing aircraft, armoured vehicles and a force of 6,000 soldiers. Several months later, `Abd as-Salam Muhammad `Arif led a successful coup against the Ba'ath government. Arif declared a ceasefire in February 1964 which provoked a split among Kurdish urban radicals on one hand and Peshmerga (Freedom fighters) forces led by Barzani on the other.

On April 13, 1966, President Abdul Salam Arif died in a helicopter crash and was succeeded by his brother, General Abdul Rahman Arif. Following the unexpected death of Arif, whereupon he was replaced by his brother, Abdul Rahman Arif, the Iraqi government launched a last-ditch effort to defeat the Kurds. This campaign failed in May 1966, when Barzani forces thoroughly defeated the Iraqi Army at the Battle of Mount Handrin, near Rawanduz. Following the Six Day War of 1967, the Ba'ath Party felt strong enough to retake power in 1968. Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr became president and chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council (RCC). The Ba'ath government started a campaign to end the Kurdish insurrection, which stalled in 1969. This can be partly attributed to the internal power struggle in Baghdad and also tensions with Iran. Moreover, the Soviet Union pressured the Iraqis to come to terms with Barzani. The war ended with more than 100,000 mortal casualties, with little achievements to both Kurdish rebels and the Iraqi government.

In the aftermath of the First Kurdish Iraqi War, a peace plan was announced in March 1970 and provided for broader Kurdish autonomy. The plan also gave Kurds representation in government bodies, to be implemented in four years. G.S. Harris, Ethnic Conflict and the Kurds, Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, pp.118120, 1977 Despite this, the Iraqi government embarked on an Arabization program in the oil rich regions of Kirkuk and Khanaqin in the same period. In the following years, Baghdad government overcame its internal divisions and concluded a treaty of friendship with the Soviet Union in April 1972 and ended its isolation within the Arab world. On the other hand, Kurds remained dependent on the Iranian military support and could do little to strengthen their forces. By 1974 the situation in the north escalated again into the Second Kurdish Iraqi War, to last until 1975.

====Under Saddam Hussein====
Promoting women's education in the 1970s.

In July 1979, President Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr was forced to resign by Saddam Hussein, who assumed the offices of both President and Chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council.

Territorial disputes with Iran led to an inconclusive and costly eight-year war, the IranIraq War (19801988, termed Qdisiyyat-Saddm  'Saddam's Qdisiyyah'), which devastated the economy. Iraq declared victory in 1988 but actually achieved a weary return to the status quo ante bellum, meaning both sides retained their original borders. 

The war began when Iraq invaded Iran, launching a simultaneous invasion by air and land into Iranian territory on 22 September 1980, following a long history of border disputes, and fears of Shia insurgency among Iraq's long-suppressed Shia majority influenced by the Iranian Revolution. Iraq was also aiming to replace Iran as the dominant Persian Gulf state. Although Iraq hoped to take advantage of the revolutionary chaos in Iran and attacked without formal warning, they made only limited progress into Iran and within several months were repelled by the Iranians who regained virtually all lost territory by June 1982. For the next six years, Iran was on the offensive. Despite calls for a ceasefire by the United Nations Security Council, hostilities continued until 20 August 1988. The war finally ended with a United Nations brokered ceasefire in the form of United Nations Security Council Resolution 598, which was accepted by both sides. It took several weeks for the Iranian armed forces to evacuate Iraqi territory to honor pre-war international borders between the two nations (see 1975 Algiers Agreement). The last prisoners of war were exchanged in 2003. 

The war came at a great cost in lives and economic damagehalf a million Iraqi and Iranian soldiers as well as civilians are believed to have died in the war with many more injuredbut it brought neither reparations nor change in borders. The conflict is often compared to World War I, Abrahamian, Ervand, A History of Modern Iran, Cambridge, 2008, p.171 in that the tactics used closely mirrored those of that conflict, including large scale trench warfare, manned machine-gun posts, bayonet charges, use of barbed wire across trenches, human wave attacks across no-man's land, and extensive use of chemical weapons such as mustard gas by the Iraqi government against Iranian troops and civilians as well as Iraqi Kurds. At the time, the UN Security Council issued statements that "chemical weapons had been used in the war." However, in these UN statements it was never made clear that it was only Iraq that was using chemical weapons, so it has been said that "the international community remained silent as Iraq used weapons of mass destruction against Iranian as well as Iraqi Kurds" and it is believed.

A long-standing territorial dispute was the ostensible reason for Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in 1990. In November 1990, the UN Security Council adopted Resolution 678, permitting member states to use all necessary means, authorizing military action against the Iraqi forces occupying Kuwait and demanded a complete withdrawal by January 15, 1991. When Saddam Hussein failed to comply with this demand, the Persian Gulf War (Operation "Desert Storm") ensued on January 17, 1991. Probably as many as 30,000 Iraqi soldiers and a few thousand civilians were killed.

In March 1991 revolts in the Shia-dominated southern Iraq started involving demoralized Iraqi Army troops and the anti-government Shia parties. Another wave of insurgency broke out shortly afterwards in the Kurdish populated northern Iraq (see 1991 uprisings in Iraq). Although they presented a serious threat to the Iraqi Ba'ath Party regime, Saddam Hussein managed to suppress the rebellions with massive and indiscriminate force and maintained power. They were ruthlessly crushed by the loyalist forces spearheaded by the Iraqi Republican Guard and the population was successfully terrorized. During the few weeks of unrest tens of thousands of people were killed. Many more died during the following months, while nearly two million Iraqis fled for their lives. In the aftermath, the government intensified the forced relocating of Marsh Arabs and the draining of the Iraqi marshlands, while the Coalition established the Iraqi no-fly zones.

On 6 August 1990, after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, the U.N. Security Council adopted Resolution 661 which imposed economic sanctions on Iraq, providing for a full trade embargo, excluding medical supplies, food and other items of humanitarian necessity, these to be determined by the Security Council sanctions committee. After the end of the Gulf War and after the Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait, the sanctions were linked to removal of weapons of mass destruction by Resolution 687 . From 1991 until 2003 Iraq underwent hyperinflation, increased poverty and malnutrition. To varying degrees, the effects of government policy, the aftermath of Gulf War and the sanctions regime have been blamed for these conditions.

During the late 1990s, the U.N. considered relaxing the sanctions imposed because of the hardships suffered by ordinary Iraqis. Studies dispute the number of people who died in south and central Iraq during the years of the sanctions. It is also disputed whether any extra hardship was caused by the sanctions or whether this was the result of other factors. However, an oil for food program was established in 1996 to ease the effects of sanctions.

Iraqi cooperation with UN weapons inspection teams was questioned on several occasions during the 1990s. UNSCOM chief weapons inspector Richard Butler withdrew his team from Iraq in November 1998 because of Iraq's lack of cooperation. The team returned in December. Richard BUTLER, Saddam Defiant, Weidenfeld & Nicolson, London, 2000, p. 224 Butler prepared a report for the UN Security Council afterwards in which he expressed dissatisfaction with the level of compliance . The same month, US President Bill Clinton authorized air strikes on government targets and military facilities. Air strikes against military facilities and alleged WMD sites continued into 2002.

== Recent history (2003present) ==

=== 2003 invasion of Iraq ===

After the terrorist attacks by the group formed by the multi-millionaire Saudi Osama bin Laden on New York and Washington in the United States in 2001, American foreign policy began to call for the removal of the Ba'ath government in Iraq. Conservative think-tanks in Washington had for years been urging regime change in Baghdad, but until the Iraq Liberation Act of 1998, official US policy was to simply keep Iraq complying with UN sanctions. The Iraq Liberation Act, codified regime change in Iraq as the official policy of the United States government. It was passed 99-0 by the United States Senate in 1998.

The US urged the United Nations to take military action against Iraq. American president George W. Bush stated that Saddm had repeatedly violated 16 UN Security Council resolutions. The Iraqi government rejected Bush's assertions. A team of U.N. inspectors, led by Swedish diplomat Hans Blix was admitted, into the country; their final report stated that Iraqis capability in producing "weapons of mass destruction" was not significantly different from 1992 when the country dismantled the bulk of their remaining arsenals under terms of the ceasefire agreement with U.N. forces, but did not completely rule out the possibility that Saddam still had Weapons of Mass Destruction. The United States and the United Kingdom charged that Iraq was hiding Weapons and opposed the team's requests for more time to further investigate the matter. Resolution 1441 was passed unanimously by the UN Security Council on November 8, 2002, offering Iraq "a final opportunity to comply with its disarmament obligations" that had been set out in several previous UN resolutions, threatening "serious consequences" if the obligations were not fulfilled. The UN Security Council did not issue a resolution authorizing the use of force against Iraq.

In March 2003 the United States and the United Kingdom, with military aid from other nations, invaded Iraq.

=== Post-invasion history ===

Occupation zones in Iraq as of September 2003.

In 2003, after the American and British invasion, Iraq was occupied by Coalition forces. On May 23, 2003, the UN Security Council unanimously approved a resolution lifting all economic sanctions against Iraq.

As the country struggled to rebuild after three wars and a decade of sanctions, it was plagued by violence between a growing Iraqi insurgency and occupation forces. Saddam Hussein, who vanished in April, was captured on December 13, 2003.

Jay Garner was appointed Interim Civil Administrator with three deputies, including Tim Cross. Garner was replaced in May 2003 by L. Paul Bremer, who was himself replaced by John Negroponte on April 19, 2004 who left Iraq in 2005. Negroponte was the last US interim administrator.

Terrorism emerged as a threat to Iraq's people not long after the invasion of 2003. Al Qaeda now has a presence in the country, in the form of several terrorist groups formerly led by Abu Musab Al Zarqawi. Al-Zarqawi was a Jordanian militant Islamist who ran a militant training camp in Afghanistan. He became known after going to Iraq and being responsible for a series of bombings, beheadings and attacks during the Iraq war. Al-zarqawi was killed on June 7, 2006. Many foreign fighters and former Ba'ath Party officials have also joined the insurgency, which is mainly aimed at attacking American forces and Iraqis who work with them. The most dangerous insurgent area is the Sunni Triangle, a mostly Sunni-Muslim area just north of Baghdad.

By the end of 2006 violence continued as the new Iraqi Government struggled to extend complete security within Iraq.

U.S. and Coalition forces remained in Iraq. An increasingly disturbing trend had arisen - sectarian fighting. This new phase of conflict was waged predominately along religious sectarian lines. Fighting was primarily between the majority Shia and the minority Sunni. But there were reports of infighting as well. Reported acts of violence conducted by an uneasy tapestry of insurgents steadily increased by the end of 2006. According to official US figures, these attacks were overwhelming directed at American forces. Also, criminal elements within Iraq's society seemed to perpetuate violence for their own means and ambitions. Further, Islamic Jihadist - of which Al Qaeda in Iraq is a member - continued to use terror and extreme acts of violence promarily against Shia civilians to advance their religious and political agenda(s). The aims of these attacks were not completely clear, but it was argued in 2006/7 that these attacks were aimed at fomenting civil conflict within Iraq to destroy the legitimacy of the newly elected Iraqi government and create an unsustainable position for the U.S. forces within Iraq. The most widely reported evidence of this argument stemmed from the 23 February 2006 attack on the Al Askari Mosque in Samarra, one of Shi'ite Islam's holiest sites. Analysis of the attack suggested that the Mujahideen Shura Council and Al-Qaeda in Iraq were responsible, and that the motivation was to provoke further violence by outraging the Shia population. The Mujahideen Shura Council was said to have been headed by Abdullah Rashid al-Baghdadi. The Herald Article In mid-October 2006, a statement was released, stating that the Mujahideen Shura Council had been disbanded and was replaced by the "Islamic State of Iraq". It was formed to resist efforts by the U.S. and Iraqi authorities to win over Sunni supporters of the insurgency.

In response to attacks like the one against the Askari Mosque, violence escalated. Shia militias, some of whom were associated with elements in the Iraq government, reacted with violence against Sunnis. Additionally, the militias, it appeared in late 2006, had the capability to act outside the scope of government. As a result these powerful militias, it seemed as of late 2006, were leading reprisal acts of violence against the Sunni minority. A cycle of violence thus ensued whereby Sunni insurgent attacks were followed reprisals by Shiite militias- often in the form of Shi'ite death squads that sought out and killed Sunnis. Many commentators on the Iraq War began, by the end of 2006, to refer to this violent escalation as a civil war.

Following a surge in U.S. troops in 2007 and 2008, violence in Iraq began to decrease. The war was declared formally over in December 2011.

== See also ==

* Abbasid Caliphate
* Akkadian Empire
* Assyria
* Babylonia
* History of Asia
* History of Baghdad
* History of the Middle East
* List of kings of Iraq
* List of presidents of Iraq
* List of Prime Ministers of Iraq
* Iraq
* Mesopotamia
* Politics of Iraq
* Sumer

== References ==

==Further reading==
*Kriwaczek, Paul. Babylon : Mesopotamia and the Birth of Civilization. Atlantic Books (2010). ISBN 978-1-84887-157-1
*Roux, Georges. Ancient Iraq. Penguin Books (1992). ISBN 0-14-012523-X
*Taurus,I.B. Three Kings in Baghdad: The Tragedy of Iraq's Monarchy, (2008). ISBN 978-1-84511-535-7

== External links ==
*Iraq: The Cradle of Civilization
*Iraq History and Culture from the cradle of civilization and Noah to the present age and time
*Historical Context of the Iran - Iraq War from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives

 



[[Geography of Iraq]]

Overview map of Iraq.
Topography of Iraq.

The geography of Iraq is diverse and falls into four main regions: the desert (west of the Euphrates), Upper Mesopotamia (between the upper Tigris and Euphrates rivers), the northern highlands of Iraqi Kurdistan, and Lower Mesopotamia, the alluvial plain extending from around Tikrit to the Persian Gulf.

The mountains in the northeast are an extension of the alpine system that runs eastward from the Balkans through southern Turkey, northern Iraq, Iran, and Afghanistan, eventually reaching the Himalayas. The desert is in the southwest and central provinces along the borders with Saudi Arabia and Jordan and geographically belongs with the Arabian Peninsula.

Iraq holds a special distinction in the history of geography: a clay tablet generally accepted as "the earliest known map" was unearthed in 1930 during the excavation of Ga-Sur at Nuzi Yorghan Tepe, near the towns of Harran and Kirkuk, 200 mi north of the site of Babylon. The tablet, measuring 6.8 x, is usually dated from the dynasty of Sargon of Akkad between 2500-2300 BC; an even earlier date for the tablet was promulgated by archeologist Leo Bagrow, Encyclopdia Britannica: Maps and geography in the ancient world placing it in the Agade Period (3800 BC).

==Major geographical features==
Most geographers, including those of the Iraqi government, discuss the country's geography in terms of four main zones or regions: the desert in the west and southwest; the rolling upland between the upper Tigris and Euphrates rivers (in Arabic the Dijlis and Furat, respectively); the highlands in the north and northeast; and the alluvial plain through which the Tigris and Euphrates flow.
Iraq's official statistical reports give the total land area as 438446 km2, whereas a United States Department of State publication gives the area as 434934 km2.

===Upper Mesopotamia===

The uplands region, between the Tigris north of Samarra and the Euphrates north of Hit, is known as Al Jazira (the island) and is part of a larger area that extends westward into Syria between the two rivers and into Turkey. Water in the area flows in deeply cut valleys, and irrigation is much more difficult than it is in the lower plain. Much of this zone may be classified as desert.

===Lower Mesopotamia===

An Alluvial plain begins north of Baghdad and extends to the Persian Gulf. Here the Tigris and Euphrates rivers lie above the level of the plain in many places, and the whole area is a river delta interlaced by the channels of the two rivers and by irrigation canals. Intermittent lakes, fed by the rivers in flood, also characterize southeastern Iraq. A fairly large area (15000 km2) just above the confluence of the two rivers at Al Qurnah and extending east of the Tigris beyond the Iranian border is marshland, known as Hawr al Hammar, the result of centuries of flooding and inadequate drainage. Much of it is permanent marsh, but some parts dry out in early winter, and other parts become marshland only in years of great flood.

Because the waters of the Tigris and Euphrates above their confluence are heavily silt- laden, irrigation and fairly frequent flooding deposit large quantities of silty loam in much of the delta area. Windborne silt contributes to the total deposit of sediments. It has been estimated that the delta plains are built up at the rate of nearly twenty centimeters in a century. In some areas, major floods lead to the deposit in temporary lakes of as much as thirty centimeters of mud.

The Tigris and Euphrates also carry large quantities of salts. These, too, are spread on the land by sometimes excessive irrigation and flooding. A high water table and poor surface and subsurface drainage tend to concentrate the salts near the surface of the soil. In general, the salinity of the soil increases from Baghdad south to the Persian Gulf and severely limits productivity in the region south of Al Amarah. The salinity is reflected in the large lake in central Iraq, southwest of Baghdad, known as Bahr al Milh (Sea of Salt). There are two other major lakes in the country to the north of Bahr al Milh: Buhayrat ath Tharthar and Buhayrat al Habbaniyah.

===Baghdad area===

Between Upper and Lower Mesopotamia is the urban area surrounding Baghdad.
These "Baghdad Belts" can be described as the provinces adjacent to the Iraqi capital and can be divided into four quadrants: Northeast, Southeast, Southwest, and Northwest. Beginning in the north, the belts include the province of Salah ad Din, clockwise to Baghdad province, Diyala in the North-east, Babil and Wasit in the south east and around to Al Anbar in the west.

===Highlands===

The northeastern highlands begin just south of a line drawn from Mosul to Kirkuk and extend to the borders with Turkey and Iran. High ground, separated by broad, undulating steppes, gives way to mountains ranging from 1000 to near the Iranian and Turkish borders. Except for a few valleys, the mountain area proper is suitable only for grazing in the foothills and steppes; adequate soil and rainfall, however, make cultivation possible. Here, too, are the great oil fields near Mosul and Kirkuk. The northeast is the homeland of most Iraqi Kurds.

===Desert===

The desert zone, an area lying west and southwest of the Domehpleez River, is a part of the Syrian Desert and Arabian Desert, which covers sections of Syria, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia and most of the Arabian Peninsula. 
The region, sparsely inhabited by pastoral bedouins, consists of a wide stony plain interspersed with rare sandy stretches. A widely ramified pattern of wadiswatercourses that are dry most of the yearruns from the border to the Euphrates. Some wadis are over 400 km long and carry brief but torrential floods during the winter rains.

Western and southern Iraq is a vast desert region covering some 64.900 square miles (168.000 square km), almost two-fifths of the country.
The western desert, an extension of the Syrian Desert, rises to elevations above 1.600 feet (490 metres).
The southern desert is known as Al-Hajarah in the western part and as Al-Dibdibah in the east. Both deserts are part of the Arabian Desert.
Al Hajarah has a complex topography of rocky desert, wadis, ridges, and depressions. 
Al-Dibdibah is a more sandy region with a covering of scrub vegetation. Elevation in the southern desert averages between 1.000 and 2.700 feet (300 to 800 metres). 
A height of 3.119 feet (951 metres) is reached at Mount 'Unayzah at the intersection of the borders of Jordan, Iraq and Saudi Arabia.
The deep Wadi Al-Batin runs 45 miles (75 km) in a northeast-southwest direction through Al-Dibdibah. It has been recognized since 1913 as the boundary between western Kuwait and Iraq.

==TigrisEuphrates river system==

The Euphrates originates in Turkey, is augmented by the Balikh and Khabur rivers in Syria, and enters Iraq in the northwest. Here it is fed only by the wadis of the western desert during the winter rains. It then winds through a gorge, which varies from two to 16 kilometers in width, until it flows out on the plain at Ar Ramadi. Beyond there the Euphrates continues to the Hindiya Barrage, which was constructed in 1914 to divert the river into the Hindiyah Channel; the present day Shatt al Hillah had been the main channel of the Euphrates before 1914. Below Al Kifl, the river follows two channels to As-Samawah, where it reappears as a single channel to join the Tigris at Al Qurnah.
The Tigris also rises in Turkey but is significantly augmented by several rivers in Iraq, the most important of which are the Khabur, the Great Zab, the Little Zab, and the Adhaim, all of which join the Tigris above Baghdad, and the Diyala, which joins it about thirty-six kilometers below the city. At the Kut Barrage much of the water is diverted into the Shatt al-Hayy, which was once the main channel of the Tigris. Water from the Tigris thus enters the Euphrates through the Shatt al-Hayy well above the confluence of the two main channels at Al Qurnah.

Both the Tigris and the Euphrates break into a number of channels in the marshland area, and the flow of the rivers is substantially reduced by the time they come together at Al Qurnah. Moreover. the swamps act as silt traps, and the Shatt al Arab is relatively silt free as it flows south. Below Basra, however, the Karun River enters the Shatt al Arab from Iran, carrying large quantities of silt that present a continuous dredging problem in maintaining a channel for ocean-going vessels to reach the port at Basra. This problem has been superseded by a greater obstacle to river traffic, however, namely the presence of several sunken hulls that have been rusting in the Shatt al Arab since early in the Iran-Iraq land.

The waters of the Tigris and Euphrates are essential to the life of the country, but they sometimes threaten it. The rivers are at their lowest level in September and October and at flood in March, April, and May when they may carry forty times as much water as at low mark. Moreover, one season's flood may be ten or more times as great as that in another year. In 1954, for example, Baghdad was seriously threatened, and dikes protecting it were nearly topped by the flooding Tigris. Since Syria built a dam on the Euphrates, the flow of water has been considerably diminished and flooding was no longer a problem in the mid-1980s. In 1988 Turkey was also constructing a dam on the Euphrates that would further restrict the water flow.

Until the mid-twentieth century, most efforts to control the waters were primarily concerned with irrigation. Some attention was given to problems of flood control and drainage before the revolution of July 14, 1958, but development plans in the 1960s and 1970s were increasingly devoted to these matters, as well as to irrigation projects on the upper reaches of the Tigris and Euphrates and the tributaries of the Tigris in the northeast. During the war, government officials stressed to foreign visitors that, with the conclusion of a peace settlement, problems of irrigation and flooding would receive top priority from the government.

==Coral reef==
Iraqi coastal waters boast a living coral reef, covering an area of 28 km2 in the Persian Gulf, at the mouth of the Shatt al-Arab river (). The coral reef was discovered by joint IraqiGerman expeditions of scientific scuba divers carried out in September 2012 and in May 2013. Prior to its discovery, it was believed that Iraq lacks coral reefs as the local turbid waters prevented the detection of the potential presence of local coral reefs. Iraqi corals were found to be adapted to one of the most extreme coral-bearing environments in the world, as the seawater temperature in this area ranges between 14 and 34C. The reef harbours several living stone corals, octocorals, ophiuroids and bivalves. There are also silica-containing demosponges. 

==Settlement patterns==
In the rural areas of the alluvial plain and in the lower Diyala region, settlement almost invariably clusters near the rivers, streams, and irrigation canals. The bases of the relationship between watercourse and settlement have been summarized by Robert McCormick Adams, director of the Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago. He notes that the levees laid down by streams and canals provide advantages for both settlement and agriculture. Surface water drains more easily on the levees' backslope, and the coarse soils of the levees are easier to cultivate and permit better subsurface drainage. The height of the levees gives some protection against floods and the frost that often affect low-lying areas and may kill winter crops. Above all, those living or cultivating on the crest of a levee have easy access to water for irrigation and household use in a dry, hot country.

Although there are some isolated homesteads, most rural communities are nucleated settlements rather than dispersed farmsteads; that is, the farmer leaves his village to cultivate the fields outside it. The pattern holds for farming communities in the Kurdish highlands of the northeast as well as for those in the alluvial plain. The size of the settlement varies, generally with the volume of water available for household use and with the amount of land accessible to village dwellers. Sometimes, particularly in the lower Tigris and Euphrates valleys, soil salinity restricts the area of arable land and limits the size of the community dependent on it, and it also usually results in large unsettled and uncultivated stretches between the villages.

Fragmentary information suggests that most farmers in the alluvial plain tend to live in villages of over 100 persons. For example, in the mid-1970s a substantial number of the residents of Baqubah, the administrative center and major city of Diyala Governorate, were employed in agriculture.

The Marsh Arabs (the Madan) of the south usually live in small clusters of two or three houses kept above water by rushes that are constantly being replenished. Such clusters often are close together, but access from one to another is possible only by small boat. Here and there a few natural islands permit slightly larger clusters. Some of these people are primarily water buffalo herders and lead a semi-nomadic life. In the winter, when the waters are at a low point, they build fairly large temporary villages. In the summer they move their herds out of the marshes to the river banks.

The war has had its effect on the lives of these denizens of the marshes. With much of the fighting concentrated in their areas, they have either migrated to settled communities away from the marshes or have been forced by government decree to relocate within the marshes. Also, in early 1988, the marshes had become the refuge of deserters from the Iraqi army who attempted to maintain life in the fastness of the overgrown, desolate areas while hiding out from the authorities. These deserters in many instances have formed into large gangs that raid the marsh communities; this also has induced many of the marsh dwellers to abandon their villages.

The war has also affected settlement patterns in the northern Kurdish areas. There, the persistence of a stubborn rebellion by Kurdish guerrillas has goaded the government into applying steadily escalating violence against the local communities. Starting in 1984, the government launched a scorched-earth campaign to drive a wedge between the villagers and the guerrillas in the remote areas of two provinces of Kurdistan in which Kurdish guerrillas were active. In the process whole villages were torched and subsequently bulldozed, which resulted in the Kurds flocking into the regional centers of Irbil and As Sulaymaniyah. Also as a military precaution, the government has cleared a broad strip of territory in the Kurdish region along the Iranian border of all its inhabitants, hoping in this way to interdict the movement of Kurdish guerrillas back and forth between Iran and Iraq. The majority of Kurdish villages, however, remained intact in early 1988.

In the arid areas of Iraq to the west and south, cities and large towns are almost invariably situated on watercourses, usually on the major rivers or their larger tributaries. In the south this dependence has had its disadvantages. Until the recent development of flood control, Baghdad and other cities were subject to the threat of inundation. Moreover, the dikes needed for protection have effectively prevented the expansion of the urban areas in some directions. The growth of Baghdad, for example, was restricted by dikes on its eastern edge. The diversion of water to the Milhat ath Tharthar and the construction of a canal transferring water from the Tigris north of Baghdad to the Diyala River have permitted the irrigation of land outside the limits of the dikes and the expansion of settlement.

==Climate==
Dust storms in Iraq, July 30, 2009.
Average temperatures in Iraq range from higher than 38 C in July and August to below freezing in January. Most of the rainfall occurs from December through April and averages between 100 and annually. The mountainous region of northern Iraq receives appreciably more precipitation than the central or southern desert region.

Roughly 90% of the annual rainfall occurs between November and April, most of it in the winter months from December through March. The remaining six months, particularly the hottest ones of June, July, and August, are dry.

Except in the north and northeast, mean annual rainfall ranges between 100 and. Data available from stations in the foothills and steppes south and southwest of the mountains suggest mean annual rainfall between 320 and for that area. Rainfall in the mountains is more abundant and may reach 1000 mm a year in some places, but the terrain precludes extensive cultivation. Cultivation on nonirrigated land is limited essentially to the mountain valleys, foothills, and steppes, which have 300 mm or more of rainfall annually. Even in this zone, however, only one crop a year can be grown, and shortages of rain have often led to crop failures.

Mean minimum temperatures in the winter range from near freezing (just before dawn) in the northern and northeastern foothills and the western desert to 2 to and 4 to in the alluvial plains of southern Iraq. They rise to a mean maximum of about 16 C in the western desert and the northeast, and 17 C in the south. In the summer mean minimum temperatures range from about 27 to and rise to maxima between roughly 42 and. Temperatures sometimes fall below freezing and have fallen as low as -14 C at Ar Rutbah in the western desert. They are more likely, however, to go over 49 C in the summer months, and several stations have records of over 53 C.

The summer months are marked by two kinds of wind phenomena. The southern and southeasterly sharqi, a dry, dusty wind with occasional gusts of 80 km/h, occurs from April to early June and again from late September through November. It may last for a day at the beginning and end of the season but for several days at other times. This wind is often accompanied by violent duststorms that may rise to heights of several thousand meters and close airports for brief periods. From mid-June to mid-September the prevailing wind, called the shamal, is from the north and northwest. It is a steady wind, absent only occasionally during this period. The very dry air brought by this shamal permits intensive sun heating of the land surface, but the breeze has some cooling effect.

The combination of rain shortage and extreme heat makes much of Iraq a desert. Because of very high rates of evaporation, soil and plants rapidly lose the little moisture obtained from the rain, and vegetation could not survive without extensive irrigation. Some areas, however, although arid, do have natural vegetation in contrast to the desert. For example, in the Zagros Mountains in northeastern Iraq there is permanent vegetation, such as oak trees, and date palms are found in the south.

==Area and boundaries==
In 1922 British officials concluded the Treaty of Mohammara with Abd al Aziz ibn Abd ar Rahman Al Saud, who in 1932 formed the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The treaty provided the basic agreement for the boundary between the eventually independent nations. Also in 1922 the two parties agreed to the creation of the diamond-shaped Neutral Zone of approximately 7500 km2 adjacent to the western tip of Kuwait in which neither Iraq nor Saudi Arabia would build dwellings or installations. Bedouins from either country could utilize the limited water and seasonal grazing resources of the zone. In April 1975, an agreement signed in Baghdad fixed the borders of the countries.

Through Algerian mediation, Iran and Iraq agreed in March 1975 to normalize their relations, and three months later they signed a treaty known as the Algiers Accord. The document defined the common border all along the Khawr Abd Allah (Shatt) River estuary as the thalweg. To compensate Iraq for the loss of what formerly had been regarded as its territory, pockets of territory along the mountain border in the central sector of its common boundary with Iran were assigned to it. Nonetheless, in September 1980 Iraq went to war with Iran, citing among other complaints the fact that Iran had not turned over to it the land specified in the Algiers Accord. This problem has subsequently proved to be a stumbling block to a negotiated settlement of the ongoing conflict.

In 1988 the boundary with Kuwait was another outstanding problem. It was fixed in a 1913 treaty between the Ottoman Empire and British officials acting on behalf of Kuwait's ruling family, which in 1899 had ceded control over foreign affairs to Britain. The boundary was accepted by Iraq when it became independent in 1932, but in the 1960s and again in the mid-1970s, the Iraqi government advanced a claim to parts of Kuwait. Kuwait made several representations to the Iraqis during the war to fix the border once and for all but Baghdad repeatedly demurred, claiming that the issue is a potentially divisive one that could inflame nationalist sentiment inside Iraq. Hence in 1988 it was likely that a solution would have to wait until the war ended.

Area:
total: 438317 km2
land: 437367 km2
water: 950 km2

Land boundaries:
total: 3650 km
border countries: Iran 1458 km, Saudi Arabia 814 km, Syria 605 km, Turkey 352 km, Kuwait 240 km, Jordan 181 km

Coastline: 58 km

Maritime claims:
continental shelf: not specified
territorial sea: 12 nmi

Terrain: mostly broad plains; reedy marshes along Iranian border in south with large flooded areas; mountains along borders with Iran and Turkey

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Persian Gulf 0 m
highest point: Cheekah Dar 3611 m (not Haji Ibrahim  3600 m)
True

==Resources and land use==
Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, phosphates, sulfur

Land use:
arable land: 9.19%
permanent crops: 0.48%
other: 90.33% (2011)

Irrigated land: 35250 km2 (2003)

Total renewable water resources: 89.86 km3 (2011)

While its proven oil reserves of 112 Goilbbl ranks Iraq second in the world behind Saudi Arabia, the United States Department of Energy estimates that up to 90 percent of the country remains unexplored. Unexplored regions of Iraq could yield an additional 100 Goilbbl. Iraq's oil production costs are among the lowest in the world. However, only about 2,000 oil wells have been drilled in Iraq, compared to about 1 million wells in Texas alone. US Department of Energy Information - Assessment of Iraqi Petroleum Assets 

==Environmental concerns==
Natural hazards: dust storms, sandstorms, floods

Environment - current issues: government water control projects have drained most of the inhabited marsh areas east of An Nasiriyah by drying up or diverting the feeder streams and rivers; a once sizable population of Shi'a Muslims, who have inhabited these areas for thousands of years, has been displaced; furthermore, the destruction of the natural habitat poses serious threats to the area's wildlife populations; inadequate supplies of potable water; development of Tigris-Euphrates Rivers system contingent upon agreements with upstream riparian Turkey; air and water pollution; soil degradation (salination) and erosion; and desertification.

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection
signed, but not ratified: Environmental Modification

:Major ecoregions:
:*Arabian Desert and East Sahero-Arabian xeric shrublands (PA1303)
:*Mesopotamian shrub desert (PA1320)
:Minor ecoregions:
:*Zagros Mountains forest steppe (PA0446)
:*Middle East steppe (PA0812)
:*Eastern Mediterranean conifer-sclerophyllous broadleaf forests (PA1207)
:*South Iran Nubo-Sindian desert and semi-desert (PA1328)
:*Tigris-Euphrates alluvial salt marsh (PA0906)
:*Red Sea Nubo-Sindian tropical desert and semi-desert (PA1325)
:*Persian Gulf desert and semi-desert (PA1323)

==See also==
* Babylonian Map of the World
* Saudi-Iraqi neutral zone

==References==

*
*

 



[[Demographics of Iraq]]

This article is about the demographic features of the population of Iraq, including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.

The 2009 IMF population estimate of Iraq is 31,234,000. 

==Background==

Iraq is the region known outside the Islamic world as Mesopotamia, the population estimate in 1920 was 3 million. The ruins of Ur, Babylon, and other ancient cities are situated in Iraq, as is the legendary location of the Garden of Eden. Almost 75% of Iraq's population lives in the flat, alluvial plain stretching southeast from Tikrit to the Persian Gulf. The Tigris and the Euphrates carry about 70 million cubic meters of silt annually from this plain down to the delta. The water from these two great rivers, and the fertility of the soil in the alluvial plain and the delta allowed early agriculture to sustain a stable population as far back as the 7th millennium BC.

==Population==
: 31,234,000. (April 2009 IMF est.)

==Vital statistics==

===UN estimates World Population Prospects: The 2010 Revision ===

 Period Live births per year Deaths per year Natural change per year CBR1 CDR1 NC1 TFR1 IMR1 
 1950-1955 327 000 158 000 169 000 53.2 25.8 27.5 7.30 197.6 
 1955-1960 297 000 133 000 164 000 42.6 19.1 23.5 6.20 152.9 
 1960-1965 343 000 122 000 221 000 43.3 15.4 27.9 6.60 120.7 
 1965-1970 430 000 121 000 309 000 46.5 13.1 33.4 7.40 96.0 
 1970-1975 475 000 121 000 354 000 43.6 11.1 32.5 7.15 76.4 
 1975-1980 526 000 124 000 402 000 41.2 9.8 31.5 6.80 60.4 
 1980-1985 571 000 185 000 387 000 39.1 12.6 26.5 6.35 48.9 
 1985-1990 638 000 132 000 505 000 38.8 8.0 30.8 6.15 41.8 
 1990-1995 719 000 105 000 614 000 38.2 5.6 32.6 5.80 43.4 
 1995-2000 836 000 119 000 717 000 37.9 5.4 32.5 5.40 38.1 
 2000-2005 960 000 144 000 816 000 37.5 5.6 31.9 5.12 35.9 
 2005-2010 1 079 000 187 000 892 000 36.6 6.3 30.2 4.86 34.6 
 1 CBR = crude birth rate (per 1000); CDR = crude death rate (per 1000); NC = natural change (per 1000); TFR = total fertility rate (number of children per woman); IMR = infant mortality rate per 1000 births 

===Fertility ages average in 1997-2006 http://cosit.gov.iq/en/population-manpower-staatistics/life ===

 Age groups 1997 2006 
 15-19 56,2 68 
 20-24 210 187 
 25-29 276,2 221 
 30-34 257,9 188 
 35-39 196,5 136 
 40-44 101,4 56 
 45-49 31 9 
 Total 1128,2 865 
 

==Ethnic groups==
Ethnic and religious groups in Iraq

Iraq's dominant ethnic group are the Iraqi or Mesopotamian Arabs, who account for around three-quarters of the population. They are a fusion of old Mesopotamian, Arabian, Iranian, and other populations, who now speak Mesopotamian Arabic.

Iraqi Arabs (including Palestinians) 75%, Kurds (including Yazidis) 17%, Turkmen 3%, Assyrians 2%, Persians 2%,Other 1% (Armenians, Circassians, Shabaks, Mandaeans).

==Languages==

Arabic is the official language of Iraq, and is spoken or understood by almost all the population. 

Kurdish is the largest minority language, and has regional language status in Iraqi Kurdistan. Aramaic, once spoken by the whole country, is now only spoken by the Assyrian minority.

Azerbaijani is spoken in pockets of northern Iraq, and Persian is spoken in pockets of southern Iraq. Numerous languages of the Caucasus are also spoken by minorities across the country.

==Religions==
Islam 99% (Shi'a 60%-65%, Sunni 32%-37%), Christianity 0.8%, Mandaeism and other less then 0.1%. 

==Demographic statistics==
The following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.

=== Age structure ===
: 0-14 years: 37.6% (male 5,959,562/ female 5,751,970)
: 15-64 years: 59.3% (male 9,355,176/ female 9,094,953)
: 65 years and over: 3% (male 376,700; female 423,295) (2006 est.)

=== Median age ===
: total: 21.3 years
: male: 21.2 years
: female: 21.4 years (2013 est.)

===Population growth rate===
: 2.29% (2013 est.)

=== Crude birth rate ===
: 27.51 births/1,000 population (2013 est.)

=== Crude death rate ===
: 4.65 deaths/1,000 population (2013 est.)

=== Total fertility rate ===
: 3.58 children born/woman (2012 est.)

=== Net migration rate ===
: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2013 est.)

=== Urbanization ===
: urban population: 66.5% of total population (2011)
: rate of urbanization: 3.05% annual rate of change (2010-15 est.)

===Sex ratio===
: at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
: under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
: 15-64 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
: 65 years and over: 0.87 male(s)/female
: total population: 1.03 male(s)/female (2011 est.)

===Maternal mortality rate===
: 63 deaths/100,000 live births (2010)

===Infant mortality rate===
: 38.86 deaths/1,000 live births (2010)

===Life expectancy at birth===
: total population: 68 years
: male: 69.67 years
: female: 72.67 years (2013 est.)

===Total fertility rate===
: 3.5 children born/woman (2013 est.)

===Contraceptive prevalence rate===
: 51.2% (2011)

===Health expenditures===
: 8.4% of GDP (2011)

===Physicians density===
: 0.69 physicians/1,000 population (2009)

===Hospital bed density===
: 1.3 beds/1,000 population (2010)

===Obesity - adult prevalence rate===
: 27% (2008)

===Children under the age of 5 years underweight===
: 7.1% (2006)

===Nationality===
: noun: Iraqi(s)
: adjective: Iraqi

===Literacy===
: definition: age 15 and over can read and write
: total population: 78.2%
: male: 86%
: female: 70.6% (2010 est.)

==See also==
*Iraqi people
*Iraqi diaspora
*Minorities in Iraq

==References==

==External links==
*Iraq Inter-Agency Information & Analysis Unit Reports, Maps and Assessments of Iraq's Governorates from the UN Inter-Agency Information & Analysis Unit
*CIA World Fact Book
*Linguist List partial inventory of languages and dialects of Iraq
*The Iraq DNA project

 


[[Politics of Iraq]]

The politics of Iraq takes place in a framework of a federal parliamentary representative democratic republic. It is a multi-party system whereby the executive power is exercised by the Prime Minister of the Council of Ministers as the head of government, as well as the President of Iraq, and legislative power is vested in the Council of Representatives and the Federation Council.

The current Prime Minister of Iraq is Nouri al-Maliki, who holds most of the executive authority and appoints the Council of Ministers, which acts as a cabinet and/or government.

==History==

Before the fall of Saddam Hussein in 2003, the Ba'ath Party officially ruled. Iraq was occupied by foreign troops beginning with the 2003 invasion of Iraq, with military forces coming primarily from the United States and the United Kingdom. Most foreign militaries operated under the umbrella of the Multinational force in Iraq (the MNFI), authorized under United Nations Security Council Resolution 1546, 1637, 1723, and 1790 until December 31, 2008. On January 1, 2009 the U.S.Iraq Status of Forces Agreement entered into force.

The occupation yielded to a transitional administrative law, which was replaced by the Constitution of Iraq following approval in a referendum held on October 15, 2005. A permanent 275-member Council of Representatives was elected in the December 2005 Iraqi legislative elections, initiating the formation of the Government of Iraq, 2006-2010. The last elections were the January 2010 Iraqi legislative elections.

==Government==

===Federal government===

Council of Representatives of Iraq.

The federal government of Iraq is defined under the current Constitution as an Islamic, Constitution of Iraq, Section 1, Article 2 democratic, federal parliamentary republic. Constitution of Iraq, Section 1, Article 1 The federal government is composed of the executive, legislative, and judicial branches, as well as numerous independent commissions.

The legislative branch is composed of the Council of Representatives and a Federation Council. Constitution of Iraq, Section 3, Chapter 1, Article 48. The executive branch is composed of the President, the Prime Minister, and the Council of Ministers. Constitution of Iraq, Section 3, Chapter 2, Article 63 The federal judiciary is composed of the Higher Judicial Council, the Supreme Court, the Court of Cassation, the Public Prosecution Department, the Judiciary Oversight Commission, and other federal courts that are regulated by law. Constitution of Iraq, Section 3, Chapter 3, Article 89 One such court is the Central Criminal Court.

The Independent High Commission for Human Rights, the Independent High Electoral Commission, and the Commission on Integrity are independent commissions subject to monitoring by the Council of Representatives. Constitution of Iraq, Section 3, Chapter 4, Article 102 The Central Bank of Iraq, the Board of Supreme Audit, the Communications and Media Commission, and the Endowment Commission are financially and administratively independent institutions. Constitution of Iraq, Section 3, Chapter 4, Article 103 The Foundation of Martyrs is attached to the Council of Ministers. Constitution of Iraq, Section 3, Chapter 4, Article 104 The Federal Public Service Council regulates the affairs of the federal public service, including appointment and promotion. Constitution of Iraq, Section 3, Chapter 4, Article 107 

===Local government===
The basic subdivisions of the country are the regions and the governorates. Both regions and governorates are given broad autonomy with regions given additional powers such as control of internal security forces for the region such as police, security forces, and guards. Constitution of Iraq, Article 121 The last local elections for the governorates were held in the 2009 Iraqi governorate elections on 31 January 2009.

====Regions====

The constitution requires that the Council of Representatives enact a law which provides the procedures for forming a new region 6 months from the start of its first session. Constitution of Iraq, Article 114 A law was passed 11 October 2006 by a unanimous vote with only 138 of 275 representatives present, with the remaining representatives boycotting the vote. Legislators from the Iraqi Accord Front, Sadrist Movement and Islamic Virtue Party all opposed the bill. 

Under the law, a region can be created out of one or more existing governorates or two or more existing regions, and a governorate can also join an existing region to create a new region. A new region can be proposed by one third or more of the council members in each affected governorate plus 500 voters or by one tenth or more voters in each affected governorate. A referendum must then be held within three months, which requires a simple majority in favour to pass. In the event of competing proposals, the multiple proposals are put to a ballot and the proposal with the most supporters is put to the referendum. In the event of an affirmative referendum a Transitional Legislative Assembly is elected for one year, which has the task of writing a constitution for the Region, which is then put to a referendum requiring a simple majority to pass. The President, Prime Minister and Ministers of the region are elected by simple majority, in contrast to the Iraqi Council of Representatives which requires two thirds support. 

====Provinces====

Iraqi Governorates
Iraq is divided into 18 provinces, which are further divided into districts:

#Baghdd ()
#Salh ad-Dn ( )
#Diyl ()
#Wsit ()
#Maysn ()
#Al-Basrah ()
#Dh Qr ( )
#Al-Muthann ()
#Al-Qdisiyyah ()

Bbil ()
Al-Karbal' ()
An-Najaf ()
Al-Anbar ()
Nnaw ()
Dahk ()
Arbl ()
Kirkuk (or At-Ta'mim) ()
As-Sulaymniyyah ()

==Political parties==

===Parliamentary alliances and parties===
*National Iraqi Alliance
**Supreme Islamic Iraqi Council (al-Majlis al-alalith-thaura l-islamiyya fil-Iraq) - led by Ammar al-Hakim
**Sadrist Movement - led by Muqtada al-Sadr
**Islamic Dawa Party - Iraq Organisation (Hizb al-Da'wa al-Islami Tendeem al-Iraq) - led by Kasim Muhammad Taqi al-Sahlani
**Islamic Dawa Party (Hizb al-Da'wa al-Islamiyya) - led by Nouri al-Maliki
**Tribes of Iraq Coalition - led by Hamid al-Hais
**Islamic Fayli Grouping in Iraq - led by Muqdad Al-Baghdadi
*Democratic Patriotic Alliance of Kurdistan
**Kurdistan Democratic Party (Partiya Demokrat a Kurdistan) - led by Massoud Barzani
**Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (Yaketi Nishtimani Kurdistan) - led by Jalal Talabani
**Kurdistan Islamic Union (Yektiya Islamiya Kurdistan)
**Movement for Change (Bizutnaway Gorran) - led by Nawshirwan Mustafa
**Kurdistan Toilers Party (Parti Zahmatkeshan Kurdistan)
**Kurdistan Communist Party (Partiya Komunst Kurdistan)
**Assyrian Patriotic Party
*Iraqi List (al-Qayimaal Iraqia)
**Iraqi National Accord - led by Iyad Allawi
*The Iraqis - led by Ghazi al-Yawer
*Iraqi Turkmen Front (Irak Trkmen Cephesi)) (same as Alliance of the Turkomen Front of Iraq?)
*National Independent Cadres and Elites
*People's Union (Ittihad Al Shaab)
**Iraqi Communist Party - led by Hamid Majid Mousa
*Islamic Kurdish Society - led by Ali Abd-al Aziz
*Islamic Labour Movement in Iraq
*National Democratic Party (Hizb al Dimuqratiyah al Wataniyah) - led by Samir al-Sumaidai
*National Rafidain List
**Assyrian Democratic Movement (Zowaa Dimuqrataya Aturaya)- led by Yonadam Kanna
*Reconciliation and Liberation Bloc
*The Upholders of the Message (Al-Risaliyun)
*Mithal al-Alusi List
*Yazidi Movement for Reform and Progress

===Other parties===
*Communist Party of Iraq
*Worker-Communist Party of Iraq
*Leftist Worker-Communist Party of Iraq
*Alliance of Independent Democrats - led by Adnan Pachachi
*National Democratic Party - Naseer al-Chaderchi
*Green Party of Iraq
*Iraqi Democratic Union
* Iraqi National Accord 
*Constitutional Monarchy Movement - led by Sharif Ali Bin al-Hussein
*Assyrian Patriotic Party - on the Democratic Patriotic Alliance of Kurdistan list
*Assyria Liberation Party
*Kurdistan Conservative Party
*Turkmen People's Party
*Iraqi Islamic Party - led by Mohsen Abdel Hamid
*Al Neshoor Party 

===Illegal parties===
*Hizb ut-Tahrir
*Arab Socialist Ba'ath Party (Regional Command National Command)

==Elections==

===Iraqi parliamentary election, January 2005===

Iraqi police officers hold up their index fingers marked with purple indelible ink, a security measure to prevent double voting.
Elections for the National Assembly of Iraq were held on January 30, 2005 in Iraq. The 275-member National Assembly was a parliament created under the Transitional Law during the Occupation of Iraq. The newly elected transitional Assembly was given a mandate to write the new and permanent Constitution of Iraq and exercised legislative functions until the new Constitution came into effect, and resulted in the formation of the Iraqi Transitional Government.

The United Iraqi Alliance, tacitly backed by Shia Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, led with some 48% of the vote. The Democratic Patriotic Alliance of Kurdistan was in second place with some 26% of the vote. Prime Minister Ayad Allawi's party, the Iraqi List, came third with some 14%. In total, twelve parties received enough votes to win a seat in the assembly.

Low Arab Sunni turnout threatened the legitimacy of the election, which was as low as 2% in Anbar province. More than 100 armed attacks on polling places took place, killing at least 44 people (including nine suicide bombers) across Iraq, including at least 20 in Baghdad.

===Iraqi parliamentary election, December 2005===

Iraqis in the predominantly Sunni city of Husaybah, wait in lines to vote during the national election.
Following the ratification of the Constitution of Iraq on 15 October 2005, a general election was held on 15 December to elect the permanent 275-member Iraqi Council of Representatives.

The elections took place under a list system, whereby voters chose from a list of parties and coalitions. 230 seats were apportioned among Iraq's 18 governorates based on the number of registered voters in each as of the January 2005 elections, including 59 seats for Baghdad Governorate. local election results The seats within each governorate were allocated to lists through a system of Proportional Representation. An additional 45 "compensatory" seats were allocated to those parties whose percentage of the national vote total (including out of country votes) exceeds the percentage of the 275 total seats that they have been allocated. Women were required to occupy 25% of the 275 seats. The change in the voting system gave more weight to Arab Sunni voters, who make up most of the voters in several provinces. It was expected that these provinces would thus return mostly Sunni Arab representatives, after most Sunnis boycotted the last election.

Turnout was high (79.6%). The White House was encouraged by the relatively low levels of violence during polling, with one insurgent group making good on a promised election day moratorium on attacks, even going so far as to guard the voters from attack. President Bush frequently pointed to the election as a sign of progress in rebuilding Iraq. However, post-election violence threatened to plunge the nation into civil war, before the situation began to calm in 2007. The election results themselves produced a shaky coalition government headed by Nouri al-Maliki.

===Iraqi parliamentary election, 2010===

A parliamentary election was held in Iraq on 7 March 2010. The election decided the 325 members of the Council of Representatives of Iraq who will elect the Iraqi Prime Minister and President. The election resulted in a partial victory for the Iraqi National Movement, led by former Interim Prime Minister Ayad Allawi, which won a total of 91 seats, making it the largest alliance in the Council. The State of Law Coalition, led by incumbent Prime Minister Nouri Al-Maliki, was the second largest grouping with 89 seats.

The election was rife with controversy. Prior to the election, the Supreme Court in Iraq ruled that the existing electoral law/rule was unconstitutional, The 2005 Election Law Seen as Unconstitutional; Seat Distribution Key in Doubt and a new elections law made changes in the electoral system. Iraq Passes Key Election Law and Prepares for January Vote On 15 January 2010, the Independent High Electoral Commission (IHEC) banned 499 candidates from the election due to alleged links with the Ba'ath Party. Before the start of the campaign on 12 February 2010, IHEC confirmed that most of the appeals by banned candidates had been rejected and 456 of the initially banned candidates would not be allowed to run for the election. There were numerous allegations of fraud, and a recount of the votes in Baghdad was ordered on 19 April 2010. On May 14, IHEC announced that after 11,298 ballot boxes had been recounted, there was no sign of fraud or violations. 

The new parliament opened on 14 June 2010. After months of fraught negotiations, an agreement was reached on the formation of a new government on November 11. Talabani would continue as president, Al-Maliki would stay on as prime minister and Allawi would head a new security council.

===Iraqi parliamentary election, 2014===

Parliamentary elections were held in Iraq on 30 April 2014. The elections decided the 328 members of the Council of Representatives who will in turn elect the Iraqi President and Prime Minister.

==Issues==

===Corruption===
According to Transparency International, Iraq's is the most corrupt government in the Middle East, and is described as a hybrid regime (between a flawed democracy and an authoritarian regime). The 2011 report "Costs of War" from Brown University's Watson Institute for International Studies concluded that U.S. military presence in Iraq has not been able to prevent this corruption, noting that as early as 2006, "there were clear signs that post-Saddam Iraq was not going to be the linchpin for a new democratic Middle East." 

==See also==
* Assyrian politics in Iraq
* Post-invasion Iraq, 2003present
* Reconstruction of Iraq
* Human rights in post-invasion Iraq

==References==

==External links==
*
* Who Are Iraq's New Leaders? What Do They Want? U.S. Institute of Peace Special Report, March 2006
* BBC Report: Who's Who in Post-Saddam Iraq
* Iraq Elections newswire
* Video Seminar on Iraq Coalition Politics: April 20, 2005, sponsored by the Program in Arms Control, Disarmament, and International Security at the University of Illinois.
* Global Justice Project: Iraq
* M. Ismail Marcinkowski, Religion and Politics in Iraq. Shiite Clerics between Quietism and Resistance, with a foreword by Professor Hamid Algar of the University of California at Berkeley. Singapore: Pustaka Nasional, 2004 (ISBN 9971-77-513-1)
* Iraq Inter-Agency Information & Analysis Unit Reports, Maps and Assessments of Iraq's Governorates from the UN Inter-Agency Information & Analysis Unit
*State and society in Iraq ten years after regime change: the rise of a new authoritarianism International Affairs (2013)

 



[[Economy of Iraq]]

Iraq's economy is dominated by the oil
sector, which has provided about 95% of foreign exchange earnings in modern times. http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/library/report/crs/crs_iraq_economy.pdf In the 1980s, financial problems caused by massive expenditures in the eight-year war with Iran and damage to oil export facilities by Iran led the government to implement austerity measures, borrow heavily, and later reschedule foreign debt payments; Iraq suffered economic losses of at least $80 billion from the war. Christopher Parker and Pete W. Moore from merip.org After the end of hostilities, in 1988, oil exports gradually increased with the construction of new pipelines and restoration of damaged facilities. Current GDP per capita from the World Resources Institute 

Since mid-2009, oil export earnings have returned to levels seen before War#2010: U.S. drawdown and Operation New Dawn|Operation New Dawn] and government revenues have rebounded, along with global oil prices. In 2011 Baghdad probably will increase oil exports above the current level of 1900000 oilbbl per day as a result of new contracts with international oil companies, but is likely to fall short of the 2400000 oilbbl per day it is forecasting in its budget. Iraq's recent contracts with major oil companies have the potential to greatly expand oil revenues, but Iraq will need to upgrade its oil processing, pipeline, and export infrastructure to enable these deals to reach their potential.

An improved security environment and an initial wave of foreign investment are helping to spur economic activity, particularly in the energy, construction, and retail sectors. Broader economic improvement, long-term fiscal health, and sustained increases in the standard of living still depend on the government passing major policy reforms and on continued development of Iraq's massive oil reserves. Although foreign investors viewed Iraq with increasing interest in 2010, most are still hampered by difficulties in acquiring land for projects and by other regulatory impediments.

Inflation has decreased consistently since 2006 as the security situation has improved. However, Iraqi leaders remain hard pressed to translate macroeconomic gains into improved lives for ordinary Iraqis. Unemployment remains a problem throughout the country. Reducing corruption and implementing reforms - such as bank restructuring and developing the private sector - would be important steps in this direction.

==Recent History==
Nominal GDP grew by 213% in the '60s, 1325% in the '70s, 2% in the '80s, -4) per day in 1979, and oil revenues were 21 billion dollars in 1979 and 27 billion in 1980 due to record oil prices. At the outbreak of the war, Iraq had amassed an estimated 35 billion in foreign exchange reserves.

The IranIraq War and the 1980s oil glut depleted Iraq's foreign exchange reserves, devastated its economy, and left the country saddled with a foreign debt of more than $40 billion. After the initial destruction of the war, oil exports gradually increased with the construction of new pipelines and the restoration of damaged facilities.

==Sanctions==

Iraq's seizure of Kuwait in August 1990, subsequent international economic sanctions, and damage from military action by an international coalition beginning in January 1991, drastically reduced economic activity. The regime exacerbated shortages by supporting large military and internal security forces and by allocating resources to key supporters of the Ba'ath Party. The implementation of the UN's Oil for Food program in December 1996 helped improve economic conditions. For the first six six-month phases of the program, Iraq was allowed to export increasing amounts of oil in exchange for food, medicine, and other humanitarian goods. In December 1999, the UN Security Council authorized Iraq to export as much oil as required to meet humanitarian needs. Per capita food imports increased substantially, while medical supplies and health care services steadily improved, though per capita economic production and living standards were still well below their prewar level.

Iraq changed its oil reserve currency from the U.S. dollar to the euro in 2000. However, 28% of Iraq's export revenues under the program were deducted to meet UN Compensation Fund and UN administrative expenses. The drop in GDP in 2001 was largely the result of the global economic slowdown and lower oil prices.

==After the Fall of Saddam Hussein==

The removal of sanctions on 24 May 2003 and rising oil prices in the mid-to-late 2000s led to a doubling in oil production from a low of 1.3 mbpd during the turbulence of 2003 to a high of 2.6 mbpd in 2011. http://www.indexmundi.com/energy.aspx?country=iq&product=oil&graph=production Furthermore, reduced inflation http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/FP.CPI.TOTL.ZG/countries/IQ?display=default and violence https://blogs.law.harvard.edu/mesh/2009/04/measuring-iraq/ since 2007 have translated to real increases in living standards for Iraqis.

One of the key economic challenges was Iraq's immense foreign debt, estimated at $125 billion. Although some of this debt was derived from normal export contracts that Iraq had failed to pay for, some was a result of military and financial support during Iraq's war with Iran.

The Jubilee Iraq campaign http://www.jubileeiraq.org/odiousdebt.htm argued that much of these debts were odious (illegitimate). However, as the concept of odious debt is not accepted, trying to deal with the debt on those terms would have embroiled Iraq in legal disputes for years. Iraq decided to deal with its debt more pragmatically and approached the Paris Club of official creditors.

In a December 2006 Newsweek International article, a study by Global Insight in London was reported to show "that Civil war or not, Iraq has an economy, andmother of all surprisesit's doing remarkably well. Real estate is booming. Construction, retail and wholesale trade sectors are healthy, too, according to report. The U.S. Chamber of Commerce reports 34,000 registered companies in Iraq, up from 8,000 three years ago. Sales of secondhand cars, televisions and mobile phones have all risen sharply. Estimates vary, but one from Global Insight puts GDP growth at 17 percent last year and projects 13 percent for 2006. The World Bank has it lower: at 4 percent this year. But, given all the attention paid to deteriorating security, the startling fact is that Iraq is growing at all." 

Between 100000 oilbbl/d and 300000 oilbbl/d of Iraqs declared oil production over the past four years could have been siphoned off through corruption or smuggling, according to a US Study from May 12, 2007. 

==Industry==

Traditionally, Iraqs manufacturing activity has been closely connected to the oil industry. The major industries in that category have been petroleum refining and the manufacture of chemicals and fertilizers. Before 2003, diversification was hindered by limitations on privatization and the effects of the international sanctions of the 1990s. Since 2003, security problems have blocked efforts to establish new enterprises. The construction industry is an exception; in 2000 cement was the only major industrial product not based on hydrocarbons. The construction industry has profited from the need to rebuild after Iraqs several wars. In the 1990s, the industry benefited from government funding of extensive infrastructure and housing projects and elaborate palace complexes.

==Primary sectors==

===Agriculture===
Historically, 50 to 60 percent of Iraqs arable land has been under cultivation. Because of ethnic politics, valuable farmland in Kurdish territory has not contributed to the national economy, and inconsistent agricultural policies under Saddam Hussein discouraged domestic market production. Despite its abundant land and water resources, Iraq is a net food importer. Under the UN Oil for Food program, Iraq imported large quantities of grains, meat, poultry, and dairy products. The government abolished its farm collectivization program in 1981, allowing a greater role for private enterprise in agriculture.

The international Oil-for-Food program (19972003) further reduced farm production by supplying artificially priced foreign foodstuffs. The military action of 2003 did little damage to Iraqi agriculture; because of favorable weather conditions, in that year grain production was 22 percent higher than in 2002. Although growth continued in 2004, experts predicted that Iraq will be an importer of agricultural products for the foreseeable future. Long-term plans call for investment in agricultural machinery and materials and more prolific crop varietiesimprovements that did not reach Iraqs farmers under the Hussein regime. In 2004 the main agricultural crops were wheat, barley, corn, rice, vegetables, dates, and cotton, and the main livestock outputs were cattle and sheep.

The Agricultural Cooperative Bank, capitalized at nearly 1 G$ - by 1984, targets its low-interest, low-collateral loans to private farmers for mechanization, poultry projects, and orchard development. Large modern cattle, dairy, and poultry farms are under construction. Obstacles to agricultural development include labour shortages, inadequate management and maintenance, salinization, urban migration, and dislocations resulting from previous land reform and collectivization programs.

Importation of foreign workers and increased entry of women into traditionally male labour roles have helped compensate for agricultural and industrial labour shortages exacerbated by the war. A disastrous attempt to drain the southern marshes and introduce irrigated farming to this region merely destroyed a natural food producing area, while concentration of salts and minerals in the soil due to the draining left the land unsuitable for agriculture. 

In the Madain Qada region east of Baghdad, hundreds of small farmers united to form the Green Madain Association for Agricultural Development, an agricultural cooperative that provides its members with drip irrigation and greenhouses as well as access to credit. 

===Forestry, fishing, and mining===
Throughout the twentieth century, human exploitation, shifting agriculture, forest fires, and uncontrolled grazing denuded large areas of Iraqs natural forests, which in 2005 were almost exclusively confined to the northeastern highlands. Most of the trees found in that region are not suitable for lumbering. In 2002 a total of 112,000 cubic meters of wood were harvested, nearly half of which was used as fuel.

Despite its many rivers, Iraqs fishing industry has remained relatively small and based largely on marine species in the Persian Gulf. In 2001 the catch was 22,800 tons.

Aside from hydrocarbons, Iraqs mining industry has been confined to extraction of relatively small amounts of phosphates (at Akashat), salt, and sulfur (near Mosul). Since a productive period in the 1970s, the mining industry has been hampered by the IranIraq War (198088), the sanctions of the 1990s, and the economic collapse of 2003.

===Energy===

As one of the three most oil-rich countries in the world, Iraq has the resources for complete energy independence. By world standards, production costs for Iraqi oil are relatively low. However, three wars (Iraq-Iran War from 19801988, Gulf War 1991 and the Iraqi Invasion of 2003) in addition to the UN sanctions - which lasted for twelve years from 1991 to 2003, left the industrys infrastructure in poor condition. The lifting of sanctions in 2003 allowed repairs to begin. However, since 2003 oil pipelines and installations have been sabotaged persistently. In 2004 Iraq had eight oil refineries, the largest of which were at Baiji, Basra, and Daura. Sabotage and technical problems at the refineries forced Iraq to import fuels, liquid petroleum gas, and other refined products from nearby countries. In October 2004, for example, Iraq spent US$60 million for imported gasoline. In late 2004 and early 2005, regular sabotage of plants and pipelines reduced export and domestic distribution of oil, particularly to Baghdad. Nationwide fuel shortages and power outages resulted.

In 2004 plans called for increased domestic utilization of natural gas to replace oil and for use in the petrochemical industry. However, because most of Iraqs gas output is associated with oil, output growth depends on developments in the oil industry.

As much as 90 percent of Iraqs power generating and distribution systems were destroyed in the Persian Gulf War of 1991, and full recovery never occurred. In mid-2004, Iraq had an estimated 5,000 megawatts of power-generating capacity, compared with 7,500 megawatts of demand. At that time, the transmission system included 17,700 kilometers of line. In 2004 plans called for construction of two new power plants and restoration of existing plants and transmission lines to ease the blackouts and economic hardship caused by this shortfall, but sabotage and looting held capacity below 6,000 megawatts. In 2004 the World Bank estimated that US$12 billion would be needed for near-term restoration, and the Ministry of Electricity estimated that US$35 billion would be necessary to rebuild the system fully.

In 2007, hydrocarbon industries accounted for well over 70 per cent of the Iraqi economy and 95 per cent of the government's revenues. Diversification of the economy into non-hydrocarbon industries remain a long-term issue.

====2009 Oil services contracts====
Between June 2009 and February 2010 the Iraqi Oil Ministry tendered for the award of Service Contracts to develop Iraq's existing oil fields. The results of the tender, which was broadcast live on Iraqi television, are as follows for all major fields awarded but excluding the Kurdish controlled areas where Production Sharing Contracts have been awarded which are currently being disputed by the Baghdad government. All contracts are awaiting final ratification of the awards by the Iraqi government. Company shares are subject to change as a result of commercial negotiations between parties.

If all contracts awarded reach their stated target plateau production then this will increase Iraqi production from today's 2.5 mb/d by 9.4 mb/d to a total of 11.9 mb/d, comparable to current Saudi declared capacity of 12.5 mb/d.

 Field Company Home country Region Company type Share in field Production increase share Service fee per bbl Gross revenue at plateau - US bn p.a. References 
 Majnoon Shell Netherlands Netherlands Public 45% 0.7875 1.39 0.4 BBC 
 Petronas Malaysia Asia State 30% 0.525 1.39 0.266 Shell 
 Halfaya CNPC China Asia State 37.5% 0.525 1.39 0.102 Upstream 
 Petronas Malaysia Asia State 18.75% 0.099 1.4 0.051 Upstream 
 Total France Europe Public 18.75% 0.099 1.39 0.051 
 Rumaila BP UK UK Public 37.5% 0.7125 2 0.520 Business Week 
 CNPC China Asia State 37.5% 0.7125 1.39 0.520 
 Zubair ENI Italy Europe Public 32.81% 0.328 2 0.240 Business Week 
 Occidental US US Public 23.44% 0.2344 2 0.171 Business Week 
 KOGAS Korea Asia State 18.75% 0.1875 2 0.137 Business Week 
 West Qurna Field Phase 2 Lukoil Russia Russia Public 75.00% 1.3500 1.15 0.567 Business Week 
 Statoil Norway Europe State n/a n/a n/a n/a Statoil 
 Badra Gazprom Russia Russia State 30% 0.051 5.5 0.102 Business Week 
 Petronas Malaysia Asia State 15% 0.0255 5.5 0.051 Upstream 
 KOGAS Korea Asia State 23% 0.03825 5.5 0.077 Upstream 
 TPAO Turkey Asia State 8% 0.01275 5.5 0.026 
 West Qurna Field Phase 1 Exxon US US Public 60% 1.2276 1.9 0.851 Business Week 
 Shell Netherlands Netherlands Public 15% 0.3069 1.9 0.213 Alfred Donovan's blog (royaldutchshellplc.com) 

Notes:
 1. Field shares are as a % of the total. The Iraq state retains a 25% share in all fields for which Service Contracts have been awarded.
 2. Production Increase Share is the millions bbls per day that will attract the Service Fee for the company.
 3. Gross revenue at plateau is the total payment each company will receive upon reaching their declared target plateau production rate (in between 5 and 8 years depending on field), before deduction of any operating costs but in addition to recovery of all development costs as billions of US$ per annum. The total gross revenue for all companies, after recovery of capital costs, is at plateau production of an additional 9.4 mb/d, 4.34 bn US per annum at a $70 bbl oil price. The 2010 Iraq govt budget is $60 billion. $300 billion is approximately $10,000 per annum for each Iraqi citizen.

In summary the shares by region in the increased production are:

 Region ProductionShare mb/d % oftotal 
 Iraq 1.462 25% 
 Asia 1.9 20% 
 UK 1.81 19% 
 US 1.462 16% 
 Russia 1.402 14% 
 Europe (excl UK) 0.528 6% 

==Services==

===Finance===
Iraqs financial services have been the subject of post-Hussein reforms. The 17 private banks established during the 1990s were limited to domestic transactions and attracted few private depositors. Those banks and two main state banks were badly damaged by the international embargo of the 1990s. To further privatize and expand the system, in 2003 the Coalition Provisional Authority removed restrictions on international bank transactions and freed the Central Bank of Iraq (CBI) from government control. In its first year of independent operation, the CBI received credit for limiting Iraqs inflation. In 2004 three foreign banks received licenses to do business in Iraq.

===Private security===
Because of the danger posed by Iraqs ongoing insurgency, the security industry has been a uniquely prosperous part of the services sector. Often run by former U.S. military personnel, in 2005 at least 26 companies offered personal and institutional protection, surveillance, and other forms of security.

===Retail===
In the early post-Hussein period, a freewheeling retail trade in all types of commodities straddled the line between legitimate and illegitimate commerce, taking advantage of the lack of income tax and import controls.

===Tourism===
The Iraq tourism industry, which in peaceful times has profited from Iraqs many places of cultural interest (earning US$14 million in 2001), has been dormant since 2003. Despite conditions, in 2005 the Iraqi Tourism Board maintained a staff of 2,500 and 14 regional offices. Between 2009 and 2010, 165 tourists from 16 different countries entered Iraq to visit historic sites; as of January 2011, a U.S. State Department grant provided $2 million to help preserve Babylon, supporting the re-opening of one of the site's two museums. 

===Telecommunications===
During 2003-8, mobile phone subscriptions had expanded over hundredfold to 10 million nationwide, according to the Brookings Institute. http://abcnews.go.com/International/Story?id=4473387&page=2 

==Labor force==
In 2002 Iraqs labor force was estimated at 6.8 million people.

In 1996 some 66.4 percent of the labor force worked in services, 17.5 percent in industry, and 16.1 percent in agriculture. 2004 estimates of Iraqs unemployment ranged from 30 percent to 60 percent.

+Nationwide unemployment rate since May, 2003 \"Reconstructing Iraq\", International Crisis Group, Report, September 2, 2004, p. 16, footnote 157. 
 Month UnemploymentRate 
 2003-5 May N/A 
 2003-6 June 50-60% 
 2003-7 July N/A 
 2003-8 August 50-60% 
 2003-9 September N/A 
 2003-10 October 40-50% 
 2003-11 November N/A 
 2003-12 December 45-55% 
 2004-01 to 05 (January - May) 30-45% 
 2004-06 to 11 (June - November) 30-40% 
 2004-12 December 28-40% 
 2005-01 to 10 (January - October) 27-40% 
 2005-11 to 12 (November - December) 25-40% 
 2006-01 to 12 (January - December) 25-40% 
 2007-01 to 12 (January - December) 25-40% 
 2008-01 to 12 (January - December) 25-40% 
 2009-01 (January) 23-38% 
 2010 15-20% 
 2012 11% 

The CPA has referred to a 25% unemployment rate, the Iraqi Ministry of Planning mentioned a 30% unemployment rate, whereas the Iraqi Ministry of Social Affairs claims it to be 48%. Other sources are claiming a 20% unemployment rate and a probably 60% under-employment rate. The actual figure is problematic because of high participation in black-market activities and poor security conditions in many populous areas. In central Iraq, security concerns discouraged the hiring of new workers and the resumption of regular work schedules. At the same time, the return of Iraqis from other countries increased the number of job seekers. In late 2004, most legitimate jobs were in the government, the army, the oil industry, and security-related enterprises. http://www.iq.undp.org/ILCS/labour.htm Under Saddam Hussein Hussein, many of the highest-paid workers were employed by the greatly overstaffed government, whose overthrow disrupted the input of these people to the economy. In 2004 the U.S. Agency for International Development committed US$1 billion for a worker-training program. In early 2004, the minimum wage was US$72 per month.

==External trade==
Iraqi exports in 2006
From the 1990s until 2003, the international trade embargo restricted Iraqs export activity almost exclusively to oil. In 2003 oil accounted for about US$7.4 billion of Iraqs total US$7.6 billion of export value, and statistics for earlier years showed similar proportions. After the end of the trade embargo in 2003 expanded the range of exports, oil continued to occupy the dominant position: in 2004 Iraqs export income doubled (to US$16.5 billion), but oil accounted for all but US$340 million (2 percent) of the total. In late 2004, sabotage significantly reduced oil output, and experts forecast that output, hence exports, would be below capacity in 2005 as well. In 2004 the chief export markets were the United States (which accounted for nearly half), Italy, France, Jordan, Canada, and the Netherlands. In 2004 the value of Iraqs imports was US$21.7 billion, incurring a trade deficit of about US$5.2 billion. In 2003 the main sources of Iraqs imports were Turkey, Jordan, Vietnam, the United States, Germany, and Britain. Because of Iraqs inactive manufacturing sector, the range of imports was quite large, including food, fuels, medicines, and manufactured goods. By 2010, exports rose to US$50.8 billion and imports rose to US$45.2 billion. Chief 2009 export partners were: U.S., India, Italy, South Korea, Taiwan, China, Netherlands, and Japan. Chief 2009 import partners were: Turkey, Syria, U.S., China, Jordan, Italy, and Germany. http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/6804.htm 

== References ==

==External links==
*
*Iraq Inter-Agency Information & Analysis Unit Reports, Maps and Assessments of Iraq from the UN Inter-Agency Information & Analysis Unit
*Map of Iraq's oil and gas infrastructure

 



[[Transport in Iraq]]

Transport in Iraq consists of railways, highways, waterways, pipelines, ports and harbors, marines and airports.

== Railways ==

total:
2,272 km
standard gauge:
2,272 km 

For more than two decades there have been plans for building a metro system in Baghdad. It is possible that part of the tunnels have been built, but that they are now used militarily for sheltering, hiding and escaping purposes. U.N. inspectors have heard of the tunnels for years, but have not found their entrances. map In November, 2008, an overground service dubbed the Baghdad Metro began service. Local government in Baghdad is arranging feasibility studies for the construction of two new underground lines 

A 37 km monorail is planned in Najaf, which would link three Shi'ite holy sites. 

The first Iraqi Republic Railways train to Basra since the overthrow of Saddam Hussein's regime arrived on 26 April 2003. British troops hope to use the 68 km long railway to transport much-needed aid supplies from the port town of Umm Qasr to Basra.

In June 2011, it was announced that planning had begun for a new high-speed rail line between Baghdad and Basra, with a memorandum of understanding with Alstom having been signed. 

===Maps===
* UNHCR Atlas Map
* UN Map

===Railway links with adjacent countries===
All adjacent countries generally use , but may vary in couplings. Neighbours with electrified railways - Turkey and Iran - both use the world standard 25 kVAC

* Turkey - via Syria
* Iran - one link partially under construction and a second link planned
** Khorramshahr, Iran, to Basra, Iraq - almost complete (2006)
** Kermanshah, Iran, and the Iraqi province of Diyala - construction commenced.
** see () or 2005.
* Kuwait - no railways
* Saudi Arabia - 
* Jordan - partially constructed - break of gauge / gauge
* Syria - same gauge - at Rabiya/Nurabiya

==Roadways==

total:
44,900 km 
paved:
37,851 km,
unpaved:
7,049 km (2002)

==Waterways==
5,729 km (Euphrates River (2,815 km), Tigris River 1,899 km, Third River (565 km)); Shatt al Arab is usually navigable by maritime traffic for about 130 km; channel has been dredged to 3 m and is in use; Tigris and Euphrates Rivers have navigable sections for shallow-draft watercraft; Shatt al Basrah canal was navigable by shallow-draft craft before closing in 1991 because of the Gulf War

==Pipelines==
crude oil 5,432 km; natural gas 2,455 km; refined products 1,637 km; liquid petroleum gas 913 km

==Ports and harbors==

=== Persian Gulf ===
* Umm Qasr Port
* Khawr az Zubayr
* Al Basrah has limited functionality

==Merchant marine==
total:
32 ships (with a volume of or over) totaling /
ships by type:
cargo ship 14, passenger ship 1, passenger/cargo 1, petroleum tanker 13, refrigerated cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off ship 2 (1999 est.)

==Airports==
Iraq has about 104 airports as of 2012. Major airports include:
*Baghdad International Airport
*Basra International Airport
*Mosul International Airport
*Erbil International Airport
*Sulaimaniyah International Airport
*Najaf International Airport

===Airports - with paved runways===
total:
75
over 3,047 m:
20
2,438 to 3,047 m:
36
1,524 to 2,437 m:
5
914 to 1,523 m:
6
under 914 m:
6 (2012)

===Airports - with unpaved runways===
total:
29
over 3,047 m:
3
2,438 to 3,047 m:
4
1,524 to 2,437 m:
3
914 to 1,523 m:
13
under 914 m:
6 (2012)

===Heliports===
20 (2012)

==See also==
* Iraq
* Iraqi Republic Railways

==References==

 

[[Foreign relations of Iraq]]

Since 1980, the foreign relations of Iraq were influenced by a number of controversial decisions by the Saddam Hussein administration. Hussein had good relations with the Soviet Union and a number of western countries such as France and Germany, who provided him with advanced weapons systems. He also developed a tenuous relation with the United States, who supported him during the IranIraq war. However, the Invasion of Kuwait that triggered the Gulf War brutally changed Iraq's relations with the Arab World and the West. Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Syria and others were among the countries that supported Kuwait in the UN coalition. After the Hussein administration was toppled by the 2003 invasion of Iraq, the governments that succeeded it, have now tried to establish relations with various nations.

==Middle East==

===Egypt===
Iraq's relations with the Arab world have been extremely varied. Relations between Iraq and Egypt violently ruptured in 1977, when the two nations broke relations with each other following Iraq's criticism of Egyptian President Anwar Sadat's peace initiatives with Israel. In 1978, Baghdad hosted an Arab League summit that condemned and ostracized Egypt for accepting the Camp David accords. However, Egypt's strong material and diplomatic support for Iraq in the war with Iran led to warmer relations and numerous contacts between senior officials, despite the continued absence of ambassadorial-level representation. Since 1983, Iraq has repeatedly called for restoration of Egypt's "natural role" among Arab countries. In January 1984, Iraq successfully led Arab efforts within the OIC to restore Egypt's membership. However, Iraqi-Egyptian relations were broken in 1990 after Egypt joined the UN coalition that forced Iraq out of Kuwait. Relations have steadily improved in recent years, and Egypt is now one of Iraq's main trade partners (formerly under the Oil-for-Food Programme).

===Lebanon===

Iraq and Lebanon have maintained diplomatic relations since 1943. Both countries have refused to recognize Israel and have supported the Palestinians.

Throughout history, Iraq's relations with Lebanon have been relatively close, both politically and culturally. During the regime of Saddam Hussein, the leader of the Ba'ath Party had strong relations with Bachir, and Amine Gemayel; relations grew even stronger when Iraqi officials verbally lashed out against Israel's actions in the 2006 War. However, relations have diminished due to ongoing sectarian clashes between Iraq's Sunni and Shia Muslim branches, and the Lebanese Government's support of Hezbollah.

===Iran===

In 1988 Iraq's main foreign policy issue was the war with Iran. This war had begun in September 1980, when Saddam Hussein sent Iraqi forces across the Shatt al Arab into southwestern Iran. Although the reasons for Saddam Husayn's decision to invade Iran were complicated, the leaders of the Baath Party had long resented Iranian hegemony in the Persian Gulf region and had especially resented the perceived Iranian interference in Iraq's internal affairs both before and after the 1979 Islamic Revolution. Their objectives were to halt any potential foreign assistance to the Shias and to the Kurdish opponents of the regime and to end Iranian domination of the area. The Baathists believed a weakened Iran would be incapable of posing a security threat and could not undermine Iraq's efforts to exercise the regional influence that had been blocked by non-Arab Iran since the mid-1960s. By early 1982, the Iraqi occupation forces were on the defensive and were being forced to retreat from some of their forward lines. In June 1982, Saddam Hussein ordered most of the Iraqi units to withdraw from Iranian territory; after that time, the Baathist government tried to obtain a cease-fire based on a return of all armed personnel to the international borders that prevailed as of September 21, 1979.

Iran did not accept Iraq's offer to negotiate an end to the war. Similarly, it rejected a July 1982 United Nations (UN) Security Council resolution calling for an immediate cease-fire. Subsequently, Iranian forces invaded Iraq by crossing the Shatt al Arab in the south and by capturing some mountain passes in the north. To discourage Iran's offensive, the Iraqi air force initiated bombing raids over several Iranian cities and towns. The air raids brought Iranian retaliation, which included the aerial bombing of Baghdad. Although Iraq eventually pushed back and contained the Iranian advances, it was not able to force Iranian troops completely out of Iraqi territory. The perceived threat to Iraq in the summer of 1982 thus was serious enough to force Saddam Hussein to request the Nonaligned Movement to change the venue of its scheduled September meeting from Baghdad to India; nevertheless, since the fall of 1982, the ground conflict has generally been a stalemated war of attritionalthough Iran made small but demoralizing territorial advances as a result of its massive offensives in the reed marshes north of Basra in 1984 and in 1985, in Al Faw Peninsula in early 1986, and in the outskirts of Basra during January and February 1987. In addition, as of early 1988 the government had lost control of several mountainous districts in Kurdistan where, since 1983, dissident Kurds have cooperated militarily with Iran.

Saddam Hussein's government has maintained consistently since the summer of 1982 that Iraq wants a negotiated end to the war based upon the status quo ante. Iran's stated conditions for ceasing hostilities, namely the removal of Saddam Husayn and the Baath from power, however, have been unacceptable. The main objective of the regime became the extrication of the country from the war with as little additional damage as possible. To further this goal, Iraq has used various diplomatic, economic, and military strategies; none of these had been successful in bringing about a cease-fire as of early 1988.

Although the war was a heavy burden on Iran and Iraq politically, economically, and socially, the most profound consequence of the war's prolongation on Iraq, was its impact on the patterns of Iraq's foreign relations. Whereas trends toward a moderation of the Baath Party's ideological approach to foreign affairs were evident before 1980, the war helped to accelerate these trends. Two of the most dramatic changes were in Iraq's relationships with the Soviet Union and with the United States. During the course of the war Iraq moved away from the close friendship with the Soviet Union that had persisted throughout the 1970s, and it initiated a rapprochement with the United States. Iraq also sought to ally itself with Kuwait and with Saudi Arabia, two neighboring countries with which there had been considerable friction during much of the 1970s. The alignment with these countries was accompanied by a more moderate Iraqi approach to other Arab countries, such as Egypt and Jordan, which previously Iraq had perceived as hostile.

IraqiIranian relations have remained cool since the end of the Iraq-Iran War in 1988. Outstanding issues from that war, including prisoner of war exchanges and support of armed opposition parties operating in each other's territory, remain to be solved.

Relations appear to have improved since March 2008, when Iranian president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad made a two-day visit to Iraq.

===Israel===

Iraq participated in the ArabIsraeli wars of 1948, 1967 and 1973, and traditionally has opposed all attempts to reach a peaceful settlement between Israel and the Arab States. Israel attacked Iraq's nuclear research reactor under construction near Baghdad in July 1981. During the IranIraq war, Iraq moderated its anti-Israel stance considerably. In August 1982 President Hussein stated to a visiting U.S. Congressman that "a secure state is necessary for both Israel and the Palestinians." Iraq did not oppose then President Reagan's September 1, 1982 Arab-Israeli peace initiative, and it supported the moderate Arab position at the Fez summit that same month. Iraq repeatedly stated that it would support whatever settlement is found acceptable by the Palestinians.

===Jordan===

Iraq's relations with Jordan have improved significantly since 1980, when Jordan declared its support for Iraq at the outset of the Iran-Iraq war. Jordan's support for Iraq during the Persian Gulf War resulted in a further improvement of ties. Relations have cooled since the current King of Jordan took office in 2000, but remain good. King Abdullah of Jordan has become the first Arab leader to visit Iraq since the fall of Saddam Hussein in 2003, a landmark step towards reducing Baghdad's isolation among its Arab neighbours. Jordan is one of a small number of Arab countries to have named ambassadors to Iraq. http://www.abc.net.au/news/stories/2008/08/12/2332118.htm 

===Kuwait===

Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in 1990 resulted in its government-in-exile, the US, Saudi Arabia, and most Persian Gulf states to sever relations with Baghdad and joining the United Nations coalition that drove Iraqi forces out of Kuwait during the Persian Gulf War. Iraq's refusal to implement United Nations Security Council resolutions and continued threats toward Kuwait have resulted in relations remaining cool.

===Saudi Arabia===

Saudi leaders were relieved when Iraq was defeated, but they recognized that relations with Baghdad had been damaged. Consequently, postwar Saudi policy focused on ways to contain potential Iraqi threats to the kingdom and the region. One elements of Riyadh's containment policy included support for Iraqi opposition forces that advocated the overthrow of Saddam Hussein's government. In the past, backing for such groups had been discreet, but in early 1992 the Saudis invited several Iraqi opposition leaders to Riyadh to attend a well-publicised conference. To further demonstrate Saudi dissatisfaction with the regime in Baghdad, Crown Prince Abdallah permitted the media to videotape his meeting with some of the opponents of Saddam Hussein.

===Sudan===
Sudan has an Embassy in Baghdad and Iraq's Embassy is in Khartoum. SudaneseIraqi relations were and still are very close, Sudan supported Iraq during the Gulf War, and following the war, Baghdad established Khartoum as a major center for Iraqi intelligence. http://www.fas.org/news/iraq/1998/08/980824-in.htm Sudanese-Iraq Relations Iraq and Sudan are connected by remote cultural similarities such as language (both countries speak Arabic, though the two are different in dialect) and religion, both are Muslim (however Sudan is predominantly Sunni, while the majority of Iraq is Shia). Tension between the two countries intensified during the American invasion, even though Sudan fiercely opposed the proposal. Ties between Iraq and Sudan have since improved.

===Syria===

The political states of Iraq and Syria were formed by the United Kingdom and France following the defeat of the Ottoman Empire in World War I. Iraq and Syria are united by historical, social, political, cultural and economic relations, but share a long foreign drawn border. The land known as Mesopotamia is Iraq and eastern Syria and is called such by its inhabitants. Political relations between Iraq and Syria have in the past seen difficulties, however, new diplomatic relations described by both sides as "Historic" were established in November 2006, beginning an era of close cooperation and political friendship between Iraq and Syria. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/middle_east/6167968.stm Iraq and Syria restore relations 

===United Arab Emirates===

In June 2008, the Iraqi government announced that the United Arab Emirates would send an ambassador to Baghdad within a few days. This would become the first Arab ambassador in Iraq since the kidnapping and murder of Ihab el-Sherif in July 2005. This announcement was made during a surprise visit by the United Arab Emirates' Foreign Minister Abdullah bin Zayed Al Nahyan to Baghdad on 5 June 2008. This marked the first time a high-ranking official from a Gulf state visited Iraq since March 2003. 

==Europe==

In September 2005, a joint political declaration between the European Union and Iraq was signed which forms the basis of regular political dialogue. A Trade and Cooperation Agreement between the EU and Iraq is in the process of being negotiated and will probably be concluded during 2008.

July 2005 saw the introduction of EUJUST LEX, the European Union's rule of law operation intended to train Iraqi police and legal officials in human rights along with other issues. Over 1 400 Iraqis have already taken part in training courses. 

 Country Formal Relations Began Notes 
 Bulgaria See BulgariaIraq relations * Bulgaria has an embassy in Baghdad. Bulgarian embassy in Baghdad * Iraq has an embassy in Sofia. Bulgarian Ministry of Foreign Affairs: direction of the Iraqi embassy in Sofia * Bulgaria was part of the Multinational force in Iraq between May 2003 and December 2008. 
 Czech Republic 1993 See Foreign relations of the Czech Republic 
 Denmark See DenmarkIraq relations Denmark has an embassy in Baghdad and a trade office in Basra, Iraq has an embassy in Copenhagen. On March 21, 2003, the Danish Parliament made a fateful decision to support U.S. military action in Iraq and, in fact, contribute naval assets to the war. In 2006, the Iraqi Transport Minister Salam al-Malki announced freezing all economic relations with Danish and Norwegian companies in protest against insulting cartoons published in the countries' newspapers. Iraq-Denmark-Freeze With a total Iraqi population in Denmark numbering around 12,000, there are organizations such as the Iraqi-Danish Culture Days, which is currently organized in the capital of Copenhagen. Iraqi-Danish Culture Days Festival in Copenhagen 
 France See FranceIraq relations Before Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1991, France enjoyed friendly relations with former Iraqi president Saddam Hussein, however the relationship turned sour once Iraq entered Kuwaiti soil and soon France cut off ties with Iraq. Following thirteen years, France resumed relations with Iraq in 2003. Iraq has an embassy in Paris and France has an embassy and a representative office in Baghdad. 
 Germany See GermanyIraq relations * Iraq's full diplomatic recognition of East Germany and Foreign Minister Otto Winzer's acknowledgement of that recognition were announced in Neues Deutschland on 2 May 1969. 
 Greece See Greece-Iraq relations Relations of the Greek and Iraqi peoples are deeply rooted in history, both have developed cultures that have influenced the course of humanity. They date as far back as when Alexander the Great ruled Mesopotamia (which name is of Greek origin, meaning \"the land between two rivers\") and eventually died in Babylon, Iraq. Greece firmly and consistently supports the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq. Greece traditionally maintained good and friendly relations with Iraq due to strong historical and cultural bonds, dating back to ancient times. Greece has an Embassy in Baghdad, and Iraq is represented by her Embassy in Athens. 
 Vatican City See Foreign relations of the Holy See 
 Hungary See HungaryIraq relations * Hungary is represented in Iraq through its embassy in Amman (Jordan). Hungarian embassy in Amman (also accredited to Iraq * Iraq has an embassy in Budapest. * Between August 2003 and March 2005, Hungary had contributed to more than 300 soldiers to the Multinational force in Iraq. 
 Italy See IraqItaly relations Iraq has an embassy in Rome and Italy has an embassy in Baghdad and a consulate-general in Basra. 
 Romania * Iraq has an embassy in Bucharest. Romanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs: direction of the Iraqi embassy in Bucharest * Romania has an embassy in Baghdad. Romanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs: direction of the Romanian embassy in Baghdad 
 Russia See IraqRussia relations * The Soviet Union established diplomatic relations with the Kingdom of Iraq on 9 September 1944. 
 Serbia * Iraq has an embassy in Belgrade. * Serbia has an embassy in Baghdad. * Serbian Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with Iraq 
 Slovenia 2005, * In 2005, Slovenian and Iraqi ambassadors to the United Nastions, Roman Kirn and Samir Sumaidaie, signed an agreement at the United Nations Headquarters in New York. * Slovenia is the first European country to establish diplomatic relations with Iraq since the appointment of the new Iraqi government. * Prior to this agreement, Slovenia was already assisting Iraq through NATO and other international organizations. * Slovenia did not make efforts to establish relations during the reign of former Iraqi president, Saddam Hussein. 
 Sweden See IraqSweden relations * Sweden is represented in Iraq through its embassy in Amman (Jordan). 
 Switzerland 1936 In November 2000 Switzerland opened a diplomatic liaison office in Baghdad to safeguard its interests. Bilateral relations became closer after the Iraq war in 2003. Today Iraq has an embassy in Bern and Switzerland has a representative office in Baghdad. 
 Turkey 1932 See IraqiTurkish relations In 1988 Iraq maintained cordial relations with Turkey, its non-Arab neighbor to the north. Turkey served as an important transshipment point for both Iraqi oil exports and its commodity imports. A pipeline transported oil from the northern oil fields of Iraq through Turkey to the Mediterranean Sea. Trucks carrying a variety of European manufactured goods used Turkish highways to bring imports into Iraq. There was also trade between Turkey and Iraq, the former selling Iraq small arms, produce, and textiles. In addition, Iraq and Turkey have cooperated in suppressing Kurdish guerrilla activities in their common border area. 
 Ukraine 16 December 1992 See IraqUkraine relations * In May 2001 in Baghdad the Embassy of Ukraine in Iraq re-opened. 
 United Kingdom 1920 See Iraq  United Kingdom relations Ties between London and Baghdad are slowly progressing, but relations between the two nations are somewhat uncertain seeing as many Iraqis remember the colonial oppression either they or their ancestors faced at the hands of the British Empire. In other words, relations between the United Kingdom and the Republic of Iraq are close, the two countries aim to increase economic relations through trade and renewing Iraq's infrastructure. In 2013 Stephen Green, Baron Green of Hurstpierpoint, British Minister for Trade and Investment visited Iraq. Iraqi Airways resumed flights to London in 2013, this comes after a 23 year hiatus. 

==Outside the Middle East and Europe==
Outside the Middle East, Iraq maintained correct relations with other countries. Iraq identified itself as part of the Nonaligned Movement of primarily African and Asian nations, actively participated in its deliberations during the late 1970s, and successfully lobbied to have Baghdad chosen as the site for its September 1982 conference. Although significant resources were expended to prepare facilities for the conference, and Saddam Hussein would have emerged from the meeting as a recognized leader of the Nonaligned Movement, genuine fears of an Iranian bombing of the capital during the summer of 1982 forced the government reluctantly to request that the venue of the conference be transferred to New Delhi. Since that time, preoccupation with the war against Iran, which also is a member of the Nonaligned Movement, has tended to restrict the scope of Iraqi participation in that organization. 

===Brazil===

* Diplomatic relations started in 1967.
* Brazil was the first Latin American country to reopen its embassy in Iraq since the 1991 Gulf War. 
* Both countries are full members of the Group of 77.

===Cuba===

Cuba's relations with Iraq were prosperous during the presidency of Saddam Hussein. Cuba's friendly relations with Iraq dated back to the Non Aligned Movement meeting held in Cuba 1979. Fidel Castro even provided doctors to perform back surgery on Hussein. Cuba consistently supported Iraq at the United Nations against sanctions and threats made by the United States. The thirteen-year sanction against Iraq prevented much trade between Havana and Baghdad.

Iraq has an embassy in Havana. Cuba has an embassy in Baghdad. Embassy of Cuba in Iraq 

===India===

* Diplomatic relations started in 1947.
Have maintained strong relationships since.

===Indonesia===

Indonesia and Iraq shared similarity as the Muslim majority countries. Both nations share their experiences in rebuilding and development. Indonesia has an embassy in Baghdad, while Iraq has an embassy in Jakarta. Both nations are partners in multilateral organizations, such as World Trade Organization (WTO), The Non-Aligned Movement and Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).

After World War II, Iraq had been one of the first countries to recognize Indonesia's independence in 1945. The two countries established diplomatic relations in 1950 and have signed around 15 agreements to boost bilateral ties. Indonesia has maintained its embassy in Baghdad during various crises, such as the IranIraq war in the 1980s. However, at the height of the Iraq War, Indonesia was forced to temporarily closed its embassy in Baghdad in 2003, and reopen it in June 2011. 

In 2003, Indonesian Government and people protested against a U.S.-led military campaign against Baghdad. Over 50,000 Indonesian people crowded the streets of the Indonesian capital, Jakarta on Sunday, February 9, 2003, to protest the United States' threat of military action against Iraq. After the war ended and Indonesia reopen its embassy in 2011, relations between the two countries have developed at a fast pace. Iraq invited Indonesia's companies to participate in the reconstruction of Iraq. Traditionally Indonesia sees Iraq as the source of energy, such as oil and gas. On the other hand Iraqi people are familiar with Indonesian exported products such as tires, soaps, spices, furniture, coal, clothing, palm oil, shoes, paper, automobiles, rubber and electronic goods.

===Pakistan===

Diplomatic relations started in 1947. Iraq and Pakistan have had close, friendly, and cooperative relations since the latter's independence in 1947. Issues such as Iraqi support for Pakistan in its 1971 war with India (which Iraq also has excellent relations with), and Pakistani support for Iraq against Iran in the Iran-Iraq War have forged relations between the two. Relations soured during the Gulf War when Pakistan contributed troops for the UN Coalition, seeing it as a betrayal due to Iraq's constant support for Pakistan in their previous wars with India. In 2002, Saddam Hussein visited India and said he gave his unwavering support to India over the Kashmir dispute. In 2003, Pakistan rejected US's request to send troops for the invasion which have helped soothed relations between the two.

===Singapore===
Diplomatic relations between both countries were established on 27 December 1977. Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Singapore: Embassy of the Republic of Iraq The Embassy of Iraq in Indonesia also handles Singapore Embassy of Iraq in Indonesia representing Singapore 

===United States===

Embassy of Iraq in Washington, D.C.
Because of the primary roles taken by the United States and Britain in deposing Saddam Hussein and establishing interim governments to replace his regime, Iraq's relationships with those countries, particularly the United States, are expected to remain paramount for the foreseeable future. Government and nongovernmental aid from the United States will continue as a crucial support in reconstruction. In 2006 formulation of more precise foreign policy priorities awaits the firm establishment of the permanent government. In the short term, Iraq's relations with Western and Far Eastern economic powers are determined by debt forgiveness and reconstruction assistance, which have come from many quarters. Relations with the United States were strained in mid-2006 when Iraq criticized Israeli attacks on Hezbollah forces in Lebanon.

==Member of International Organizations==
Iraq belongs to the following international organizations: Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development, Arab League, Arab Monetary Fund, Council of Arab Economic Unity, Customs Cooperation Council, Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia, G-77, International Atomic Energy Agency, International Monetary Fund, International Maritime Organization, Interpol, International Organization for Standardization, International Telecommunication Union, Non-Aligned Movement, Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries, Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, United Nations, Universal Postal Union, World Health Organization and World Bank.

==Ministry of Foreign Affairs==
Iraq's relations with other countries and with international organizations are supervised by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. In 1988 the minister of foreign affairs was Tariq Aziz, who was an influential leader of the Ba'ath Party and had served in that post since 1983. Aziz, Saddam Hussein, and the other members of the Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) formulated Iraq's foreign policy, and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs bureaucracy implemented RCC directives. The Baath maintained control over the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and over all Iraqi diplomatic missions abroad.

Since the overthrow of Saddam Hussein in 2003, Hoshyar Zebari was first appointed Minister of Foreign Affairs in the Iraqi Governing Council in Baghdad on 3 September 2003. On 28 June 2004, he was reappointed as Minister of Foreign Affairs by the Iraqi Interim Government, under Prime Minister Ayad Allawi. On 3 May 2005 he was sworn in as Minister of Foreign Affairs by the Iraqi Transitional Government, under Prime Minister Ibrahim al-Jaafari. On 20 May 2006, he was delegated in for the fourth consecutive time as Foreign Minister in the government of Nouri Al-Maliki.

==International disputes==
Iran and Iraq restored diplomatic relations in 1990 but are still trying to work out written agreements settling outstanding disputes from their eight-year war concerning border demarcation, prisoners-of-war, and freedom of navigation and sovereignty over the Shatt al-Arab waterway; in November 1994, Iraq formally accepted the United Nations-demarcated border with Kuwait which had been spelled out in Security Council Resolutions 687 (1991), 773 (1992), and 883 (1993); this formally ends earlier claims to Kuwait and to Bubiyan and Warbah islands although the government continues periodic rhetorical challenges; dispute over water development plans by Turkey for the Tigris and Euphrates rivers.

==See also==
* Territorial disputes in the Persian Gulf
* Disarmament of Iraq
* Iraq and the European Union
* List of diplomatic missions of Iraq
* List of diplomatic missions in Iraq
* Visa requirements for Iraqi citizens

==References==

==External links==
* Iraq - Trade and Diplomatic Relations with the EU

 

[[Demographics of the Republic of Ireland]]

Ireland had a population of 4,581,269 at the 2011 census. 

== Demographic history ==
A graph of the populations of the island of Ireland and Europe indexed against 1750 showing the disastrous consequence of the 184549 famine.
Ireland, throughout most of its history, had a small population, comparable to that of other regions of similar area in Europe. In the 18th and early 19th centuries, along with the rest of Europe, Ireland experienced a major population boom as a result of the Agricultural and Industrial revolutions. Its population densities remained comparable to that of Britain and the other countries of Europe.

This changed dramatically with the Great Famine of the mid-19th century, which led to mass starvation and consequent mass emigration. This famine was by far the most significant turning point in the demographics of the country: during the hundred years that followed, Ireland's population continued a slow decline, with the result that Ireland today has a significantly smaller population than other European countries of comparable size.

In the mid-20th century, Ireland's population started to grow once more, although emigration was still common. In the 1990s, the demographics of the country began to change as a result of the Celtic Tiger Irish economic boom. Immigration began to far outweigh emigration. Many former Irish emigrants returned home, and Ireland became an attractive destination for immigrants, mainly from Central Europe, but also from Africa, Asia and elsewhere. With the 2008 onset of the Irish economic and banking crisis, however, the country's economy suffered, and since then Ireland has once again been experiencing net emigration. 

In November 2013 Eurostat reported that Ireland had the largest net emigration rate of any European Union country at 7.6 people emigrating per 1,000 population.
However, Ireland's population is the youngest of any country in the European Union and its population size is predicted to grow for many decades into the future, bucking the trend of declining population predicted for most European countries. A report published in 2008 predicted that the country's population would reach 6.7 million by 2060. RT News - Irish population to hit 6.7m by 2060 Ireland has been experiencing a baby boom, with increasing birth rates and overall fertility rates. Irish Examiner - Baby boom as Irish births reach highest level since 1982 Despite this the total fertility rate is still below replacement. This increase is primarily fueled by non-Irish immigration - in 2009, a quarter of all children born in Ireland were born to mothers who had immigrated from other countries. IrishJournal.ie 

== Ethnic groups and immigration ==
Gaelic culture and language forms an important part of the Irish national identity.

The Irish Travellers are a native minority group.

In 2008, Ireland had the highest birth rate (18.1 per 1,000), lowest death rate (6.1 per 1,000) and highest net-migration rate (14.1 per 1,000) in the entire European Union  and the largest population growth rate (4.4%) in the 27-member bloc as a result. Irish Independent - Baby boom puts us on top of birth rate league 

Ireland is home to people from all over the globe, especially in Dublin. These countries include mostly Poland, United Kingdom, Lithuania, Latvia and Russia.

Traditionally Ireland has been a land of mass emigration and its gaining mass immigration to their country. Some illegal immigrants are reported to use sham marriages as method to gain legal status. The Irish government has sought to work with UK government to stem the flow of illegal immigrants. 

==Vital statistics of Ireland ==

 Population on April 1 (x 1000) Live births Deaths Natural change Crude birth rate (per 1000) Crude death rate (per 1000) Natural change (per 1000) Total fertility rate 
 1923 3 014 62 417 42 217 19 473 20.5 14.0 6.5 
 1924 3 005 63 402 45 180 18 222 21.1 15.0 6.1 
 1925 2 985 62 069 43 650 18 419 20.8 14.6 6.2 
 1926 2 971 61 176 41 740 19 436 20.6 14.0 6.5 
 1927 2 957 60 054 43 677 16 377 20.3 14.8 5.5 
 1928 2 944 59 176 41 792 17 384 20.1 14.2 5.9 
 1929 2 937 58 280 42 991 15 289 19.8 14.6 5.2 
 1930 2 927 58 353 41 702 16 651 19.9 14.2 5.7 2.54 
 1931 2 933 57 086 42 947 14 139 19.5 14.6 4.8 2.49 
 1932 2 949 56 240 42 984 13 256 19.1 14.6 4.5 2.43 
 1933 2 962 57 364 40 539 16 825 19.4 13.7 5.7 2.47 
 1934 2 971 57 897 39 083 18 814 19.5 13.2 6.3 2.49 
 1935 2 971 58 266 41 543 16 723 19.6 14.0 5.6 2.50 
 1936 2 967 58 115 42 586 15 529 19.6 14.4 5.2 2.50 
 1937 2 948 56 488 45 086 11 402 19.2 15.3 3.9 2.45 
 1938 2 937 56 925 40 041 16 884 19.4 13.6 5.7 2.47 
 1939 2 934 56 070 41 717 14 353 19.1 14.2 4.9 2.43 
 1940 2 958 56 594 41 885 14 709 19.1 14.2 5.0 2.43 
 1941 2 993 56 780 43 797 12 983 19.0 14.6 4.3 2.42 
 1942 2 963 66 117 41 640 24 477 22.3 14.1 8.3 2.85 
 1943 2 946 64 375 43 494 20 881 21.9 14.8 7.1 2.80 
 1944 2 944 65 425 45 128 20 297 22.2 15.3 6.9 2.84 
 1945 2 952 66 861 42 762 24 099 22.6 14.5 8.2 2.90 
 1946 2 957 67 922 41 457 26 465 23.0 14.0 8.9 2.94 
 1947 2 974 68 978 44 061 24 917 23.2 14.8 8.4 2.98 
 1948 2 985 65 930 36 357 29 573 22.1 12.2 9.9 2.80 
 1949 2 981 64 153 38 062 26 091 21.5 12.8 8.8 2.75 
 1950 2 969 63 565 37 741 25 824 21.4 12.7 8.7 2.74 
 1951 2 961 62 878 42 382 20 496 21.2 14.3 6.9 2.69 
 1952 2 953 64 631 35 105 29 526 21.9 11.9 10.0 2.97 
 1953 2 949 62 558 34 591 27 967 21.2 11.7 9.5 2.95 
 1954 2 941 62 534 35 535 26 999 21.3 12.1 9.2 3.18 
 1955 2 921 61 622 36 761 24 861 21.1 12.6 8.5 3.28 
 1956 2 898 60 740 33 910 26 830 21.0 11.7 9.3 3.41 
 1957 2 885 61 242 34 311 26 931 21.2 11.9 9.3 3.52 
 1958 2 853 59 510 34 248 25 262 20.9 12.0 8.9 3.43 
 1959 2 846 60 188 34 243 25 945 21.1 12.0 9.1 3.63 
 1960 2 832 60 735 32 660 28 075 21.4 11.5 9.9 3.78 
 1961 2 818 59 825 34 763 25 062 21.2 12.3 8.9 3.78 
 1962 2 830 61 782 33 838 27 944 21.8 12.0 9.9 3.92 
 1963 2 850 63 246 33 795 29 451 22.2 11.9 10.3 4.01 
 1964 2 864 64 072 32 630 31 442 22.4 11.4 11.0 4.07 
 1965 2 876 63 525 33 022 30 503 22.1 11.5 10.6 4.04 
 1966 2 884 62 215 35 113 27 102 21.6 12.2 9.4 3.95 
 1967 2 900 61 307 31 400 29 907 21.1 10.8 10.3 3.84 
 1968 2 913 61 004 33 157 27 847 20.9 11.4 9.6 3.77 
 1969 2 926 62 912 33 734 29 178 21.5 11.5 10.0 3.83 
 1970 2 950 64 382 33 686 30 696 21.8 11.4 10.4 3.85 
 1971 2 978 67 551 31 890 35 661 22.7 10.7 12.0 3.97 
 1972 3 024 68 527 34 381 34 146 22.7 11.4 11.3 3.93 
 1973 3 073 68 713 34 192 34 521 22.4 11.1 11.2 3.78 
 1974 3 124 68 907 34 921 33 986 22.1 11.2 10.9 3.64 
 1975 3 177 67 178 33 173 34 005 21.1 10.4 10.7 3.43 
 1976 3 228 67 718 34 043 33 675 21.0 10.5 10.4 3.35 
 1977 3 272 68 892 33 632 35 260 21.1 10.3 10.8 3.31 
 1978 3 314 70 299 33 794 36 505 21.2 10.2 11.0 3.27 
 1979 3 368 72 539 33 771 38 768 21.5 10.0 11.5 3.26 
 1980 3 401 74 064 33 472 40 592 21.8 9.8 11.9 3.25 
 1981 3 443 72 158 32 929 39 229 21.0 9.6 11.4 3.10 
 1982 3 480 70 843 32 457 38 386 20.4 9.3 11.0 2.98 
 1983 3 504 67 117 32 076 35 041 19.2 9.2 10.0 2.76 
 1984 3 529 64 062 32 154 31 908 18.2 9.1 9.0 2.57 
 1985 3 540 62 388 33 213 29 175 17.6 9.4 8.2 2.48 
 1986 3 541 61 620 33 630 27 990 17.4 9.5 7.9 2.44 
 1987 3 547 58 433 31 413 27 020 16.5 8.9 7.6 2.31 
 1988 3 531 54 600 31 580 23 020 15.5 8.9 6.5 2.17 
 1989 3 510 52 018 32 111 19 907 14.8 9.1 5.7 2.08 
 1990 3 506 52 954 31 370 21 584 15.1 8.9 6.2 2.12 
 1991 3 526 52 718 31 305 21 413 15.0 8.9 6.1 2.09 
 1992 3 555 51 089 30 931 20 158 14.4 8.7 5.7 1.99 
 1993 3 574 49 304 32 148 17 156 13.8 9.0 4.8 1.91 
 1994 3 586 48 255 30 948 17 307 13.5 8.6 4.8 1.85 
 1995 3 601 48 530 31 494 17 036 13.5 8.7 4.7 1.86 
 1996 3 626 50 390 31 514 18 876 13.9 8.7 5.2 1.89 
 1997 3 664 52 311 31 605 20 706 14.3 8.6 5.7 1.93 
 1998 3 703 53 551 31 352 22 199 14.5 8.5 6.0 1.95 
 1999 3 742 53 354 31 683 21 671 14.3 8.5 5.8 1.90 
 2000 3 790 54 239 31 115 23 124 14.3 8.2 6.1 1.89 
 2001 3 847 57 854 30 212 27 642 15.0 7.9 7.2 1.96 
 2002 3 917 60 521 29 348 31 173 15.5 7.5 8.0 1.97 
 2003 3 980 61 529 29 074 32 455 15.5 7.3 8.2 1.99 
 2004 4 045 61 972 28 665 33 307 15.3 7.1 8.2 1.96 
 2005 4 134 61 372 28 260 33 112 14.8 6.8 8.0 1.88 
 2006 4 233 64 237 27 479 36 758 15.2 6.5 8.7 1.93 
 2007 4 339 71 389 28 050 42 570 16.4 6.5 9.9 2.04 
 2008 4 422 75 173 28 192 46 873 17.0 6.3 10.7 2.14 
 2009 4 459 75 554 28 898 45 380 16.9 6.3 10.6 2.10 
 2010 4 470 73 724 27 122 46 602 16.5 6.1 10.4 2.07 
 2011 4 581 74 650 28 995 45 655 16.3 6.3 10.0 2.04 
 2012 4 585 72 225 28 848 43 377 15.8 6.3 9.5 2.01 
 2013 4 593 68 930 30 018 28 912 15.0 6.5 8.5 1.96 

==Demographic statistics==
The following demographic statistics are from Ireland's Central Statistics Office (CSO), Eurostat and the CIA World Factbook.

===Population===
A 2001 Population pyramid showing Ireland's age and gender structure.

Figures from the CSO. 

: 4,581,269 (2011)
: 4,585,400 (2012 preliminary estimate)

===Age structure===
: 014 years: 21.3% (male: 501,189; female: 478,401) (2011)
: 1564 years: 67.0% (male: 1,558,196; female: 1,545,073) (2011)
: 65 years and over: 11.7% (male: 243,314; female: 292,079) (2011)

Non-national groups with populations in Ireland of 10,000 or more in 2006. Non-European Union nationals are shown exploded.

===Sex ratio===
: at birth: 1.07 male(s)/female
: under 15 years: 1.07 male(s)/female
: 1564 years: 1 male(s)/female
: 65 years and over: 0.8 male(s)/female
: total population: 0.99 male(s)/female (2008)

===Infant mortality rate===
: total:
3.78 deaths/1,000 live births (2013)

===Life expectancy at birth===
Foreign residents of Ireland by country of birth, 2006.

: total population: 80.19 years (2011)
: male: 76.96 years (2011)
: female: 80.35 years (2011)

===Total fertility rate===
2.1 children born/woman (2009) Central Statistics Office Ireland - Report on Vital Statistics 2009 

===HIV/AIDS===
 adult prevalence rate: 0.1% (2001 est.)
- people living with HIV/AIDS: 6,900 (2008 est.)

===Nationality===
: noun: Irishman(men), Irishwoman(women), Irish (collective plural)
: adjective: Irish

===Nationalities in Ireland===
Irish (including dual-Irish/other): 86.9%, UK: 2.5%, Other EU 27: 6.1%, Other Europe: 0.7%, Asia: 1.5%, Africa: 0.9%, USA: 0.2%, Other countries: 0.5%, Multiple nationality: 0.1%, Not stated: 1.2% (2011)

===Ethnic groups===
Irish & Irish Travellers (of largely Gaelic stock, with Norse (Norwegian), Norman, English, French, Scottish, and Welsh admixture), Ulster-Scots and various immigrant populations  the largest immigrant groups, with over 10,000 people, are the British, Poles, Americans, Lithuanians, Latvians, Germans, Nigerians, and Chinese
 CSO Ireland - Persons usually resident and present in the State on Census Night (2006), classified by place of birth and age group. 

Ethnic backgrounds:
White Irish: 84.5%, Irish Travellers: 0.7%, Other White: 9.1% (total White: 94.3%), Asian: 1.9%, Black: 1.4%, Other: 0.9%, Not Stated: 1.6% (2011) CSO Ireland This is Ireland - Highlights from the 2011 census, Part 1 

===Religions===
Roman Catholic 84.16%, No Religion 7.63%, Church of Ireland 2.81%, Islam 1.07%, Presbyterian 0.54%, Orthodox 0.99%, Methodist 0.15% (2011). In an Irish Times Behaviour Attitudes social poll published on 15 September 2010, 32% of those surveyed said they went to a religious service more than once a week.

===Geographic Population Distribution===
: Urban population (areas with >1,500 people): 62.0% (2011)
: Rural population: 38.0% (2011)

===Languages===
English is the most commonly used language, with 94% Eurobarometer - Europeans and their languages of the population calling it their mother tongue. Irish, is the first official language of the state with 11% calling it their mother tongue. Irish is the main language of the Gaeltacht regions, where 96,628 people live. Shelta and Ulster Scots are also spoken by small communities. The main sign language used is Irish Sign Language.

===Literacy===
: definition: age 15 and over can read and write
:total population: 99%
:male: 99%
:female: 99% (2003 est.)

==See also==
*Republic of Ireland Census 2011
*Ireland
*Irish diaspora
*Irish population analysis
*Ireland
*Stamp 4

Groups:
*Black people in Ireland
*Lithuanians in Ireland
*Turks in Ireland
*Polish minority in Ireland
*Roma in Ireland

==External links==
*Irish Central Statistics Office
*Historical Census Data
*Marketing Ireland

==References==

Ireland



[[Politics of the Republic of Ireland]]

Ireland is a parliamentary, representative democratic republic and a member state of the European Union. While the head of state is the popularly elected President of Ireland, this is a largely ceremonial position with real political power being vested in the indirectly elected Taoiseach (prime minister) who is the head of the government.

Executive power is exercised by the government which consists of no more than 15 cabinet ministers, inclusive of the Taoiseach and Tnaiste (deputy prime minister). Legislative power is vested in the Oireachtas, the bicameral national parliament, which consists of Dil ireann, Seanad ireann and the President of Ireland. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. The head of the judiciary is the Chief Justice who presides over the Supreme Court.

While there are a number of political parties in the state, the political landscape has been dominated for decades by Fianna Fil and Fine Gael, historically opposed and competing entities, which both occupy the traditional centre ground. From the 1930s until 2011 they were the largest and second largest parties respectively. Both parties trace their roots back to the opposing sides of the civil war. The Labour Party, historically the state's third political party has only ever been in power when in coalition with either of the two main parties. In 2011 there was a major political realignment in Ireland, with Fine Gael becoming the largest party, Labour the second, and Fianna Fil dropping to third following a collapse in support, while Sinn Fin saw a substantial increase in support.

==Main office holders==

 Office Name Party Since 
 President Michael D. Higgins Independent 11 November 2011 
 Taoiseach Enda Kenny Fine Gael 9 March 2011 
 Tnaiste Eamon Gilmore Labour Party 9 March 2011 

==Constitution==

The state operates under the Constitution of Ireland () which was adopted in 1937 by means of a plebiscite. The constitution falls within the liberal democratic tradition. It defines the organs of government and guarantees certain fundamental rights. The Constitution can only be amended by means of a referendum. Important constitutional referendums have concerned issues such as abortion, the status of the Catholic Church, divorce, and the European Union.

==President==
ras an Uachtarin in Dublin, official residence of the President of Ireland

The head of state is the President of Ireland. In keeping with the state's parliamentary system of government the President exercises a mainly ceremonial role but does possess certain specific powers. The presidency is open to all Irish citizens who are at least 35. They are directly elected by secret ballot under the alternative vote. A candidate may be nominated for election as President by no fewer than 20 members of the Oireachtas or by four or more of Ireland's 34 County and City Councils. A retiring President may nominate themselves as a candidate for re-election. If only one valid candidate is nominated for election, for example if there is consensus among the political parties to nominate a single candidate, it is unnecessary to proceed to a ballot and that candidate is deemed elected. The President is elected to a seven year term of office and no person may serve more than two terms.

In carrying out certain of their constitutional functions, the President is aided by the Council of State. There is no Vice-President in Ireland. If for any reason the President is unable to carry out his/her functions, or if the Office of President is vacant, the duties of the President are carried out by the Presidential Commission.

==Executive branch==
Government Buildings in Dublin

Executive authority is exercised by a cabinet known simply as the Government. Article 28 of the Constitution states that the Government may consist of no less than seven and no more than fifteen members, namely the Taoiseach (prime minister), the Tnaiste (deputy prime minister) and up to thirteen other ministers. The Taoiseach is appointed by the President, after being nominated by Dil ireann (the lower house of parliament). The remaining ministers are nominated by the Taoiseach and appointed by the President following their approval by the Dil. The Government must enjoy the confidence of Dil ireann and, in the event that they cease to enjoy the support of the lower house, the Taoiseach must either resign or request the President to dissolve the Dil, in which case a general election follows.

==Legislative branch==
Leinster House in Dublin, seat of the houses of the Oireachtas

Article 15 of the Constitution of Ireland established the Oireachtas as the national parliament of Ireland. The Oireachtas consists of the President of Ireland and two elected houses: Dil ireann (the House of Representatives) and Seanad ireann (the Senate). As the Oireachtas also consists of the President the official title of the two law making houses is the Houses of the Oireachtas. The Dil is by far the dominant House of the legislature. The President may not veto bills passed by the Oireachtas, but may refer them to the Supreme Court of Ireland for a ruling on whether they comply with the constitution.

===Dil ireann===

Members of the Dil are directly elected at least once in every five years under the single transferable vote form of proportional representation from multi-seat constituencies. Membership of the house is open to all Irish citizens who are at least 21 and permanently resident in the State. The electorate consists of all Irish and British citizens resident in Ireland over the age of 18. Members of the Dil are known as Teachta Dla or TDs. Currently there are 166 TDs, of which one, the Ceann Comhairle (Chairman), is automatically returned at an election. The Taoiseach, Tnaiste and the Minister for Finance must be members of the Dil. All other members of the Government must be members of the Dil, however up to two members may be members of the Seanad. The Dil is the only House which can introduce and amend money bills (i.e. financial and tax legislation). Since the early 1990s no single party has had a majority in Dil ireann, so that coalition governments have been the norm.

===Seanad ireann===

The Senate is a largely advisory body. It consists of sixty members called Senators. An election for the Seanad must take place no later than 90 days after a general election for the members of the Dil. Eleven Senators are nominated by the Taoiseach while a further six are elected by certain national universities. The remaining 43 are elected from special vocational panels of candidates, the electorate for which consists of the 60 members of the outgoing Senate, the 166 TDs of the incoming Dil and the 883 elected members of 5 city and 29 county councils. The Senate has the power to delay legislative proposals and is allowed 90 days to consider and amend bills sent to it by the Dil (excluding money bills). The Senate is only allowed 21 days to consider money bills sent to it by the Dil. The Senate cannot amend money bills but can make recommendations to the Dil on such bills.

==Judicial branch==
The Four Courts in Dublin

Ireland is a common law jurisdiction. The judiciary consists of the Supreme Court, the High Court and other lower courts established by law. Judges are appointed by the President after being nominated by the Government and can be removed from office only for misbehaviour or incapacity, and then only by resolution of both houses of the Oireachtas. The final court of appeal is the Supreme Court, which consists of the Chief Justice, seven ordinary judges and ex officio the President of the High Court. The Supreme Court rarely sits as a full bench and normally hears cases in chambers of three, five or seven judges.

Both the Supreme Court and the High Court have the power of judicial review and may declare to be invalid both laws and acts of the state which are repugnant to the constitution.

==Public sector==

The Government, through the civil and public services and state-sponsored bodies, is a significant employer in the state; these three sectors are often called the public sector. Management of these various bodies vary, for instance in the civil service there will be clearly defined routes and patterns whilst among public services a sponsoring minister or the Minister for Finance may appoint a board or commission. Commercial activities, where the state involves itself, are typically through the state-sponsored bodies which are usually organised in a similar fashion to private companies.

A 2005 report on public sector employment, showed that in June 2005 the numbers employed in the public sector stood at 350,100; of these by sector they were 38,700 (civil service), 254,100 (public service) and 57,300 (state-sponsored). The total workforce of the state was 1,857,400 that year, thus the public sector represents approximately 20% of the total workforce. Central Statistics Office Public Sector Employment and Earnings (June 2005) 

===Civil service===

The civil service of Ireland consists of two broad components, the Civil Service of the Government and the Civil Service of the State. Whilst these two components are largely theoretical, they do have some fundamental operational differences. The civil service is expected to maintain the political impartiality in its work, and some sections of it are entirely independent of Government decision making.

===Public service===

The public service is a relatively broad term and is not clearly defined and sometimes is taken to include the civil service. The public service proper consists of Government agencies and bodies which provide services on behalf of the Government but are not the core civil service. For instance local authorities, Education and Training Boards and Garda Sochna are considered to be public services.

==Local government==

Article 28A of the constitution of Ireland provides a constitutional basis for local government. The Oireachtas is empowered to establish the number, size and powers of local authorities by law. Under Article 28A, members of local authorities must be directly elected by voters at least once every five years.

Local government in Ireland is governed by a series of Local Government Acts, beginning with the Local Government (Ireland) Act 1898. The most significant of these is the Local Government Act 2001, which established a two-tier structure of local government. The top tier of the structure consists of 34 local authorities, of which 29 are County Councils corresponding to each of the Republic's 26 traditional counties (Counties Dublin and Tipperary having been divided into three and two council areas respectively). The remaining 5 top tier authorities are the five largest cities (Dublin, Cork, Galway, Limerick, and Waterford), each of which has a City Council with the same status as a County Council.

The second tier of local government, which only exists in certain urban areas, consists of the town councils. The towns of Kilkenny, Sligo, Drogheda, Clonmel, and Wexford use the title of "Borough Council" instead of "Town Council", but they have no additional responsibilities. Local government bodies have responsibility for such matters as planning, environmental protection, roads, public water supply, sanitation and libraries.

==Political parties==

A number of political parties are represented in the Dil and coalition governments are common. The Irish electoral system has been characterised by the two and a half party system, with two large catch all parties dominating. This changed after the 2011 Irish General Election, following the large drop in support for Fianna Fil and the rise in support for other parties.

The current largest party in the state is Fine Gael, which has its origins in the pro-treaty movement of Michael Collins in the Irish Civil War. Traditionally the party of law and order, it is associated with strong belief in pro-enterprise and reward. Despite expressions of Social Democracy by previous leader Garrett Fitzgerald, today, it remains a Christian democratic, economically liberal party along European lines, with a strongly pro-European outlook. Fine Gael was formed out of a merger of Cumann na nGaedheal, the Centre Party and the Blueshirts. In recent years it has generally been associated with a liberal outlook. It has formed government in the periods 1922&ndash;32 (Cumann na nGaedheal), 1948&ndash;51, 1954&ndash;57, 1973&ndash;77, 1981&ndash;82, 1982&ndash;87, 1994&ndash;97, and 2011 to present.

The second largest party in the state is the centre-left Labour Party which was founded by James Connolly and Jim Larkin in 1912. Labour have formal links with the trade union movement and have governed in seven coalition governments - six led by Fine Gael and one by Fianna Fil. This role as a junior coalition partner has led to Labour being classed as the half party of Ireland's two and a half party system.

Fianna Fil, a traditionally Irish republican party founded in 1927 by amon de Valera, is the third largest party. It first formed a government on the basis of a populist programme of land redistribution and national preference in trade and republican populism remains a key part of its appeal. It has formed government seven times since Ireland gained independence: 1932&ndash;48, 1951&ndash;54, 1957&ndash;73, 1977&ndash;81, 1982, 1987&ndash;94, and 1997&ndash;2011. It lost a huge amount of support in the 2011 general election.

The fourth largest party is Sinn Fin, established in its current form in 1970. The original Sinn Fin played a huge role in the Irish War of Independence and the First Dil. Fine Gael and Fianna Fil trace their origins to that party. The current day party has been historically linked to the Provisional IRA. The party is a Republican party which takes a more left wing stance on economics and social policy than the Labour Party.

The United Left Alliance was an electoral alliance consisting of the Socialist Party, the People Before Profit Alliance, and the Workers and Unemployed Action Group. It was formed recently in November 2010, although it has yet to be formally registered as a political party. The Socialist Party is made up of members of a Trotskyist faction within the Labour Party who were expelled in 1989.

A number of independent TDs such as Maureen O'Sullivan, Luke 'Ming' Flanagan, Mick Wallace, Finian McGrath, Catherine Murphy, John Halligan and Thomas Pringle largely hold left-wing views, while Shane Ross and Stephen Donnelly are more closely identified with the centre-right. http://cedarlounge.wordpress.com/2011/02/21/looking-left-next-friday/ 

===Party details===

 

===Party representation===

 

==Foreign relations==

Ireland's foreign relations are substantially influenced by its membership of the European Union, although bilateral relations with the United States and United Kingdom are also important to the country. It is one of the group of smaller nations in the EU, and has traditionally followed a non-aligned foreign policy.

===Military neutrality===
Ireland tends towards independence in foreign policy, thus it is not a member of NATO and has a longstanding policy of military neutrality.

This policy has helped the Irish Defence Forces to be successful in their contributions to UN peace-keeping missions since 1960 (in the Congo Crisis ONUC) and subsequently in Cyprus (UNFICYP), Lebanon (UNIFIL), Iran/Iraq Border (UNIIMOG), Bosnia and Herzegovina (SFOR & EUFOR Althea), Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE), Liberia (UNMIL), East Timor (INTERFET), Darfur and Chad (EUFOR Tchad/RCA). Irish Defence Forces do not deploy in Missions

===International organisation participation===
The Republic is member of the Australia Group, AustraliaGroup.net - Participants BIS, British-Irish Council, CE, Celtic League, EBRD, ECE, EIB, EMU, ESA, EU, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICC, ITUC, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, International Maritime Organization, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, MINURSO, NAM (guest), NEA, NSG, OECD, OPCW, OSCE, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNFICYP, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIFIL, UNIKOM, UNITAR, UNMIBH, UNMIK, UNMOP, UNTAET, UNTSO, UPU, WCO, WEU (observer), WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO, and the Zangger Committee.

==Northern Ireland==
Northern Ireland has been a major factor in Irish politics since the island of Ireland was divided between Northern Ireland and what is now the Republic in 1920. The creation of Northern Ireland led to conflict between northern nationalists (mostly Roman Catholic) who seek unification with the Republic and Unionists (mostly Protestant) who opposed British plans for Irish Home Rule and wished for Northern Ireland to remain within the United Kingdom. After the formation of Northern Ireland in 1921 following its opt out from the newly formed Irish Free State, many Roman Catholics and Republicans were discriminated against. The abolition of Proportional Representation and the gerrymandering of constituency boundaries led to Unionists being over-represented at Stormont and at Westminster. Even James Craig who was prime minister of Northern Ireland boasted of his Protestant Parliament for a Protestant People. In the 1960s NICRA was set up to end discrimination between Catholics and Protestants. There was a massive backlash to this from sections of the Unionist community. This conflict exploded into violence in the late sixties with the beginning of the Troubles, involving groups such as the Provisional IRA, loyalist paramilitaries, the police and the British army, the latter originally drafted in to protect Catholic communities from loyalist violence. These clashes were to result in the suspension of the Stormont Parliament and unsuccessful efforts by the British Government to encourage a power-sharing Executive in Northern Ireland which were only realised following the Good Friday Agreement in 1998. The Troubles caused thousands of deaths in Northern Ireland but also spilled over into bombings and acts of violence in England and the Republic.

Since its foundation it has been the stated long-term policy of governments of what is now the Republic to bring an end to the conflict in Northern Ireland and to bring about a united Ireland. Northern Ireland has also, in the past, often been a source of tension between the Irish Government and the government of the United Kingdom. In order to find a solution to the Troubles the Irish Government became a partner in the Good Friday Agreement in 1998.

While Sinn Fin have long organised in both Northern Ireland and the Republic, Fianna Fil have recently opened a cumann(branch) in Derry and begun recruiting members at Queen's University, Belfast although both are exteremely small.

===North/South Ministerial Council===

Under the Belfast Agreement (also known as the Good Friday Agreement) and Article 3 of the constitution a North-South Ministerial Council and six North-South Implementation Bodies coordinate activities and exercise a limited governmental role within certain policy areas across the whole island of Ireland. The Implementation Bodies have limited executive authority in six policy areas. Meetings of the Council take the form of meetings between ministers from both the Republic's Government and the Northern Ireland Executive. The Council was suspended from 2002 to 2007. However, with the resumption of devolved government in Northern Ireland in May 2007, the Council has now reassumed its duties.

==See also==
*Ireland
*Elections in the Republic of Ireland
*History of the Republic of Ireland
*History of Ireland
*List of Irish by-elections
*Politics of Northern Ireland
*Parliamentary Constituencies in the Republic of Ireland

==Notes==
 

==References==

==Further reading==
* John Coakley & Michael Gallagher (Editors) Politics in the Republic of Ireland (Routledge, 2004) 
* Sean Dooney & John O'Toole Irish Government Today (Gill & Macmillan Ltd., 1998) 
* Neil Collins & Terry Cradden Irish Politics Today (Manchester University Press, 2001) 
* Noel Whelan Politics, Elections and the Law (Blackhall Publishing, 2000) 

==External links==
*ElectionsIreland.org  Irish election results from 1920 to today.

 

[[Telecommunications in the Republic of Ireland]]

Telecommunications in Ireland includes telephone, Internet, radio, and television. Each of these markets has been opened to competition and are now digital.

==Regulation==

Telecommunications, including radio frequency spectrum licensing and the postal sector, are regulated by the Commission for Communications Regulation (ComReg). ComReg was established on 1 December 2002. The Broadcasting Authority of Ireland (BAI) () is the regulator of both public and commercial broadcasting sector in Ireland. It was established on 1 October 2009, replacing the Broadcasting Commission of Ireland (BCI) ().

The Minister for Communications, Energy and Natural Resources has overall responsibility for national policy and regulation of both telecommunications and broadcasting.

The telecommunications market in Ireland was opened to competition in 1998. "Irish telecom market opens to competition", CNN, 7 December 1998 In 2007 licensed operators other than Eircom, the former state-owned monopoly, accounted for 32% of the market. Quarterly Key Data Report for September 2007, Commission for Communications Regulation (Comreg), 7 September 2007, page 11, Fig 2.1.3 By June 2011 this figure had risen to 41% of fixed line revenue. "Annual Report 2010 / 2011", Commission for Communications Regulation, 20 April 2012 Eircom remains the largest telecommunications company in Ireland, offering fixed, mobile, and broadband services. As Bord Telecom ireann, the company was state owned until 1999, when it was floated on the Irish and New York Stock Exchanges.

==Infrastructure==

Ireland's telecommunications network is a modern digital system connected by an extensive national fibre optic network with multiple high capacity fibre optic links to the UK, Continental Europe, North America and with dedicated capacity on routes to Asia and other parts of the globe.
There is an open and competitive telecommunications market regulated by ComReg. However, the fixed-line market is still dominated by the incumbent operator, Eircom.

Several companies operate national fibre optic networks including eircom, BT Ireland, ESB Group and UPC Ireland. Eircom's fibre network is the most extensive covering most parts of the country with 12,000 km of fibre routes (>40,000 km of fibres) Eircom. 
Eircom's Next Generation Network upgrade rolled out Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing (DWDM) which is capable of delivering up to 320 Gbit/s along a single fibre route. 
This upgrade also sees eircom's core infrastructure moving to an all-IP network. It has major aggregation nodes at 140 locations around Ireland and onward fibre connections to another 470 central office sites.

Ireland also has major connections to multiple international fibre optic networks, an example of which is Hibernia Atlantic.
Hibernia Atlantic submarine cable system

94 Irish towns and cities also have access to publicly owned, carrier-neutral metropolitan fibre networks managed by e|net. E|Net 
These networks can be used by any licensed Irish telecommunications operator to provide commercial or residential end users with products.

For residential and small business providers, most major urban areas have access to UPC Ireland's HFC network which provides speeds of up to 200Mbit/s using EuroDOCSIS 3.0 cable modem technology.

Eircom wholesale is also in the process of rolling out FTTC which provides speeds of up to 100Mbit/s down and 20Mbit/s up. The system uses VDSL2 and vectoring between the FTTC cabinet and the end user. Retail services using this next generation access infrastructure are provided by approximately 15 operators.

Ireland has four mobile networks that own and operate their own network infrastructure and a number of MVNO operators that operate mobile phone services using one of these infrastructure providers' radio networks. The four infrastructure owning networks are:
* Networks providing 2G GSM and 3G UMTS: Vodafone Ireland  Wholly owned by Vodafone Group, O2 Ireland  Part of Telefnica, Meteor / E Mobile  Part of the eircom group
* Network providing 3G UMTS only: 3 Ireland  Hutchison Whampoa Group.

Meteor/eMobile were the first to launch 4G LTE services in Ireland on 26 September 2013, followed by Vodafone on 14 October 2013, and Three on 27 January 2014. O2 is due to launch its 4G services later in 2014.

==Telephone system==

* Fixed telephone lines in use 1,168,591 (Q4 2012, ComStat) 
* Mobile cellular telephones: 5,460,507 (Q4 2012, ComStat) 
* Country code: 353

As mobile phone services become more price competitive, more Irish customers are opting to drop landline services. This is reflected by a sharp fall in the number of fixed line channels in use and an equivalent increase in mobile subscriptions. Details are tracked on ComReg's ComStat website http://www.comstat.ie 

There are four mobile telecommunications providers: 3 Ireland, O2 Ireland, Meteor (Eircom), and Vodafone Ireland. Hutchinson 3G are currently negotiating with Ireland and EU regulators on whether their proposed takeover of O2 Ireland can proceed, as planned by their 850M takeover deal. 

There are also six MNVOs (Mobile Network Virtual Operator): 48 (runs off the O2 Network), eMobile (runs off the Meteor network), Tesco Mobile (runs off the O2 Network), Lycamobile (runs off the O2 Network), Blueface (runs off the 3 Ireland network) and Postfone (runs off the Vodafone network). UPC Ireland has confirmed that they will be launching an MVNO in the future, though it is unknown when this entry might occur.

===History===

The original network was taken over by the Irish Department of Posts and Telegraphs (P&T) from the British Post Office in 1921 and used a mixture of manual and step-by-step automatic exchanges. Development of the network was relatively stagnant with slow rollout of automatic switching using step-by-step exchanges until after WWII.
From 1957 onwards, P&T began to rollout more modern crossbar switchs using equipment supplied by Ericsson built at their Athlone facility. This saw significant improvements to many services, but the network was still quite underdeveloped in rural areas.
Digital switching was introduced in 1980 using Ericsson AXE and Alcatel E10 switches both of which were manufactured at facilities in Ireland. This saw a total transformation of the telephone network with modern automatic and digital services reaching even the most rural parts of Ireland by the mid 1980s.
The fixed line network is now made up of multiple operators using a diverse range of digital technologies including VoIP.

Ireland's first mobile telephone network, Eircell went live in 1986 using the analogue TACS system.
2G GSM services from Eircell launched on 1st July 1993. Digifone followed in 1997, then Meteor in 2001 (having been licenced in 1998) and 3 Ireland launched its UMTS 3G-only service in 2005.

3G services launched in 2004 (Vodafone Ireland) and other networks quickly followed suit.
and 4G launched in 2013 (Meteor) and is now available on most networks.

==Internet==

* Internet users: 3.6 million, 77% of the population, 70th in the world (2011); Percentage of Individuals using the Internet 20002011, International Telecommunication Union, accessed on 19 August 2012. 3.0 million, 67th in the world (2009) "Communications :: Ireland", World Factbook, U.S. Central Intelligence Agency, retrieved 28 February 2013 
* Dial-up subscriptions: 11 437 (Q4 2012 ComStat) 
* Fixed broadband subscriptions: 1,666,645 (Q4 2012 ComStat) 
* Mobile broadband subscriptions: 554,563 Q4 2012 ComStat) 
* Internet hosts: 1.4 million, 40th in the world (2012) 
* Internet censorship: Little or none (2011) "Ireland: Freedom of Speech and Press and Internet Freedom", Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2011, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, U.S. Department of State 
* Top-level domain name: .ie 

Broadband Internet access is available in Ireland via DSL, cable, wireless, and satellite. By the end of 2011 Eircom announced that 75% of its working lines would be connected to Next Generation Broadband (NGB) enabled exchanges. 

A typical monthly broadband Internet subscription cost $26.02 in 2011, 14% less than the average of $30.16 for the 34 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries surveyed. "USD PPP for Eircom Next Generation Broadband Basic (512kbit/s up, 8.2 Mbit/s down) as reported in question 4e, OECD Fixed Broadband basket low 2", OECD Broadband statistics, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, September 2011, updated 18 July 2012 

In August 2012 Pat Rabbitte, the Minister for Communications, Energy and Natural Resources, outlined a national broadband plan with goals of: "Rabbitte unveils broadband plan", Mary Minihan and Deagln de Bradn, Irish Times, 30 August 2012 
* 70100 Mbit/s broadband service available to at least 50 per cent of the population,
* at least 40 Mbit/s available to at least a further 20 per cent, and
* a minimum of 30 Mbit/s available to everyone, no matter how rural or remote.

Founded in 1996, the Internet Neutral Exchange (INEX) is an industry-owned association that provides IP peering and traffic exchange for its members in Ireland. The INEX switching centres are located in four secure data centres in Dublin: TeleCity Group in Kilcarbery Park, Dublin 22 & TeleCity Group in Citywest Business Campus, Dublin 24 and Interxion DUB1, and Interxion DUB2 in Park West. The switches are connected by dedicated resilient fibre links. "History of INEX", Internet Neutral Exchange, retrieved 3 March 2013 In March 2013 it listed 57 full and 18 associate members. "INEX Public Member List", Internet Neutral Exchange, retrieved 3 March 2013 

Established in 1998, "About ISPAI", Internet Service Providers Association of Ireland, retrieved 3 March 2013 the Internet Service Providers Association of Ireland (ISPAI) listed 24 Internet access and hosting providers as members in 2012. "Register of Members (Current)", Internet Service Providers Association of Ireland, 1 August 2012, retrieved 3 March 2013 

==Radio and television==
RT logo
TV3 logo

===Infrastructure===
Television in Ireland is broadcast using DVB-T using the common platform specifications defined by NorDig which apply in the Nordic countries and Ireland. Video is encoded using the MPEG4 system.
The analogue PAL-I broadcasting system is no longer on air.

Cable systems operate using the DVB-C standard and Satellite is broadcast using DVB-S/S2.
Some areas still carry a range of cable channels in analogue PAL-I format. Although, this is normally just a legacy service provided by default. It is not possible to subscribe to analogue cable as a new customer.

Radio is broadcast primarily using FM 88-108 MHz.
Digital DAB Radio is also available in some areas.
RT Radio 1 is also broadcast on Longwave 252 kHz (AM)
Mediumwave services have been discontinued.

2RN operates a national FM network and DAB services. However, most independent FM stations own their own broadcasting infrastructure.

Raidi Teilifs ireann (; Radio Television of Ireland; abbreviated as RT) is a statutory semi-state company and the public service broadcaster Broadcasting Act 2009 (Section 113), Irish Statute Book, Office of the Attorney General, Government of Ireland, 12 July 2009 that dominates the radio and TV sectors in Ireland. The first commercial radio stations began broadcasting in 1989. Prior to 1989 hundreds of pirate radio stations were a mainstay of radio listener-ship, particularly in Dublin, and a handful of pirate stations continue to operate illegally today. In 1998 TV3 became the first privately owned commercial TV station and it remains the main free-to-air service after RT. Competition also comes from British public and private terrestrial TV. Satellite and cable TV are widely available. There are also non-commercial community and special interest radio stations. "Ireland profile: Media", BBC News, 26 March 2012 

RT both produces programmes and broadcasts them on television, radio and the Internet in English and Irish. The radio service began on 1 January 1926, while regular television broadcasts began on 31 December 1961, making RT one of the oldest continuously operating public service broadcasters in the world. Some RT services are only funded by advertising, while other RT services are only funded by the television licence fee.

Saorview ( ) is Ireland's national free-to-air digital terrestrial television (DTT) service operated by 2RN. Trial service began on 29 October 2010 with full service to the public from May 2011. "DTT to be launched on 31 October", RT News, 4 June 2010] Analogue television transmissions ended on 24 October 2012. "Analogue switch off has finally happened", Saorview, 24 October 2012 

SAORSAT is Ireland's national free-to-air digital satellite television service, also operated by 2RN. SAORSAT delivers Irish television services to the 1% to 2% of homes that are not covered by the SAORVIEW Digital Terrestrial Television service. http://www.rtenl.ie/wp-content/uploads/2012/03/RT%C3%89NL-SAORSAT-FAQs-Mar-2012-Rev-1.1.pdf 

A television licence is required for any address at which there is a television set or device that is not exempt. The annual licence fee is 160. The licence is free to senior citizens (to anyone over the age of 70, some over 66), some Social Welfare recipients, and individuals who are blind. 

 

== See also ==
* Community Radio Forum of Ireland (CRAOL)
* Internet censorship in Ireland
* List of Irish-Gaelic radio stations
* List of television channels available in the Republic of Ireland
* Media of the Republic of Ireland

== References ==

== External links ==
* Broadcasting Authority of Ireland
* Commission for Communications Regulation

Ireland
 


[[Transport in Ireland]]

Most of the transport system in Ireland is in public hands, either side of the Irish border. The Irish road network has evolved separately in the two jurisdictions Ireland is divided up into, while the Irish rail network was mostly created prior to the partition of Ireland.

In the Republic of Ireland, the Minister for Transport, acting through the Department of Transport, is responsible for the State's road network, rail network, public transport, airports and several other areas. Although some sections of road have been built using private or public-private funds, and are operated as toll roads, they are owned by the Government of Ireland. The rail network is also state-owned and operated, while the government currently still owns the main airports. Public transport is mainly in the hands of a statutory corporation, Cras Iompair ireann (CI), and its subsidiaries, Bus tha Cliath (Dublin Bus), Bus ireann (Irish Bus), and Iarnrd ireann (Irish Rail).

On 1 November 2005, the Irish government published the Transport 21 plan which includes 18bn for improved roads and 16bn for improved rail, including the Western Railway Corridor and the Dublin Metro.

In Northern Ireland, the road network and railways are in state ownership. The Department for Regional Development is responsible for these and other areas (such as water services). Two of the three main airports in Northern Ireland are privately operated and owned. The exception is City of Derry Airport, which is owned and funded by Derry City Council. A statutory corporation, the Northern Ireland Transport Holding Company (which trades as Translink) operates public transport services through its three subsidiaries - NI Railways Company Limited, Ulsterbus Limited, and Citybus Limited (now branded as Metro).

==Railways==

;Total right
: broad gauge
:1947 km (1998); 38 km electrified; 485 km double track; some additions and removals since 1997

: standard gauge
:28 km (2004) (Luas tramway); 28 km electrified; 28 km double track; additional track under construction

: narrow gauge
:1365 km (2006) (industrial railway operated by Bord na Mna)

Ireland's railways are in State ownership, with Iarnrd ireann (Irish Rail) operating services in the Republic and NI Railways operating services in Northern Ireland. The two companies co-operate in providing the joint Enterprise service between Dublin and Belfast. InterCity services are provided between Dublin and the major towns and cities of the Republic, and in Ulster along the BelfastDerry railway line. Suburban railway networks operate in Dublin, Dublin Suburban Rail, and Belfast, Belfast Suburban Rail, with limited local services being offered in, or planned for, Cork, Limerick, and Galway.

The rail network in Ireland was developed by various private companies during the 19th century, with some receiving government funding. The network reached its greatest extent by 1920. A broad gauge of 1600mm (5 ft 3in) was agreed as the standard for the island, although there were also hundreds of kilometres of 914mm (3 ft) narrow gauge railways. 

Many lines in the west were decommissioned in the 1930s under amon de Valera, with a further large cull in services by both CI and the Ulster Transport Authority (UTA) during the 1960s, leaving few working lines in the northern third of the island. There is a campaign to bring some closed lines back into service, in particular the Limerick-Sligo line (the Western Railway Corridor), to facilitate economic regeneration in the west, which has lagged behind the rest of the country. There is also a move to restore service on the Dublin to Navan line, and smaller campaigns to re-establish the rail links between Sligo and Enniskillen/Omagh/Derry and Mullingar and Athlone/Galway. Under the Irish government's Transport 21 plan, the Cork to Midleton rail link was reopened in 2009. The re-opening of the Navan-Clonsilla rail link and the Western Rail Corridor are amongst future projects as part of the same plan. 

Public transport services in Northern Ireland are sparse in comparison with those of the rest of Ireland or Great Britain. A large railway network was severely curtailed in the 1950s and 1960s. Current services includes suburban routes to Larne, Newry and Bangor, as well as services to Derry. There is also a branch from Coleraine to Portrush. 

Since 1984 an electrically operated train service run by Iarnrd ireann has linked Dublin with its coastal suburbs. Running initially between Bray and Howth, the Dublin Area Rapid Transit (DART) system was extended from Bray to Greystones in 2000 and further extended from Howth Junction to Malahide. In 2004 a light rail system, Luas, was opened in Dublin serving the central and western suburbs, run by Veolia under franchise from the Railway Procurement Agency. The construction of the Luas system caused much disruption in Dublin. Plans to construct a Dublin Metro service including underground lines were mooted in 2001, but stalled in the financial crisis at the end of that decade.

Ireland has one of the largest dedicated freight railways in Europe, operated by Bord na Mna totalling nearly 1400 km. 

==Roads==
 Ireland. Motorways shown in blue, primary roads (N, A) shown in green. (OpenStreetMap mapping)
;Total - 117318 km
:South: 92500 km including 1015 km of motorway (2010)
:North: 24818 km including 148 km of motorway (2008)
::paved - 87043 km, unpaved - 5457 km

Ireland's roads link Dublin with all the major cities (Belfast, Cork, Limerick, Derry, Galway, and Waterford). Driving is on the left. Signposts in the Republic of Ireland are shown in kilometres and speed limits in kilometres per hour. Distance and speed limit signs in Northern Ireland use imperial units in common with the rest of the United Kingdom.

Historically, land owners developed most roads and later Turnpike Trusts collected tolls so that as early as 1800 Ireland had a 16100 km road network. In 2005 the Irish Government launched Transport 21, a plan envisaging the investment of 34 billion in transport infrastructure from 2006 until 2015. Several road projects were progressed but the economic crisis that began in 2008-09 has prevented its full implementation.

===Bus services===
Ireland's first mail coach services were contracted with the government by John Anderson with William Bourne in 1791 who also paid to improve the condition of the roads. The system of mail coaches, carriages and "bians" was further developed by Charles Bianconi, based in Clonmel, from 1815 as a fore-runner of the modern Irish public transportation system. 

State-owned Bus ireann (Irish Bus) currently provides most bus services in the Republic of Ireland, outside Dublin, including an express coach network connecting most cities in Ireland, along with local bus services in the provincial cities. Bus tha Cliath (Dublin Bus), a sister company of Bus ireann, provides most of the bus services in Dublin, with some other operators providing a number of routes. These include Aircoach, a subsidiary of FirstGroup which provides services to Dublin Airport from Dublin city centre, South Dublin City, Greystones and Bray. They also operate two intercity express non stop services service between Dublin Airport, Dublin City Centre, and Cork and also a non stop route between Belfast City Centre, Dublin Airport and Dublin City. Other operators such as Irish Citylink and GoBus.ie compete on the Dublin-Galway route. Matthews Coaches run a direct service from Bettystown, Laytown and Julianstown to Dublin whilst Dublin Coach operate services to Portlaoise and Limerick.

Some private rural operators exist, such as Halpenny's in Blackrock, County Louth, which was the first private bus operator to run a public service in Ireland, Bus Feda (Feda O'Donnell Coaches), which operates twice daily routes from Ranafast, County Donegal to Galway and back, Feda O'Donnell Coaches and Lough Swilly Bus Company.

In Northern Ireland Ulsterbus provides the bus network, with its sister company Metro providing services in Belfast. Both are part of state-owned Translink. Tiger Coaches operates a very late night bus service on Friday and Saturday nights between Belfast and Lisburn. Belfast Telegraph 15 November 2010 report on launch of Tiger Coaches service 

Private hire companies such as Eirebus Eirebus Irish Private Coach Travel offer groups traveling throughout Ireland with options ranging from cars to 56 passenger coaches and many run route between airports, Pavilions Shopping Centre, National Convention Centre and the O2.

Cross-border services (e.g. Dublin city centre to Belfast) are run primarily by a partnership of Ulsterbus and Bus ireann with some services run across the border exclusively by one of the two companies (e.g. Derry&ndash;Sligo run by Bus ireann). Aircoach, a private operator, does however operate a competing Dublin to Belfast Express service via Dublin Airport.

==Waterways==

;Total (2004) - 753 km
: (pleasure craft only on inland waterways, several lengthy estuarine waterways)
* Grand Canal
* Royal Canal
* ShannonErne Waterway
* River Barrow

==Pipelines==
Natural gas transmission network 1795 km (2003). There is a much more extensive distribution network.

==Ports and harbours==

Ireland has major ports in Dublin, Belfast, Cork, Rosslare, Derry and Waterford. Smaller ports exist in Arklow, Ballina, Drogheda, Dundalk, Dn Laoghaire, Foynes, Galway, Larne, Limerick, New Ross, Sligo, Warrenpoint and Wicklow.

Ports in the Republic handle 3.6 million travellers crossing the sea between Ireland and Great Britain each year. This has been steadily dropping for a number of years (20% since 1999), probably as a result of low cost airlines. Ferry connections between Britain and Ireland via the Irish Sea include the routes from Fishguard and Pembroke to Rosslare, Holyhead to Dn Laoghaire, Stranraer to Belfast and Larne, and Cairnryan to Larne; the Swansea to Cork route has closed. There is also a connection between Liverpool and Belfast via the Isle of Man. The world's largest car ferry, Ulysses, is operated by Irish Ferries on the Dublin&ndash;Holyhead route.

In addition, there are ferries from Rosslare and Cork to France.

The vast majority of heavy goods trade is done by sea. Northern Irish ports handle 10 megatonnes (Mt) of goods trade with Britain annually, while ports in the south handle 7.6 Mt, representing 50% and 40% respectively of total trade by weight.

===Merchant marine===
;Total - 35 ships (with a volume of or over) totalling /
:Ships by type - bulk carrier 7, cargo ship 22, chemical tanker 1, container ship 3, roll-on/roll-off ship 1, short-sea passenger 1
:Foreign-owned - Germany 3, Italy 7, Norway 2
:Registered in other countries - 18 (2003 est.)

===Aviation===

Ireland has five main international airports: Dublin Airport, Belfast International Airport (Aldergrove), Cork Airport, Shannon Airport and Ireland West Airport (Knock). Dublin Airport is the busiest of these, carrying over 22 million passengers per year; a second terminal (T2) was opened in November 2010. All provide services to Great Britain and continental Europe, while Belfast International, Dublin and Shannon also offer transatlantic services. For several decades until 2007 Shannon was a mandatory stopover for transatlantic routes to the United States. In recent years it has opened a pre-screening service allowing passengers to pass through US immigration services before departing from Ireland.

There are also several smaller regional airports: George Best Belfast City Airport, City of Derry Airport, Galway Airport, Kerry Airport (Farranfore), Sligo Airport (Strandhill), Waterford Airport and Donegal Airport (Carrickfinn). Scheduled services from these regional points are in the main limited to flights travelling to other parts of Ireland and to Great Britain. Airlines based in Ireland include Aer Lingus (the former national airline of the Republic of Ireland), Ryanair, Aer Arann and CityJet. Services to the Aran Islands are operated from Aerfort na Minna (Connemara Regional Airport).
 
Ireland's national airline, Aer Lingus, provides air services from Belfast City, Cork, Dublin and Shannon to Europe, North Africa and North America. Cork, Dublin and Shannon airports are run by a State body, the DAA (Dublin Airport Authority). Other Irish airlines are Ryanair, one of the largest in the world, Aer Arann, CityJet, Air Contractors and the newly launched Aer Lingus subsidiary Aer Lingus Regional. There are a number of other operators specialising in general aviation.

====Airport passenger numbers====
In 2012, the passenger numbers were as follows:

 Rank Airport Runways Max Length Passengers 
 1 Dublin 2 2637 m 19,090,954 
 2 Belfast International 2 2780 m 4,313,685 
 3 Cork 2 2133 m 2,340,141 
 4 Belfast City 1 1829 m 2,246,202 
 5 Shannon 1 3119 m 1,394,781 
 6 Knock 1 2340 m 685,000 
 7 City of Derry 1 1967 m 398,209 
 8 Kerry 1 2000 m 249,793 
 9 Waterford 1 1433 m 80,000* 
 

*Latest available figures from 2011

==Gateway Irish Urban Reference Destination Distances==

+Midlands Gateway Urban Destination Distances The distances given below are in kilometres as travelling through the Midlands Gateway ATM (Athlone-Tullamore-Mullingar). Where it is logical to travel along the east or west coast directly, these distances are provided according to the popular route. Urban by-passes, Rockades, Diversions, Detours and all other dispositives prolonging the travelled distances between destinations are equated to ZERO. This is an estimation distance guide only. 
 &times; City /Town 1 City /Town 2 City /Town 3 City /Town 4 City /Town 5 City /Town 6 City /Town 7 City /Town 8 City /Town 9 City /Town 10 City /Town 11 City /Town 12 City /Town 13 City /Town 14 City /Town 15 City /Town 16 City /Town 17 City /Town 18 City /Town 19 City /Town 20 City /Town 21 City /Town 22 City /Town 23 City /Town 24 City /Town 25 City /Town 26 City /Town 27 City /Town 28 City /Town 29 City /Town 30 City /Town 31 City /Town 32 City /Town 33 
 km Athboy 
 km 80 Athlone 
 km 188 241 Ballymena 
 km 144 221 46 Belfast 
 km 100 128 298 285 Castlebar 
 km 60 80 152 136 168 Cavan 
 km 232 255 44 91 269 180 Coleraine 
 km 368 217 467 424 274 300 491 Cork 
 km 220 234 89 114 221 163 50 478 Derry 
 km 40 142 163 120 230 88 187 309 188 Drogheda 
 km 80 124 211 168 235 108 235 259 236 53 M-50Dublin 
 km 72 160 127 84 248 80 152 341 165 37 85 Dundalk 
 km 248 219 418 375 301 274 443 78 430 260 211 211 Dungarvan 
 km 60 40 222 176 130 40 200 297 193 90 80 120 251 Edgeworthstown 
 km 184 108 453 407 173 213 387 140 408 296 243 324 160 148 Ennis 
 km 120 126 434 168 160 46 157 363 107 137 154 100 337 86 234 Enniskillen 
 km 128 96 354 341 92 160 326 201 276 268 219 249 227 136 80 190 Galway 
 km 152 124 333 290 250 178 358 148 345 175 126 207 96 155 150 265 174 Kilkenny 
 km 160 230 515 472 290 319 539 87 476 357 308 389 165 296 155 382 215 195 Killarney 
 km 160 123 409 366 183 217 417 99 368 251 202 283 119 175 41 280 109 131 114 Limerick 
 km 40 55 245 197 112 56 228 284 191 118 105 147 244 15 156 101 156 162 310 202 Longford 
 km 32 48 215 169 154 59 232 242 221 75 65 85 216 35 155 121 144 120 261 159 42 Mullingar 
 km 60 116 244 201 227 130 269 223 256 86 37 118 175 107 206 193 205 89 272 165 114 72 Naas 
 km 100 80 368 325 174 169 332 134 307 210 161 242 151 146 84 232 100 93 149 43 153 111 124 Nenagh 
 km 60 179 97 110 199 72 102 423 57 133 181 110 375 143 338 50 255 290 404 297 128 130 201 254 Omagh 
 km 200 202 375 332 328 300 400 195 387 217 160 249 117 235 239 363 306 121 280 198 242 200 141 202 332 Rosslare 
 km 180 134 374 392 168 279 402 119 352 277 227 309 146 214 20 342 94 158 134 28 221 179 190 69 329 224 Shannon 
 km 160 117 215 202 84 121 187 323 137 201 207 200 334 96 255 75 175 228 338 231 81 123 199 195 114 358 216 Sligo 
 km 260 215 509 466 249 312 483 118 434 351 302 383 195 289 148 375 175 228 33 107 296 254 265 143 398 295 128 297 Tralee 
 km 60 43 256 213 169 93 281 207 256 149 101 130 181 80 165 156 138 85 226 124 77 35 89 76 204 164 144 158 219 Tullamore 
 km 160 174 373 330 310 228 397 123 385 215 166 247 46 205 170 291 236 51 208 129 212 170 129 160 329 73 155 289 226 135 Waterford 
 km 180 189 350 307 315 244 374 184 362 112 134 224 107 263 228 307 295 110 269 187 228 186 129 189 307 19 214 333 285 151 63 Wexford 
 km 120 170 270 227 280 204 295 254 282 112 55 144 176 181 281 146 265 132 346 240 188 146 75 199 227 109 265 253 340 146 133 84 Wicklow 
 

==See also==
* Public transport in Ireland
* State-sponsored bodies of Ireland
* List of Ireland-related topics

==References==
 

==External links==
* Rail Users Ireland - Ireland's National Rail User organisation
* Meath on Track - Navan railway campaign (defunct)
* A discussion on RT Radio One's science show Quantum Leap about the quality of GPS mapping in Ireland is available here. The discussion starts 8mins 17sec into the show. It was aired on 18 Jan 2007 Requires RealPlayer.

 

[[Foreign relations of the Republic of Ireland]]

The foreign relations of Ireland are substantially influenced by its membership of the European Union, although bilateral relations with the United States and United Kingdom are also important to the country. It is one of the group of smaller nations in the EU, and has traditionally followed a non-aligned foreign policy. Ireland tends towards independence in foreign military policy, thus it is not a member of NATO and has a longstanding policy of military neutrality. According to the Irish Defence forces, this policy has helped them to be successful in their contributions to UN peace-keeping missions since 1960 (in the Congo Crisis) and subsequently in Cyprus, Lebanon and Bosnia and Herzegovina. 

==Main relationships==

======

Embassy of Ireland in London

Since at least the 1600s Ireland has had political connections with the United Kingdom, with the whole island becoming a part of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland from 1801 to 1922. From the time of Ireland declaring itself independent from the United Kingdom in 1937, the two countries have been involved in a dispute over the status of Northern Ireland. Articles 2 and 3 of the Constitution of Ireland formerly claimed Northern Ireland as a part of the "national territory", though in practice the Irish government did recognise the UK's jurisdiction over the region.
From the onset of the Troubles in 1969, the two governments sought to bring the violence to an end. The Sunningdale Agreement of 1973 and the Anglo-Irish Agreement of 1985 were important steps in this process. In 1998, both states signed the Good Friday Agreement and now co-operate closely to find a solution to the region's problems. Articles 2 and 3 of the Constitution of Ireland were amended as part of this agreement, the territorial claim being replaced with a statement of aspiration to unite the people of the island of Ireland. As part of the Good Friday Agreement, the states also ended their dispute over their respective names: Ireland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Each agreed to accept and use the others' correct name.

When the Troubles were raging in Northern Ireland, the Irish Government sought, with mixed success, to prevent the import of weapons and ammunition through its territory by illegal paramilitary organisations for use in their conflict with the security forces in Northern Ireland. In the 1970s the Irish warship, the L Ciara intercepted a ship carrying weapons from Libya which were probably destined for Irish Republican paramilitaries. Law enforcement acts such as these additionally improved relations with the government of the United Kingdom. However, the independent judiciary blocked a number of attempts to extradite suspects between 1970 and 1998 on the basis that their crime might have been 'political' and thus contrary to international law at the time.

Ireland is one of the parties to the Rockall continental shelf dispute that also involves Denmark, Iceland, and the United Kingdom. Ireland and the United Kingdom have signed a boundary agreement in the Rockall area. However, neither have concluded similar agreements with Iceland or Denmark (on behalf of the Faroe Islands) and the matter remains under negotiation. Iceland now claims a substantial area of the continental shelf to the west of Ireland, to a point 4948'N 1900'W, which is further south than Ireland.

The controversial Sellafield nuclear fuel reprocessing plant in north-western England has also been a contentious issue between the two governments. The Irish government has sought the closure of the plant, taking a case against the UK government under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. However, the European Court of Justice found that the case should have been dealt with under EU law. Irish Government must pursue Sellafield case via EU  European Parliament press release, 8 June 2006. In 2006, however, both countries came to a friendly agreement which enabled both the Radiological Protection Institute of Ireland and the Garda Sochna (Irish Police Force) access to the site to conduct investigations. 

The cultural relationship between the two countries still remain strong, particularly in sport. The British and Irish Lions, for example, is a rugby team made up of players from England, Ireland, Scotland and Wales that undertakes tours of the southern hemisphere playing the major rugby nations such as New Zealand, Australia and South Africa every four years.

======

Embassy of Ireland in Washington, D.C.

:See also: United States Ambassador to Ireland, Embassy of the United States in Dublin, United States Ambassador's Official Residence in Dublin
The United States recognised the Irish Free State on 28 June 1924 with diplomatic relations being established on 7 October 1924. In 1927, the United States opened an American Legation in Dublin. A GUIDE TO THE UNITED STATES' HISTORY OF RECOGNITION, DIPLOMATIC, AND CONSULAR RELATIONS, BY COUNTRY, SINCE 1776: IRELAND Due to the ancestral ties between the two countries, Ireland and the U.S. have a strong relationship, both politically and economically, with the U.S. being Ireland's biggest trading partner since 2000. Ireland also receives more foreign direct investment from the U.S. than many larger nations, with investments in Ireland equal to France and Germany combined and, in 2012, more than all of developing Asia put together. 

The use of Shannon Airport as a stop-over point for US forces en route to Iraq has caused domestic controversy in Ireland. Opponents of this policy brought an unsuccessful High Court case against the government in 2003, arguing that this use of Irish airspace violated Irish neutrality. Horgan v. An Taoiseach & others IEHC 64 (28 April 2003)  High Court judgement in the unsuccessful case brought by Ed Horgan Restrictions such as carrying no arms, ammunition, or explosives, and that the flights in question did not form part of military exercises or operations were put in place to defend Irish neutrality, however allegations have been made against the Central Intelligence Agency that the airport has been used between 30 and 50 times for illegal extraordinary rendition flights to the U.S. 

In 1995 a decision was made by the U.S. government to appoint a Special Envoy to Northern Ireland to help with the Northern Ireland peace process. During the 2008 presidential campaign in the United States, however, Democratic Party candidate Barack Obama was reported as having questioned the necessity to keep a US Special Envoy for Northern Ireland. His remarks caused uproar within the Republican Party, with Senator John McCain questioning his leadership abilities and his commitment to the ongoing peace process in Northern Ireland. 

, Anne Anderson is the Irish ambassador to the United States while there is no U.S. ambassador to Ireland.

=== and ===

Embassy of Ireland in Beijing

Ireland's official relationship with the People's Republic of China began on 22 June 1979. Centre for Asian Studies, University Collete Dublin, China the Emerging Power: Prospects for Sino-Irish Relations, By Conor O'Clery, Asia Correspondent, The Irish Times Following his visit to China in 1998, former Taoiseach Bertie Ahern authorised the establishment of an Asia Strategy. Irish Department of Foreign Affairs: a Decade of the Asia Strategy The aim of this Strategy was to ensure that the Irish Government and Irish enterprise work coherently to enhance the important relationships between Ireland and Asia. In recent years due to the rapid expansion of the Chinese economy, China is becoming a key trade partner of Ireland, with over $6bn worth of bilateral trade between the two countries in 2010. In July 2013, the Irish Tnaiste and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade were invited to China by the Chinese foreign minister Wang Yi on a trade mission to boost both investment and political ties between the two countries. 

Ireland has raised its concerns in the area of human rights with China on a number of occasions. On 12 May 2007, during a visit to Beijing, former Taoiseach Brian Cowen (then Minister for Finance) discussed human rights issues with Chinese Foreign Minister Li Zhaoxing. Oireachtas: WRITTEN answer on Wednesday, 31 January 2007. Ref No: 43859/06 Former Tnaiste Mary Coughlan also raised human rights issues and concerns with visiting Chinese Vice-Premier Zeng Peiyan. Ireland also participates in the EU-China Human Rights Dialogue.

Concerning the Taiwan issue, Ireland follows a One-China policy. In 2007, the former Irish Minister for Foreign Affairs, Dermot Ahern summarised the Irish position as follows: Oireachtas: ORAL answer on Thursday, 8 February 2007 by the former Minister for Foreign Affairs (Ref No: 3911/07) 

The former Minister's emphasis on the One China policy and to the Taiwan issue being best settled through dialogue "between the parties concerned" was consistent with Beijing's wish that the Taiwan issue be regarded as a domestic one between Chinese on both sides of the Taiwan Straits.

==Europe and the European Union==

Ireland is consistently the most pro-European of EU member states, with 77% of the population approving of EU membership according to a Eurobarometer poll in 2006. Standard Eurobarometer 65 "Question QA11a: Generally speaking, do you feel that (OUR COUNTRY'S) membership of the European Union is...? Answers: A good thing." Survey conducted MayJuly 2006, published July 2006. Ireland was a founding member of the euro single currency. In May 2004, Ireland was one of only three countries to open its borders to workers from the 10 new member states. EU issues important to Ireland include the Common Agricultural Policy, corporation tax harmonisation and the EU Constitution. The Irish electorate declined to ratify the Treaty of Lisbon in 2008. A second referendum in October 2009 passed the bill, allowing the treaty to be ratified before it was ratified legal guarantees on issues such as the right of Ireland to remain militarily neutral (and not engage in any kind of "European army"),the right of the state to maintain its low levels of corporation tax and that the treaty would not change the right to life article in the Irish constitution making abortion illegal and an act of murder under Irish constitutional law.

, Paschal Donohoe is Minister of State for European Affairs at the Department of Foreign Affairs. Ireland has held the Presidency of the Council of the European Union on seven occasions (in 1975, 1979, 1984, 1990, 1996, 2004 and 2013).

 Country Formal Relations Began Notes 
 Albania * Ireland is represented in Albania through its embassy in Athens (Greece). * Albania is represented in Ireland through its embassy in London (United Kingdom). * Both countries are full members of the Council of Europe. 
 Andorra 1995 * Ireland is represented in Andorra through its embassy in Madrid (Spain). * Andorra is represented in Ireland through its embassy in London (United Kingdom). * Both countries are full members of the Council of Europe. 
 Armenia 1996 * Ireland recognised Armenias independence in December 1991. * Armenia is represented in Ireland through its embassy in London (United Kingdom) and an honorary consulate in Dublin. * Ireland is represented in Armenia through its embassy in Sofia (Bulgaria) and through an honorary consulate in Yerevan. * Both countries are full members of the Council of Europe. 
 Austria 1951 * Ireland has an embassy in Vienna. * Austria has an embassy in Dublin. * Both countries are full members of the European Union and the Council of Europe. * In 1986, the President of Ireland Patrick Hillery paid a state visit to Austria. * In July 2006, the President of Ireland Mary McAleese paid a state visit to Austria. 
 Azerbaijan 1996 * Ireland is represented in Azerbaijan through its embassy in Ankara (Turkey). * Azerbaijan is represented in Ireland through its embassy in London (United Kingdom). 
 Belarus 1992 * Ireland is represented in Belarus through its embassy in Vilnius (Lithuania). * Belarus is represented in Ireland through its embassy in London (United Kingdom) and an Honorary Consulate in Dublin. 
 Belgium * Ireland has an embassy in Brussels and an honorary consulate in Antwerpen. * Belgium has an embassy in Dublin and two honorary consulates (Cork and Limerick) . Belgian embassy in Dublin * Both countries are full members of the European Union and the Council of Europe. 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina * Ireland is represented in Bosnia and Herzegovina through its embassy in Ljubljana (Slovenia). * Bosnia and Herzegovina is represented in Ireland through its embassy in London (United Kingdom). * Since 1997 Ireland has contributed peacekeeping troops to Bosnia on a number of occasions including the NATO led Stabilization Force and the EU led EUFOR Althea. 
 Bulgaria 1990 * Ireland has an embassy in Sofia. * Bulgaria has an embassy in Dublin. Bulgarian embassy in Ireland * Both countries are full members of the European Union and the Council of Europe. 
 Croatia 1995 * Ireland is represented in Croatia through its embassy in Ljubljana (Slovenia) and an honorary consulate in Zagreb. * Croatia has an embassy in Dublin. * Both countries are full members of the Council of Europe. 
 Cyprus See Cyprus-Ireland relations * Ireland has an embassy in Nicosia. * Cyprus has an embassy in Dublin. * Since 1964, over 9,000 members of the Irish Defense Forces have served in Cyprus without suffering any casualties. 
 Czech Republic 1929 * Ireland has an embassy in Prague. * The Czech Republic has an embassy in Dublin. * Both countries are full members of the European Union and the Council of Europe. * There are 5,451 Czechs living in Ireland. 
 Denmark 1962 See Denmark-Ireland relations * Ireland has an embassy in Copenhagen. * Denmark has an embassy in Dublin and three honorary consulates (Cork, Limerick and Waterford) . 
 Estonia 1991 * Ireland recognised Estonia on 27 August 1991. * Ireland has an embassy in Tallinn. * Estonia has an embassy in Dublin and two honorary consulates (Cork and Limerick). * Both countries are full members of the European Union and the Council of Europe. * There are approximately 2,400 Estonians living in Ireland. * Estonian Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with Ireland 
 Finland 1961 * Ireland has an embassy and an honorary consulate in Helsinki. * Finland has an embassy in Dublin and three honorary consulates (Cork, Dublin and Limerick). * Both countries are full members of the European Union and the Council of Europe. * Finnish Ministry of Foreign Affairs: relations with Ireland 
 France 1922 * Ireland has an embassy in Paris and three honorary consulates (Antibes, Cherbourg and Lyon). * France has an embassy in Dublin and three honorary consulates (Cork, Limerick and Waterford) . French embassy in Dublin * Both countries are full members of the European Union and the Council of Europe. * Both countries, throughout history, were very friendly with each other, and both fought against Great Britain cooperatively, especially during the 1798 Uprising (however, this was unsuccessful). * There are approximately 9,749 French living in Ireland. * 60% of Irish secondary school students study the French language. * French Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with Ireland 
 Georgia 1996 * Ireland is represented in Georgia through its embassy in Sofia (Bulgaria). * Georgia has an embassy in Dublin. Ireland supports EU initiatives to promote peace between Georgia and Russia. Ireland recognises Georgian sovereignty over the separatist regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. Ireland condemned the decision of Russia to recognise South Ossetia and Abkhazia as independent states. The separatist Parliament of Abkhazia expressly called on Ireland to recognise Abkhaz independence, drawing parallels between Irelands own historic struggle for independence and international recognition with its own, the Abkhaz Parliaments statement recalling that: Just like Ireland, Abkhazia has finally acquired long-awaited independence and recognition at the cost of enormous efforts... was de facto independent for a long time, but remained unrecognised. Ireland was the only unrecognised country in Europe until the world's largest country recognised a free parliament of Ireland. And that country was Russia. The parallel the Abkhaz Parliament referred to stems from the fact that the breakaway and largely unrecognised Irish Republic (191922), enjoyed some form of recognition from the RSFSR. 
 Germany 1922 * Ireland has an embassy in Berlin and five honorary consulates (Bergisch-Gladbach, Frankfurt am Main, Hamburg, Munich and Stuttgart). * Germany has an embassy in Dublin and two honorary consulates (Cork and Galway). * Both countries are full members of the European Union and the Council of Europe. * There are approximately 11,305 Germans living in Ireland. * German Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with Ireland 
 Greece 1975 See GreeceIreland relations * Ireland has an embassy in Athens and four honorary consulates (Corfu, Crete, Rhodes and Thessaloniki). * Greece has an embassy in Dublin. * Both countries are full members of the European Union and the Council of Europe. * In 2000, Greek President Konstantinos Stephanopoulos visited Dublin. * In 2002, Irish President Mary McAleese visited Athens. * In 2006, Greek Prime Minister Kostas Karamanlis and Greek Foreign Affairs Minister Dora Bakoyannis visited Dublin. * It is estimated that there is about 800 Greeks living in Ireland. * Greek Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with Ireland 
 Guernsey * Ireland has signed several tax treaties with the Guernsey. The treaties provide a mechanism for inter-governmental sharing of information about offshore assets, and avoidance of dual-taxation. 
 Holy See 1929 See Holy See  Ireland relations * Ireland has an embassy to the Holy See. * The Holy See has an embassy in Dublin. * The majority of Irish people are Roman Catholic. 
 Hungary 1976 * Since 1996, Ireland has an embassy in Budapest. * Since 1991, Hungary has an embassy in Dublin and 2 honorary consulates (Athlone and Cork). * Both countries are full members of the European Union and the Council of Europe. * There are approximately 8,034 Hungarians living in Ireland. 
 Iceland * Ireland is represented in Iceland through its embassy in Copenhagen (Denmark) and through an honorary consulate in Garabr. * Iceland is represented in Ireland through its embassy in London (United Kingdom) and through an honorary consulate in Dublin. * Both countries are full members of the Council of Europe. 
 Italy 1922 * Ireland has an embassy in Rome and an honorary consulate in Milan. * Italy has an embassy in Dublin. * There are 7,656 Italians living in Ireland. * Both countries are full members of the European Union and the Council of Europe. 
 Jersey * Ireland has signed several tax treaties with Jersey. The treaties provide a mechanism for inter-governmental sharing of information about offshore assets, and avoidance of dual-taxation. 
 Kazakhstan 1992 * Ireland is represented in Kazakhstan through its embassy in Moscow (Russia) * Kazakhstan is represented in Ireland through its embassy in London (United Kingdom). 
 Kosovo 2008 See IrelandKosovo relations * Ireland is represented in Kosovo through its embassy in Budapest (Hungary). * Kosovo declared its independence from Serbia in 17 February 2008 and Ireland recognised it on 29 February 2008. *On 6 December 2011, Kosovan Ambassador to the United Kingdom Muhamet Hamiti presented the credentials of Kosovan President Atifete Jahjaga to Irish President Michael D. Higgins; thus making Hamiti the non-resident ambassador to Ireland. * Ireland contributed 279 peacekeeping troops to the NATO led Kosovo Force, of which 12 personal are still active. 
 Latvia 1991 * Ireland recognised Latvia's independence on 27 August 1991. * Ireland has an embassy in Riga. * Latvia has an embassy in Dublin. * Both countries are full members of the European Union and the Council of Europe. * There are approximately 20,593 Latvians living in Ireland. * Latvian Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with Ireland 
 Liechtenstein * Ireland is represented in Liechtenstein through its embassy in Bern (Switzerland). * Liechtenstein is represented in Ireland through the embassy of Switzerland in Dublin. 
 Lithuania 1991 * Ireland recognised Lithuania on 27 August 1991. * Ireland has an embassy in Vilnius. * Lithuania has an embassy in Dublin and an honorary consulate in Carrickmacross. * Both countries are full members of the European Union and the Council of Europe. * There are approximately 36,683 Lithuanians living in Ireland. * Lithuanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs: list of bilateral treaties with Ireland (in Lithuanian) 
 Luxembourg 1925 * Ireland has an embassy in Luxembourg City. * Luxembourg has an honorary consulate in Dublin. * Both countries are full members of the European Union and the Council of Europe. 
 Republic of Macedonia 1994 * Ireland is represented in Macedonia through its embassy in Bratislava (Slovakia). * Macedonia is represented in Ireland through its embassy in London (United Kingdom). * Both countries are full members of the Council of Europe. 
 Malta * Ireland has an embassy in Valletta. * Malta has an embassy in Dublin and two honorary consulates (Dublin and Cork). * Both countries are full members of the European Union and the Council of Europe. 
 Isle of Man See Ireland-Isle of Man relations * Ireland has signed several tax agreements with the Isle of Man. The agreements provide a mechanism for inter-governmental sharing of information about offshore assets, and avoidance of dual-taxation. * Ireland and the Isle of Man have collaborated on preparing reports and jointly opposing the Sellafield nuclear plant to the UK government. 
 Moldova 1992 * Ireland is represented in Moldova through its embassy in Bucharest (Romania). * Moldova is represented in Ireland through its embassy in London (United Kingdom). * Both countries are full members of the Council of Europe. * Moldovan Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with Ireland 
 Monaco * Although Ireland has an Honorary Consulate in Monaco, Ireland is represented through its embassy in Paris (France). * Monaco has an Honorary Consulate in Dublin. 
 Montenegro 2006 * Montenegro declared its independence from Serbia on 3 June 2006 and Ireland recognised it on 20 June 2006. * Both countries are full members of the Council of Europe. 
 Netherlands 1922 * Ireland has an embassy in The Hague. * The Netherlands has an embassy in Dublin and 3 honorary consulates (in Cork, Limerick and Sligo.) * Both countries are full members of the European Union and the Council of Europe. * Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with Ireland (in Dutch only) 
 Norway 1949 * Ireland has an embassy in Oslo. * Norway has an embassy in Dublin. * Both countries are full members of the Council of Europe. 
 Poland 1976 * Ireland has an embassy in Warsaw. * Poland has an embassy in Dublin. * Both countries are full members of the European Union and the Council of Europe. * There are approximately 122,585 Poles living in Ireland, the largest minority in the country. 
 Portugal * Ireland has an embassy in Lisbon. * Portugal has an embassy in Dublin. * Both countries are full members of the European Union and the Council of Europe. 
 Romania 1990 See IrelandRomania relations * Ireland has an embassy in Bucharest. * Romania has an embassy in Dublin. * Both countries are full members of the European Union and the Council of Europe. * There are 17,304 Romanians living in Ireland. 
 Russia See IrelandRussia relations * Ireland has an embassy in Moscow. * Russia has an embassy Dublin and an honorary consulate in Limerick. * The Russian SFSR was the first country to recognise the independence of Ireland in 1918. * Cooperation between both countries has been more active since the end of the Cold War. Many bilateral treaties exist between both nations in various fields (taxation, investment protection, cultural and scientific, aviation, etc.). * Both countries are full members of the Council of Europe. 
 San Marino * Ireland is represented in San Marino through its embassy in Rome (Italy). * San Marino has two Consulate Generals in Ireland (Dublin and Limerick). 
 Serbia 1977 * Ireland is represented in Serbia through its embassy in Budapest (Hungary). * Serbia is represented in Ireland through its embassy in London (United Kingdom). * Both countries are full members of the Council of Europe. 
 Slovakia 1993 * Ireland has an embassy in Bratislava. * Slovakia has an embassy in Dublin. * Both countries are full members of the European Union and the Council of Europe. * There are 10,801 Slovaks living in Ireland. In 2010 Slovak airport security planted actual explosives in the luggage of unsuspecting passengers as part of a security exercise. As result of additional mistakes, the explosives were flown to Dublin, Ireland causing international controversy. Prime Minister Fico refused to dismiss the interior minister after the incident. 
 Slovenia 1991 * Ireland has an embassy in Ljubljana. * Slovenia has had an embassy in Dublin. * Both countries are full members of the European Union and the Council of Europe. 
 Spain 1924 * Ireland has an embassy in Madrid and 10 honorary consulates (in Alicante, Arrecife, Barcelona, Bilbao, Ferrol, Las Palmas, Majorca, Mlaga, Santa Cruz de Tenerife and Seville). * Spain has an embassy in Dublin. * Both countries are full members of the European Union and the Council of Europe. * There are 6,794 Spaniards living in Ireland. * Spain is the number one destination for Irish tourists worldwide, with over 1.3 million visitors from Ireland every year. * Irish Ministry of Foreign Affairs: directions of Irish representations in Spain 
 Sweden * Ireland has an embassy in Stockholm. * Sweden closed its embassy in Dublin in September 2010 and now has four honorary consulates (in Dublin, Cork, Galway and Limerick). * There are an estimated 3,500 Swedish people living in Ireland. * Both countries are full members of the European Union and the Council of Europe. 
 Switzerland 1934 * Ireland has an embassy in Bern and an honorary consulate in Zurich. * Switzerland has an embassy in Dublin. * As of 2010 there are 1,449 Swiss people living in Ireland. * Both countries are full members of the Council of Europe. 
 Turkey 1972 * Ireland has an embassy in Ankara and an honorary consulate in Istanbul. * Turkey has an embassy in Dublin. Embassy of Turkey in Ireland * Both countries are full members of the Council of Europe. * There are about 1,800 Turkish people living in Ireland. * In 2010, Irish President Mary McAleese paid a state visit to Turkey. * Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with Ireland 
 Ukraine 1992 * Ireland recognised the Ukrainian state in 1991. * Ireland is represented through its embassy in Prague (Czech Republic), and an honorary consulate in Kiev. * Ukraine has an embassy in Dublin. * Both countries are full members of the Council of Europe. *Ukrainian Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with Ireland 
 United Kingdom See Above and IrelandUnited Kingdom relations * Ireland has an embassy, a visa office and a passport office in London, and an honorary consulate in Edinburgh. * The United Kingdom has an embassy in Dublin. * There are 291,000 British people living in Ireland. * Both countries are full members of the European Union and the Council of Europe. * Ireland was part of the United Kingdom until 1922. *British Foreign Office about relations with Ireland 

==Americas==

 Country Formal Relations Began Notes 
 Antigua and Barbuda 2000 * Ireland is represented in Antigua and Barbuda through its embassy in Washington D.C. (United States). 
 Argentina 1947 * Ireland has an embassy in Buenos Aires. * Argentina has an embassy in Dublin. * In March 2008, it was announced that there was a special new visa programme between the two countries. * List of Treaties ruling relations Argentina and Ireland (Argentine Foreign Ministry, in Spanish) * See Also: Irish Argentine 
 Bahamas * Ireland is represented in Antigua and Barbuda through its embassy in Ottawa (Canada) and an honorary consulate in Nassau. * The Bahamas are represented in Ireland through their High Commission in London (United Kingdom). 
 Barbados 2001 * Ireland is represented in Barbados through its embassy in Washington D.C., USA and an honorary consulate in Bridgetown. * Barbados is represented in Ireland through its embassy in London, United Kingdom. 
 Belize * Ireland is represented in Belize through its United Nations mission in New York (United States). * Belize is represented in Ireland through an honorary consulate in Dublin. 
 Bolivia * Ireland is represented in Bolivia through its embassy in Buenos Aires, Argentina. * Bolivia is represented in Ireland through its embassy in London, United Kingdom. 
 Brazil 1975 * Ireland has an embassy in Braslia. * Brazil has an embassy in Dublin. * There are 8,704 Brazilians living in Ireland. * See Also: Irish Brazilian 
 Canada See CanadaIreland relations * Canada and Ireland enjoy friendly relations, the importance of these relations centres on the history of Irish migration to Canada. Approximately 4 million Canadians have Irish ancestors, or approximately 14% of Canada's population. * Ireland has an embassy in Ottawa 
 Chile * Ireland has an embassy in Santiago de Chile. * Chile has an embassy in Dublin and honorary consulate in Cork. * See also: Irish Chilean 
 Colombia 1999 See ColombiaIreland relations * Ireland is accredited to Colombia through its embassy in Mexico City, Mexico, Countries in which Ireland is also represented by the Embassy in Mexico Embassy of Ireland. Retrieved: 2013-10-19. and an honorary consulate in Bogot * Colombia is represented in Ireland through its embassy in London, United Kingdom. * Colombia received over 1 million in aid from Ireland in 2011. 
 Costa Rica * Ireland is accredited to Costa Rica through its embassy in Mexico City, Mexico. * Costa Rica is represented in Ireland through its embassy in London (United Kingdom). 
 Cuba 1999 * Ireland is accredited to Cuba through its embassy in Mexico City, Mexico, and an honorary consulate in Havana, Cuba. * Cuba has an embassy in Dublin. * A proportionate number of Irish people migrated to Cuba in the 19th century. 
 Dominica * Ireland is represented in Dominica through its United Nations mission in New York (United States). 
 Dominican Republic 2009 * Ireland is represented in the Dominican Republic through its embassy in Washington D.C., USA. * The Dominican Republic is represented in Ireland through its embassy in London, United Kingdom. 
 Ecuador * Ireland is represented in Ecuador through its embassy in Washington D.C., (United States) and has an honorary consulate in Quito. * Ecuador is represented in Ireland through its embassy in London, (United Kingdom) and has an honorary consulate in Dublin. 
 El Salvador 2000 * Ireland is accredited to El Salvador through its embassy in Mexico City, Mexico, and has an honorary consulate in San Salvador. * El Salvador is represented in Ireland through its embassy in London, (United Kingdom). * Irish-Salvadoran diplomatic relations were established in Dublin on 13 July 2000. Canciller de la Repblica recibe al mandatario de Irlanda a su llegada a El Salvador Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores de El Salvador, 2013-10-23. * El Salvador received over 1 million in aid from Ireland in 2011. 
 Guyana * Ireland has an honorary consulate in Georgetown, Guyana. * Guyana is represented in Ireland through its embassy in London, United Kingdom. 
 Mexico 21 August 1975 See IrelandMexico relations * Ireland has an embassy in Mexico City. Embassy of Ireland in Mexico City * Mexico has an embassy in Dublin. Embassy of Mexico in Dublin (English and Spanish) * The relationship has been associated with the Irish migration to Mexico. 
 Nicaragua * Ireland is accredited to Nicaragua through its embassy in Mexico City, Mexico. 
 Paraguay * Ireland is represented in Paraguay through its embassy in Washington D.C., USA. * Paraguay is represented in Ireland through its embassy in London, United Kingdom. 
 Peru * Ireland is accredited to Peru through its embassy in Mexico City, Mexico, and an honorary consulate in Lima. * Peru has an embassy in Dublin and has an honorary consulate in Cork. 
 Suriname * Ireland is represented in Suriname through its embassy in The Hague, Netherlands. * Suriname currently has no formal relations with Ireland. 
 Trinidad and Tobago * Ireland is represented in Trinidad & Tobago through its embassy in Washington D.C., USA and has an honorary consulate in Port of Spain, Trinidad. * Trinidad & Tobago is represented in Ireland through its embassy in London, United Kingdom. 
 Uruguay * Approximately 120,000 Uruguayans have Irish ancestors. * Ireland is represented in Uruguay through its embassy in Buenos Aires, Argentina. * Uruguay is represented in Ireland through its embassy in London, United Kingdom. 
 Venezuela 1980 * Ireland is accredited to Venezuela through its embassy in Mexico City, Mexico. * Venezuela is represented in Ireland through its embassy in London, United Kingdom. 

==Oceania==

 Country Formal Relations Began Notes 
 Australia See AustraliaIreland relations * Ireland has an embassy in Canberra, a Consulate General in Sydney and an honorary consulate in Victoria. * Australia has an embassy in Dublin. * About 20% of the Australian population have Irish ancestry, which often predates Irish Independence in 1922. * Australia Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade about relations with Ireland 
 New Zealand * Ireland is represented in New Zealand through its embassy in Canberra (Australia) and an honorary consulate in Auckland. * New Zealand is represented in Ireland through its embassy in London (United Kingdom) and an honorary consulate in Dublin. * Both countries are full members of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. * There is a community of people of Irish descent living in New Zealand. * New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade about relations with Ireland 

==Africa==

 Country Formal Relations Began Notes 
 Democratic Republic of Congo * Ireland is represented in the Democratic Republic of Congo through its embassy in Pretoria (South Africa). * Democratic Republic of Congo received 7.4 million in aid from Ireland in 2011. 
 Ethiopia 1994 See EthiopiaIreland relations * Ireland has an embassy in Addis Ababa. * Ethiopia has an embassy in Dublin. * In 2011, Ethiopia received 36.4 million in aid from Ireland. Ireland disbursed USD 71.67 million to Ethiopia in 2008, making it seventh in worldwide bilateral donors to the country. Irish foreign aid to Ethiopia includes grants towards focuses on Vulnerability, Health, Education, HIV and AIDS and Governance, either directly, through NGOs, and missionary societies. These grants amounted to  32 million in 2007, \"Ethiopia overview\", Irish Aid website . Retrieved 3 February 2009. and over  37 million in 2006. \"Impact of Irish Aid in Ethiopia in 2006\", Irish Aid website . Retrieved 3 February 2009. In January, 2003, the Irish Minister of State with responsibility for Overseas Development Assistance, Tom Kitt, visited Ethiopia to see how his country could assist in famine relief. He planned to visit the Tigray Region, which was reported as being the most affected by famine at the time. \"Minister of State Kitt leaves for Ethiopia\", Ireland, Department of Foreign Affairs website . Retrieved 3 February 2009. 
 Kenya 1979 * Ireland is represented in Kenya through its embassy in Dar-es-Salaam (Tanzania) and an honorary consulate in Nairobi. * Kenya has an embassy in Dublin. * Kenya received 9.3 million in aid from Ireland in 2011. 
 Lesotho 1975 * Ireland has an embassy in Maseru. * Lesotho has an embassy in Dublin. * Lesotho received 11.3 million in aid from Ireland in 2011. 
 Liberia * Ireland is represented in Liberia through its embassy in Abuja (Nigeria). * Liberia is represented in Ireland through its embassy in London (United Kingdom). * Liberia received 7.5 million in aid from Ireland in 2011. 
 Malawi 2002 * Ireland has an embassy in Lilongwe and an honorary consulate in Blantyre. * Malawi has an honorary consulate in Dublin. * Malawi received 17.5 million in aid from Ireland in 2011. 
 Mozambique 1996 * Ireland has an embassy in Maputo. * Mozambique is represented in Ireland through its embassy in London (United Kingdom). * Mozambique received 42.2 million in aid from Ireland in 2011. 
 Sierra Leone * Ireland is represented in Sierra Leone through its embassy in Abuja (Nigeria) and an honorary consulate in Freetown. * Sierra Leone is represented in Ireland through its embassy in London (United Kingdom). * Sierra Leone received 9.1 million in aid from Ireland in 2011. 
 Somalia * Ireland maintains diplomatic relations with the Federal Government of Somalia through its embassy in Tanzania. 
 South Africa 1993 * The opening of bilateral relations were strongly considered by both governments in the 1930s and 1940s, following a successful state visit by South African prime minister General J. B. M. Hertzog to Dublin in 1930. At this time connections between the two \"restless dominions\" were particularly cordial, based also on an earlier Irish nationalist identification with the Boer cause during the South African War of 1899-1902, but cost concerns prevented an exchange of high commissioners. Nevertheless, there were regular private visits by South Africa's London-based high commissioners, most notably Charles te Water in the 1930s, and Dr A. L. Geyer, who was a guest of Taoiseach amon de Valera in 1952. While purely financial considerations had prevented the mutual exchange of ambassadors, by the 1960s a principled stand against apartheid came to prevent such an upgrading of relations. As a result, Ireland was the only EU country that did not have full diplomatic relations with South Africa until 1993, when an exchange of ambassadors was agreed with the De Klerk administration in anticipation of the ending of apartheid, despite vociferous protests from the Irish Anti-Apartheid Movement, led by Kader and Louise Asmal, which regarded such relations as premature. Prior to this, relations were handled by a Johannesburg-based honorary consulate. * Ireland opened an embassy in Pretoria in 1994. Ireland also has a Consulate-General in Cape Town. * The South African Embassy in Dublin was opened in 1995. * There are 4,872 South Africans living in Ireland. * Ireland gave just over 6.1 million in aid to South Africa in 2011. * South African Department of Foreign Affairs about relations with Ireland 
 Sudan 1984 * Ireland is represented in Sudan through its embassy in Cairo (Egypt) and an honorary consulate in Khartoum. * Sudan is represented in Ireland through its embassy in London (United Kingdom). * Sudan received 9.6 million in aid from Ireland in 2011. 
 Tanzania 1979 * Ireland has an embassy in Dar es Salaam. * Tanzania is represented in Ireland through its high commission in London (United Kingdom). * Tanzania received 35.4 million in aid from Ireland in 2011. 
 Uganda 1994 * Ireland has an embassy in Kampala. * Uganda is represented in Ireland through its embassy in London (United Kingdom). * In 2011 Uganda received 42.7 million from Ireland through a variety of aid programmes. * Irish people are one of the few citizens that do not need a visa to travel to Uganda. It was found in November 2012 that 4 million worth of Irish foreign aid was misappropriated by senior officials of the country. Instead of going towards aiding the development of the country, this money was redirected into the personal account of the prime minister of Uganda. The Irish government then halted all aid payments towards Uganda until the money was recouped, which eventually occurred in January 2013. 
 Zambia 1965 See IrelandZambia relations * Ireland has an embassy in Lusaka. * Zambia is represented in Ireland through its high commission in London (United Kingdom). * Zambia benefits greatly from Irish Aid programs, in 2010 the country received 20.58 million in total from the country. 
 Zimbabwe 1984 * Ireland is represented in Zimbabwe through an honorary consulate in Harare. * Zimbabwe is represented in Ireland through its embassy in London (United Kingdom). * Zimbabwe received 7.6 million in aid from Ireland in 2011. 

==Asia==

 Country Formal Relations Began Notes 
 Afghanistan * Ireland is represented in Afghanistan through its embassy in Abu Dhabi (United Arab Emirates). * Ireland gave 6.5 million in aid to Afghanistan in 2011. 
 People's Republic of China 1979 See People's Republic of ChinaIreland relations * Ireland has an embassy in Beijing, a general consulate in Shanghai and an honorary consulate in Hong Kong. Irish embassy in Beijing * China has an embassy in Dublin. * There are 10,896 Chinese people living in Ireland. * Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with Ireland 
 India See IndiaIreland relations * India has an embassy in Dublin. * There are 16,986 Indians living in Ireland. * India received nearly 3.5 million in aid from Ireland in 2011. Indo-Irish relations picked up steam during the freedom struggles of the respective countries against a common imperial empire in the United Kingdom. Political relations between the two states have largely been based on socio-cultural ties, although political and economic ties have also helped build relations. Indo-Irish relations were greatly strengthened by the such luminaries as the likes of Pandit Nehru, amon de Valera, Rabindranath Tagore, W. B. Yeats, James Joyce, and, above all, Annie Besant. Politically relations have not been cold nor warm. Mutual benefit has led to economic ties that are fruitful for both states. Visits by government leaders have kept relations cordial at regular intervals. 
 Iran * Ireland has an embassy in Tehran. * Iran has an embassy in Dublin. 
 Israel 1975 See IrelandIsrael relations * Since 25 January 1996, Ireland has an embassy in Tel Aviv. * Israel has an embassy in Dublin. * Both countries are full members of the Union for the Mediterranean In 2010, the Israel Defense Forces forcibly boarded an Irish aid ship destined for the Gaza Strip which resulted in worsened relations, Israel's Mossad was also involved in the counterfeiting of five Irish passports used in an assassination, and 2 members of the Israeli ambassador's security staff in Dublin were subsequently deported. In 2010, there were numerous protests at the Israeli embassy in Ireland over the treatment of Palestinians. 
 Japan * Starting in 1973, Ireland has an embassy in Tokyo and an honorary consulate in Osaka. * Since 1964, Japan has an embassy in Dublin. * Both countries are full members of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. * Japan Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with Ireland 
 Republic of Korea 1983 * Ireland has an embassy and an honorary consulate in Seoul. * South Korea has an embassy in Dublin. * As of July 2009, the ambassador of Ireland to South Korea is Eamonn C. McKee. * Both countries are full members of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. * South Korean Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade about relations with Ireland 
 Malaysia * Ireland has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur. * Malaysia has an embassy in Dublin. 
 Pakistan See IrelandPakistan relations * Ireland is represented in Pakistan through its embassy in Riyadh (Saudi Arabia) and an honorary consulate in Karachi. * Pakistan has an embassy in Dublin. * There are 6,847 Pakistanis living in Ireland. * Pakistan received over 1.5 million in aid from Ireland in 2011. 
 Palestinian Authority * Ireland has a representative office in Ramallah. * The Palestinian Authority has a general delegation in Dublin, upgraded to mission status is 2011. * In 2011, Foreign Minister Eamon Gilmore spoke at the United Nations in favour of Palestine's application for membership. * The Occupied Territories of Palestine received 5.4 million in Irish aid in 2011. 
 Philippines See IrelandPhilippines relations * Ireland-Philippines diplomatic relations officially began in 1986 and have become more intense over the years as increasing numbers of Filipinos have migrated to Ireland. * The Philippines appointed its first resident ambassador to Ireland during 2009. * There are 12,791 Filipinos living in Ireland. 
 Saudi Arabia * Ireland has an embassy in Riyadh. * Saudi Arabia has an embassy in Dublin. 
 Timor Leste 2003 * Ireland is represented in Timor Leste through its embassy in Singapore (Singapore). * Timor Leste received 3.4 million in aid from Ireland in 2011. * Since 2003 Timor Leste is one of 9 priority countries receiving Irish Aid assistance. 
 Vietnam 1996 * Ireland has an embassy in Hanoi. * Vietnam is represented in Ireland through its embassy in London (United Kingdom) and an honorary consulate in Dublin. * Vietnamese prime Minister, Nguyen Tan Dung, visited Ireland in 2008. * Tanaiste Brian Cowen visited Vietnam in 2008. * Vietnam received over 12 million in aid from Ireland in 2011. * Vietnamese Ministry of Foreign Affairs about the relation with Ireland 

==Overview==
 

As of 2008 Ireland maintains diplomatic relations with 173 states (including the Republic of Kosovo), the Holy See and the European Union. Ireland Diplomatic missions and accreditations list 

Ireland has not yet established diplomatic relations with:
* Grenada, Guatemala, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Suriname;
* Benin, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Comoros, Equatorial Guinea, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, So Tom and Prncipe, South Sudan, Swaziland, Togo;
* Bhutan;
* Marshall Islands, Niue, Tonga;
* Sovereign Military Order of Malta; Order of Malta diplomatic relations 
* states with limited recognition except Kosovo.

==United Nations==

The United Nations was founded in 1945, but Ireland's membership was blocked by the Soviet Union until 1955. Since 25 July 2007, the Irish ambassador to the UN Office at Geneva has been Dith  Ceallaigh. United Nations Office at Geneva  retrieved 7 January 2009 Ireland has been elected to the UN Security Council as a non-permanent member on three occasions  in 1962, in 19811982 and most recently in 20012002. Permanent Mission of Ireland to the United Nations  retrieved 13 November 2006 

Ireland is a member state of the International Criminal Court, having signed the Rome Statute in 1998 and ratified it in 2002. International Criminal Court: Ireland  retrieved 13 November 2006 

===Peacekeeping missions===

Ireland has a long history of participation in UN peacekeeping efforts starting in 1958, just three years after joining the UN. , 85 members of the Irish Defence Forces had been killed on peacekeeping missions. Overseas Service: Ireland and the United Nations  from the Irish Defence Forces website. Retrieved 13 November 2006. 

List of major peacekeeping operations: Defence Forces Service Overseas: List of Missions  from the Irish Defence Forces website. Retrieved 13 November 2006. 
*June 1958  December 1958: UNOGIL observer mission to Lebanon
*1958present: UNTSO mission to the Middle East
*19601964: ONUC mission to Congo
*1964present: UNFICYP mission to Cyprus
*19731974: UNEF II mission to Sinai after the Yom Kippur War
*1978present: UNIFIL mission to Lebanon
*19881991: UNIIMOG mission to the Iran-Iraq border following the IranIraq War
*19931995: UNOSOM II "peace enforcement" mission to Somalia
*19972004: SFOR mission to former Yugoslavia
*1999present: KFOR mission to Kosovo
*19992000: INTERFET mission to East Timor
*2003present: UNMIL mission to Liberia
*2008present: EUFOR Chad/CAR mission to Chad and the Central African Republic

As well as these missions, Irish personnel have served as observers in Central America, Russia, Cambodia, Afghanistan, Namibia, Western Sahara, Kuwait and South Africa. 

==International organisations==

Ireland is a member of or otherwise participates in the following international organisations: CIA  The World Factbook  Ireland  CIA World Factbook entry . Retrieved 15 November 2006. 

 *Asian Development Bank *Australia Group *Bank for International Settlements *Council of Europe *Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council *European Bank for Reconstruction and Development *European Investment Bank *Economic and Monetary Union of the European Union *European Space Agency *European Union *Food and Agriculture Organization *International Atomic Energy Agency *International Bank for Reconstruction and Development *International Civil Aviation Organization *International Criminal Court *International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement *International Development Association *International Energy Agency *International Fund for Agricultural Development *International Finance Corporation *International Labour Organization *International Monetary Fund *International Maritime Organization *Interpol *Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission *International Organization for Migration *Inter-Parliamentary Union *International Organization for Standardization *International Telecommunication Union *Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency *United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara *United Nations Mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo *Nuclear Energy Agency *Nuclear Suppliers Group *Organization of American States (observer) *OECD *Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons *Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe *Paris Club *Permanent Court of Arbitration *Partnership for Peace *United Nations *United Nations Conference on Trade and Development *UNESCO *UNHCR *United Nations Industrial Development Organization *United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon *United Nations Mission in Liberia *United Nations Operation in Cte d'Ivoire *United Nations Truce Supervision Organization *Universal Postal Union *World Customs Organization *Western European Union (observer) *World Health Organization *World Intellectual Property Organization *World Meteorological Organization *World Trade Organization *Zangger Committee 

==Foreign aid==

Ireland's aid program was founded in 1974, and in 2006 its budget amounted to 734 million. The government has set a target of reaching the Millennium Development Goal of 0.7% of Gross National Product in aid by 2012, a target which is projected to amount to 1.5 billion based on current GNP growth. Irelands Overseas Aid Increases by 11.4%  Irish government press release, 4 April 2006. Irish development aid is concentrated on eight priority countries: Lesotho, Mozambique, Tanzania, Ethiopia, Zambia, Uganda, Vietnam and East Timor. Irish Aid: Frequently Asked Questions  Irish government website. Retrieved 13 November 2006. in 2006, Malawi was announced as the ninth priority country, with a tenth country to follow. Irish government white paper on aid  Irish government white paper, 2006 Aid has had to be reduced because of the 20082011 Irish financial crisis.

, Joe Costello is the Minister of State for Trade and Development at the Department of Foreign Affairs.

==Human rights==

There have been no serious civil, human or social rights abuses/problems in the State, according to Amnesty International and the U.S. State Department. The country consistently comes among the top nations in terms of freedom and rights ratings.

 Index Ranking (Most Recent) Result 
 Freedom in the World  Political Rights 1st (Joint) 1 (\"Free\") 
 Freedom in the World  Civil Liberties 1st (Joint) 1 (\"Free\") 
 Index of Economic Freedom 9th 76.9 (\"Mostly Free\") 
 Worldwide Press Freedom Index Ranking 15th -4.00 (\"Free\") 
 Global Peace Index 6th (Joint) 1.33 (\"More Peaceful\") 
 Democracy Index 12th 8.79 (\"Full Democracy\") 
 International Property Rights Index 13th (Joint) 7.9 
 Corruption Perceptions Index 16th (Joint) 7.7 
 Failed States Index 170th (7th from the bottom) 26.5 (\"Sustainable\") 

==Ireland and the Commonwealth of Nations==

Ireland was a member state of the British Commonwealth from 1922 until 1949, initially as a Dominion called the Irish Free State from 1922 until 1937, when Ireland adopted a new constitution and changed the name of the state to "Ireland". Although the king was removed from the Constitution in 1936, a republic was only formally declared from 18 April 1949. Under the rules at the time, a republic could not be a member state of the Commonwealth. This was changed a week later with the adoption of the London Declaration.

Since 1998, some people in Ireland have advocated joining the Commonwealth of Nations, most notably amon  Cuv and Mary Kenny.

==See also==

*Common Travel Area
*List of diplomatic missions in Ireland
*List of diplomatic missions of Ireland
*Message to the Free Nations of the World

==References==

==External links==
* Department of Foreign Affairs official site
** Irish Treaty Series "All treaties published in the Irish Treaty Series since 2002 are available in pdf format on this site. A limited number of selected treaties published in earlier years is also available"

 


[[Geography of Israel]]

 Geography of Israel 
 Topography Israel 
 Relief map of Israel 
 Area 
 Total 27,000 km2 
 Water 430 km2 
 Latitude 3130' N 
 Longitude 3445'E 
 Borders 
 Egypt 277 km 
 Jordan 335 km 
 Lebanon 79 km 
 Syria 76 km 
 Coastlines 273 km 

The geography of Israel is very diverse, with desert conditions in the south, and snow-capped mountains in the north. Israel is located at at the eastern end of the Mediterranean Sea in western Asia. It is bounded to the north by Lebanon, the northeast by Syria, the east by Jordan and the West Bank, and to the southwest by Egypt. To the west of Israel is the Mediterranean Sea, which makes up the majority of Israel's 273 km coastline and the Gaza strip. Israel has a small coastline on the Red Sea in the south.

Israel's area is approximately 27000 km2, which includes 445 km2 of inland water. Israel stretches 424 km from north to south, and its width ranges from 114 km to, at its narrowest point, 15 km. The Israeli-occupied territories include the West Bank, 5879 km2, East Jerusalem, 70 km2 and the Golan Heights, 1150 km2. Geographical features in these territories will be noted as such.

The south of Israel is dominated by the Negev desert covering some 16000 km2, more than half of the country's total land area. The north of the Negev contains the Judean Desert, which, at its border with Jordan, contains the Dead Sea which, at -417 m is the lowest point on Earth. The inland area of central Israel is dominated by the Judean Hills of the West Bank, whilst the central and northern coastline consists of the flat and fertile Israeli coastal plain. Inland, the northern region contains the Mount Carmel mountain range, which is followed inland by the fertile Jezreel Valley, and then the hilly Galilee region. The Sea of Galilee is located beyond this, and is bordered to the east by the Golan Heights, which contains the highest point under Israel's control, a peak in the Israeli-occupied Mount Hermon massif, at 2224 m. The highest point in territory internationally recognized as Israeli is Mount Meron at 1208 m. 

==Location and boundaries==
Israel on the world map

Israel lies to the north of the equator around 3130' north latitude and 3445' east longitude. It measures 424 km from north to south and, at its widest point 114 km, from east to west. At its narrowest point, however, this is reduced to just 15 km. It has a land frontier of 1017 km and a coastline of 273 km. It is ranked 151 on the List of countries and outlying territories by total area. 

Prior to the establishment of the British Mandate for Palestine, there was no clear-cut definition of the geographical and territorial limits of the area known as "Palestine." On the eve of World War I it was described by Encyclopedia Britannica as a "nebulous geographical concept." An Empire in the Holy Land: Historical Geography of the British Administration in Palestine, 19171929, Gideon Biger, St. Martin's Press and Magnes Press, 1994, pp.4041. The Sykes-Picot Treaty in 1916 divided the region that later became Palestine into four political units. An Empire in the Holy Land: Historical Geography of the British Administration in Palestine, 19171929, Gideon Biger, St. Martin's Press and Magnes Press, 1994, pp.4652. Under the British Mandate for Palestine, the first geo-political framework was created that distinguished Palestine from the larger countries that surrounded it. The boundary demarcation at this time did not introduce geographical changes near the frontiers and both sides of the border were controlled by the British administration. An Empire in the Holy Land: Historical Geography of the British Administration in Palestine, 19171929, Gideon Biger, St. Martin's Press and Magnes Press, 1994, pp.6769. 

Modern Israel is bounded to the west by the Mediterranean Sea, and to the south, the Red Sea. To the southwest is the Sinai Peninsula whilst the Syrian Desert is beyond Israel's frontier with Jordan to the east. The southernmost settlement in Israel is the city of Eilat whilst the northernmost is the town of Metula. The territorial waters of Israel extend into the sea to a distance of twelve nautical miles measured from the appropriate baseline. 

The statistics provided by the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics include the annexed East Jerusalem and Golan Heights, but exclude the West Bank and Gaza Strip. The population of Israel includes Israeli settlers in the West Bank. The route of the Israeli West Bank barrier incorporates some parts of the West Bank, creating contiguity with sovereign Palestine.

 Population (thousands) Area (km2) 
 Name Status Description Israeli Citizens (Including Jews and Arabs) Cumulative Total Non-Israeli Palestinians Cumulative Total Area Cumulative Total 
 Israel (Green Line) Area sovereign to Israel since 1948 6,674 Figure calculated from other sourced figures in table 6,674 0 0 20,582 20,582 
 East Jerusalem Occupied and subject to Israeli law since 1967. Formal legislation on 1980 (see Jerusalem Law) 455 7,129 225 (double counted) 225 336 20,918 
 Golan Heights Occupied since 1967, subject to Israeli law since 1981 (see Golan Heights Law) 42 7,172 n.a. n.a. (Syrians) 1,154 22,072 
 Seam Zone (West Bank) Area between the Green Line and the Israeli West Bank barrier. Occupied in 1967 188 7,359 35 260 200 22,272 
 Other Israeli settlements and IDF Military Areas (West Bank Area C) Other Israeli settlements (not in East Jerusalem or the Seam Zone) and areas in the West Bank directly controlled by the IDF . Occupied in 1967 57 7,473 115 375 2,961 25,233 
 Palestinian civil control (West Bank Areas A+B) Palestinian National Authority civil controlled area. Subject to \"joint\" military control with the IDF. Occupied in 1967 0 7,473 2,311 2,686 2,143 27,376 
 Gaza Strip Palestinian governed area. Israel controls airspace, maritime border and 80% of land border. Occupied in 1967, unilaterally disengaged in 2005, declared a foreign entity in 2007. 0 7,473 1,552 4,238 360 27,736 

==Physiographic regions==
Israel is divided into four physiographic regions: the Mediterranean coastal plain, the Central Hills, the Jordan Rift Valley and the Negev Desert. 

===Coastal plain===
Northern coast
The Israeli Coastal Plain stretches from the Lebanese border in the north to Gaza in the south, interrupted only by Cape Carmel at Haifa Bay. It is about 40 km wide at Gaza and narrows toward the north to about 5 km at the Lebanese border. The region is fertile and humid (historically malarial) and is known for its citrus orchards and viticulture. The plain is traversed by several short streams. From north to south these are: the Kishon, the Hadera, the Alexander, the Poleg, and the Yarkon. All of these streams were badly polluted, but in the last ten years much work has been done to clean them up. Today the Kishon, Alexander and Yarkon again flow year round, and also have parks along their banks. 

The region is divided into five sub-regions. The Western Galilee stretches from Rosh HaNikra in the far north, down to Israel's third-largest city, Haifa. It is a fertile region containing with a coastline with many small islands off of it. South of Haifa is the Hof HaCarmel region which runs to the town of Zikhron Ya'akov. The Sharon plain is the next stage down the Coastal Plain, running from Zikhron Ya'akov to Tel Aviv's Yarkon River. This area is Israel's most densely populated. South of this, running to Nahal Shikma, is the Central Coastal Plain. The southern region of the Coastal Plain is the Southern Coastal Plain (also known as the Shephelah, Plain of Judea, and Western Negev) and extends south to the Gaza Strip. It is divided into two. The Besor region, a savanna-type area with a relatively large number of communities, in the north, and the Agur-Halutsa region in the south which is very sparsely populated. 

===Central hills===
Judaean Mountains
Inland (east) of the coastal plain lies the central highland region. In the north of this region lie the mountains and hills of Upper Galilee and Lower Galilee, which are generally 500 m to 700 m in height, although they reach a maximum height of 1208 m at Mount Meron. South of the Galilee, in the West Bank, are the Samarian Hills with numerous small, fertile valleys rarely reaching the height of 800 m. South of Jerusalem, also mainly within the West Bank, are the Judean Hills, including Mount Hebron. The central highlands average 610 m in height and reach their highest elevation at Har Meron, at 1208 m, in Galilee near Safed. Several valleys cut across the highlands roughly from east to west; the largest is the Jezreel Valley (also known as the Plain of Esdraelon), which stretches 48 km from Haifa southeast to the valley of the Jordan River, and is 19 km across at its widest point. 

===Jordan Rift Valley===
Jordan Rift Valley
East of the central highlands lies the Jordan Rift Valley, which is a small part of the 6500 km-long Syrian-East African Rift. In Israel the Rift Valley is dominated by the Jordan River, the Sea of Galilee (an important freshwater source also known as Lake Tiberias and Lake Kinneret), and the Dead Sea. The Jordan, Israel's largest river (322 km), originates in the Dan, Baniyas, and Hasbani rivers near Mount Hermon in the Anti-Lebanon Mountains and flows south through the drained Hula Basin into the freshwater Lake Tiberias. Lake Tiberias is 165 km2 in size and, depending on the season and rainfall, is at about 213 m below sea level. With a water capacity estimated at 3 km3, it serves as the principal reservoir of the National Water Carrier (also known as the Kinneret-Negev Conduit). The Jordan River continues its course from the southern end of Lake Tiberias (forming the boundary between the West Bank and Jordan) to its terminus in the highly saline Dead Sea. The Dead Sea is 1020 km2 in size and, at 420 m below sea level, is the lowest surface point on the earth. South of the Dead Sea, the Rift Valley continues in the Nahal HaArava (Wadi al Arabah), which has no permanent water flow, for 170 km to the Gulf of Eilat. 

===Negev Desert===
Acacia tree in Makhtesh Gadol
The Negev Desert comprises approximately 12000 km2, more than half of Israel's total land area. Geographically it is an extension of the Sinai Desert, forming a rough triangle with its base in the north near Beersheba, the Dead Sea, and the southern Judean Mountains, and it has its apex in the southern tip of the country at Eilat. Topographically, it parallels the other regions of the country, with lowlands in the west, hills in the central portion, and the Arabah valley as its eastern border. 

Unique to the Negev region are the craterlike makhteshim cirques; Makhtesh Ramon, Makhtesh Gadol and Makhtesh Katan. The Negev is also sub-divided into five different ecological regions: northern, western and central Negev, the high plateau and the Arabah Valley. The northern Negev receives 300 mm of rain annually and has fairly fertile soils. The western Negev receives 250 mm of rain per year, with light and partially sandy soils. The central Negev has an annual precipitation of 200 mm and is characterized by impervious soil, allowing minimum penetration of water with greater soil erosion and water runoff. This can result in rare flash floods during heavy rains as water runs across the surface of the impervious desert soil. The high plateau area of Ramat HaNegev stands between 370 m and 520 m above sea level with extreme temperatures in summer and winter. The area gets 100 mm of rain each year, with inferior and partially salty soils. The Arabah Valley along the Jordanian border stretches 180 km from Eilat in the south to the tip of the Dead Sea in the north and is very arid with barely 50 mm of rain annually. 

==Geology==
Rosh HaNikra limestone grotto
Strata exposed by excavation in Jerusalem
Israel is divided east-west by a mountain range running north to south along the coast. Jerusalem sits on the top of this ridge, east of which lies the Dead Sea graben which is a pull apart basin on the Dead Sea Transform fault. 

The numerous limestone and sandstone layers of the Israeli mountains serve as aquifers through which water flows from the west flank to the east. Several springs have formed along the Dead Sea, each an oasis, most notably the oases at Ein Gedi and Ein Bokek (Neve Zohar) where settlements have developed. Israel also has a number of areas of karst topography. Caves in the region have been used for thousands of years as shelter, storage rooms, barns and as places of public gatherings. 

The far northern coastline of the country has some chalk landscapes best seen at Rosh HaNikra, a chalk cliff into which a series of grottoes have been eroded. 

==Rivers and lakes==
Israel's longest and most famous river is the 320 km long River Jordan, which rises on the southern slopes of Mount Hermon in the Anti-Lebanon mountains. The river flows south through the freshwater Sea of Galilee, and from there forms the boundary with the Kingdom of Jordan for much of its route, eventually emptying into the Dead Sea. The northern tributaries to the Jordan are the Dan, Banias, and Hasbani. Only the Dan is within undisputed Israel; the Hasbani flows from Lebanon and the Banias from territory captured from Syria in the Six-Day War. 

Lake Kinneret
The Sea of Galilee (also called the Kinneret) is Israel's largest and most important freshwater lake, located in the northeast of the country. The pear-shaped lake is 23 km long from north to south, with a maximum width of 13 km in the north, covering 166 km2. The Kinneret lies 207 m below sea level and reaches depths of 46 m. In a previous geological epoch the lake was part of a large inland sea which extended from the Hula marshes in northern Israel to 64 km south of the Dead Sea. The bed of the lake forms part of the Jordan Rift Valley. 

South of the Kinneret lies the saltwater Dead Sea which forms the border between Israel and Jordan and is 418 m below sea level, making it the lowest water surface on Earth. The Dead Sea is 67 km long with a maximum width of 16 km and also makes up part of the Rift Valley. A peninsula juts out into the lake from the eastern shore, south of which the lake is shallow, less than 6 m deep. To the north is the lake's greatest depth. 

There are no navigable, artificial waterways in Israel, although the National Water Carrier, a conduit for drinking water, might be classified as such. The idea of a channel connecting the Mediterranean and Dead Seas or the Red and Dead Seas has been discussed. 

==Selected elevations==
Mount Tabor
The following are selected elevations of notable locations, from highest to lowest: Statistical Abstract of Israel, No. 58, 2007 

 Location Region Elevation (feet) Elevation (meters) 
 Mount Hermon Golan Heights (Israeli-occupied) 7,336 ft. 2,236 m. 
 Mount Meron Upper Galilee 3,964 ft. 1,208 m. 
 Mount Ramon Negev 3,396 ft. 1,035 m. 
 Mount of Olives East Jerusalem (Israeli-occupied) 2,739 ft. 835 m. 
 Mount Tabor Lower Galilee 1,930 ft. 588 m. 
 Mount Carmel Haifa 1,792 ft. 546 m. 
 Dead Sea Judean Desert  1,368 ft.  417 m. 

==Climate==
Snow in Jerusalem
Flash flood at Ein Avdat
Israel has a Mediterranean climate with long, hot, rainless summers and relatively short, cool, rainy winters (Kppen climate classification Csa). The climate is as such due to Israel's location between the subtropical aridity of the Sahara and the Arabian deserts, and the subtropical humidity of the Levant and Eastern Mediterranean. The climate conditions are highly variable within the state and modified locally by altitude, latitude, and the proximity to the Mediterranean. 

On average, January is the coldest month with average temperatures ranging from 6 to, and July and August are the hottest months at 22 to, on average across the country. Summers are very humid along the Mediterranean coast but dry in the central highlands, the Rift Valley, and the Negev Desert. In Eilat, a desert city, summer daytime-temperatures are often the highest in the state, at times reaching 44 to. More than 70% of the average rainfall in Israel falls between November and March; June through September are usually rainless. Rainfall is unevenly distributed, significantly lower in the south of the country. In the extreme south, rainfall averages near 30 mm annually; in the north, average annual rainfall exceeds 900 mm. Rainfall varies from season to season and from year to year, particularly in the Negev Desert. Precipitation is often concentrated in violent storms, causing erosion and flash floods. In winter, precipitation often takes the form of snow at the higher elevations of the central highlands, including Jerusalem. Mount Hermon has seasonal snow which covers all three of its peaks for most of the year in winter and spring. In rare occasions, snow gets to the northern mountain peaks and only in extremely rare occasions even to the coast. The areas of the country most cultivated are those receiving more than 300 mm of rainfall annually, making approximately one-third of the country cultivable. 

Thunderstorms and hail are common throughout the rainy season and waterspouts occasionally hit the Mediterranean coast, capable of causing only minor damage. However, supercell thunderstorms and a true F2 tornado hit the Western Galilee in April 2006, causing significant damage and 75 injuries. 

Heat waves are frequent. 2010 was the hottest year in the history of Israel with absolute record high in several places in August. The heat became stronger from August when temperatures were considerably above the average. October and November were also dry, and November was almost rainless when it was supposed to be rainy.

===Climate charts of different locations in Israel===

==Natural resources==
Unlike much of the Middle East which is rich in lucrative crude oil, Israel has limited natural resources. These include copper, phosphates, bromide, potash, clay, sand, sulfur, asphalt, and manganese. Small amounts of natural gas and crude oil are present, often too little to merit commercial extraction. In 2009, significant reserves of natural gas were discovered at the Tamar 1 offshore drilling site, 90 kilometers west of Haifa. It is the largest natural gas reserve ever discovered in Israel. 

==Environmental concerns==
Ashdod dunes
Formerly polluted Kishon River after clean-up, 2010
Israel has a large number of environmental concerns ranging from natural hazards to man-made issues both resulting from ancient times to modern development. Natural hazards facing the country include sandstorms which sometimes occur during spring in the desert south, droughts which are usually concentrated in summer months, flash floods which create great danger in the deserts due to their lack of notice, and regular earthquakes,most of which are small, although there is a constant risk due to Israel's location along the Jordan Rift Valley. Current environmental concerns include the lack of arable land and natural fresh water resources. Whilst measures have been taken to irrigate and grow in the desert, the amount of water needed here poses issues. Desertification is also a risk possible on the desert fringe, whilst air pollution from industrial and vehicle emissions and groundwater pollution from industrial and domestic waste are also issues facing the country. Furthermore, the effects of the use of chemical fertilizers, and pesticides are issues facing the country. 
Israel has signed many international environmental agreements and is party to: 
* Convention on Biological Diversity
* UNFCCC  Climate Change
* United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
* Convention on the International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora and Fauna
* Hazardous Wastes
* Nuclear Test Ban
* Montreal Protocol  Ozone Layer Protection
* MARPOL 73/78  Ship Pollution
* Convention on Wetlands of International Importance Especially As Waterfowl Habitat

Signed but not ratified:
* Kyoto Protocol
* Marine Life Conservation

==Rural settlements==
View of Kibbutz Lotan
Israel's rural space includes several unique kinds of settlements, notably the moshav and the kibbutz. Originally these were collective and cooperative settlements respectively. Over time, the degree of cooperation in these settlements has decreased and in several of them the cooperative structure has been dismantled altogether. All rural settlements and many small towns (some of which are dubbed "rurban settlements") are incorporated in regional councils. Land use in Israel is 17% arable land, 4% permanent crops, and 79% other uses. As of 2003 1940 km2 were irrigated. 

There are 242 Israeli settlements and civilian land use sites in the West Bank, 42 in the Golan Heights, and 29 in East Jerusalem. 

==Islands==
Israel currently has no offshore islands within its territorial waters. However, the Israeli government plans to build artificial islands off the coast to house an airport, a seaport, a desalination plant, a power plant, and a military testing base, as an answer to Israel's lack of space. 

==Human geography==
tmo 2013349.jpg|thumb|500px|Israel and its current neighbors, with a rare dusting of snow over many areas. [http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/IOTD/view.php?id=82611 Rare Middle Eastern Snow - December 17, 201 ]] 
As of 2013, the population of Israel is 8 million, 6,015,000 of them Jewish. 

For statistical purposes, the country has three metropolitan areas; Gush Dan-Tel Aviv (population 3,150,000), Haifa (population 996,000), and Beersheba (population 531,600). Some argue that Jerusalem, Israel's largest city with a population of 763,600, and Nazareth, should also be classified as metropolitan areas. In total, Israel has 74 cities, 14 of which have populations of over 100,000. Other forms of local government in Israel are local councils of which there are 144 governing small municipalities generally over 2,000 in population, and regional councils of which there are 53, governing a group of small communities over a relatively large geographical area. 

Israel's population is diverse demographically; 76% Jewish, 20% Arab, and 4% unaffiliated. In terms of religion, 76% are Jewish, 16% Muslim, 2% Christian, 2% Druze, and 4% are unclassified by choice. 8% of Israeli Jews are haredi; 9% are "religious", 12% "religious-traditionalists", 27% are "non-religious traditionalists", and 43% are "secular". Other small, but notable groups in Israel, include Circassians of whom there are approximately 3,000 living mostly in two northern villages, 2,500 Lebanese, and 5,000 Armenians predominantly in Jerusalem. 

==See also==
* List of endemic flora of Israel
* Wildlife of Israel
* Tourism in Israel
* Kurkar

==References==

==External links==
*Interactive Map of Israel

 



[[Demographics of Israel]]

The demography of Israel is monitored by the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics. The State of Israel has a population of approximately 8,134,100 inhabitants as of the end of 2013. 75% percent of them are Jewish (about 6,102,900 individuals), 20.7% are Arabs (about 1,683,200 individuals), while the remaining 4.3% (about 348,100 individuals) are defined as "others" (family members of Jewish immigrants who are not registered at the Ministry of Interior as Jews, non-Arab Christians, non-Arab Muslims and residents who do not have an ethnic or religious classification).

Israel's annual population growth rate stood at 1.9% in 2013, three times faster than the OECD average of around 0.6%. With an average of 3 children per woman, Israel also has the highest fertility rate in the OECD by a considerable margin, and much higher than the OECD average of 1.7 

Generally, population trends in Israel reflect distinct patterns of three sub-groups: Mainstream Jews (around 63.3% of the population), Haredi Jews (11.7%), and Arabs (20.7%). http://www.cbs.gov.il/publications/tec27.pdf Over the past decade, the Arab annual population growth has fallen significantly from around 3% to less than 2.2% by 2013, Statistical Abstract of Israel 2013 - No. 64 Subject 2 - Table No. 1 while the overall Jewish growth rate rose from around 1.4% to 1.7%, primarily due to the expanding Haredi sector. http://www.un.org/esa/population/publications/completingfertility/RevisedFriedlanderpaper.PDF 

Group http://www1.cbs.gov.il/ts/databank/series_one.html?codets=3763 Population Proportion of total Growth rate 
 JewsOf which: http://www.unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/stats/documents/ece/ces/ge.11/2013/WP_7.3.pdf :Mainstream :Haredi 6,119,000 5,162,500'956,500 75.0% 63.3%'11.7% 1.7% 1.2%'5.0% 
 Arabs 1,688,600 20.7% 2.2% 
 Total 8,157,300 1.9% 
 

==Definition==
The territory of Israel can be defined in a number of ways as a result of a complex and unresolved political situation (see table below). For example, whilst the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics defines the area of Israel to include the annexed East Jerusalem and Golan Heights and to exclude the militarily controlled regions of the West Bank and Gaza Strip, it defines the population of Israel to also include Israeli settlers living in the West Bank.

 Region Status Population (thousands) Area (km2) 
 Israelis (including Jews and Arabs) Cumulative total Non-Israeli Palestinians Cumulative total Area Cumulative total 
 Green Line Area sovereign to Israel since 1948 6,674 Figure calculated from other sourced figures in table - - - 20,582 
 East Jerusalem Occupied by Israel in 1967 and, according to the Jerusalem Law, annexed in 1980 455 - 225 (double counted) - 336 - 
 Golan Heights Occupied by Israel in 1967 and, according to the Golan Heights Law, annexed in 1981 42 7,172 n.a. (Syrians) n.a. 1,154 22,072 
 Seam Zone Area between the Green Line and the West Bank barrier, occupied by Israel in 1967 188 - 35 - 200 - 
 Other Israeli settlements and IDF military areas (West Bank Area C) Israeli control, except over Palestinian civilians, according to the administrative divisions of the Oslo Accords 57 7,473 115 375 2,961 25,233 
 Palestinian National Authority (West Bank Areas A and B) Israeli-Palestinian control, according to the administrative divisions of the Oslo Accords - - 2,311 2,686 2,143 27,376 
 Gaza Strip Palestinian governed area. Israel controls airspace, maritime border and 80% of land border. - - 1,552 4,238 360 27,736 

==Cities==

Within Israel's system of local government, an urban municipality can be granted a city council by the Israeli Interior Ministry when its population exceeds 20,000. The term "city" does not generally refer to local councils or urban agglomerations, even though a defined city often contains only a small portion of an urban area or metropolitan area's population.

==Ethnic and religious groups==

The most prominent ethnic and religious groups, who live in Israel at present and who are Israeli citizens or nationals, are as follows:

===Jews===

According to Israel's Central Bureau of Statistics, in 2008, of Israel's 7.3 million people, 75.6 percent were Jews of any background. Among them, 70.3 percent were Sabras (Israeli-born), mostly second- or third-generation Israelis, and the rest are olim (Jewish immigrants to Israel)20.5 percent from Europe and the Americas, and 9.2 percent from Asia and Africa, including the Arab countries. 

The ethnic division of The Jewish population of Israel (including non-Halachic Russians) as of 2009 is as follows.

 Ethnic Makeup of Jewish Population of Israel 
 TOTAL 5,818,000 100% 
 Mizrahi Jews and Sephardic Jews 2,721,000 50.2% 
 Morocco 800,000 15.2% 
 Iraq 204,000 7.7% 
 Yemen 295,000 4.9% 
 Iran 236,000 4.0% 
 Algeria/Tunisia 224,000 3.8% 
 Other Asia 150,000 2.5% 
 Turkey 147,000 2.5% 
 Libya 136,000 2.3% 
 Egypt 112,000 1.9% 
 Other Asia 200,000 1.7% 
 India/Pakistan 76,000 1.3% 
 South America 25,000 0.04% 
 Other Africa (Not South Africa) 3,000 0.05% 
 Beta Israel (Ethiopia) 130,000 2.2% 
 Ashkenazi Jews 2,767,000 47.5% 
 Russia 1,018,000 20.9% 
 Poland 400,000 8.3% 
 Romania 351,000 7.6% 
 Other Europe 168,000 3.7% 
 North America (Including 4,000 African American Black Hebrews) 165,000 2.8% 
 Germany/Austria 160,000 2.7% 
 Bulgaria/Greece 97,000 1.9% 
 South America (mainly Argentina) 82,000 1.4% 
 Hungary 63,000 1.3% 
 Czechoslovakia 60,000 1.2% 
 South Africa 20,000 0.4% 

The errors occurring due to these calculations were:
* There was no distinction made between Sephardim and Mizrachim. (If the Sephardim, Mountain Jews and other non-Ashkenazi groups are included in Mizrachim, then Mizrachim will outnumber Ashkenazim by a margin of 52 to 48).
* Many Sephardim from Turkey were counted as Mizrachim.
* Mountain Jews, Georgian Jews and Bukharan Jews who together constitute ~15% of FSU Jews counted as Ashkenazim until 1996 (until 1996, Central Asia and the Caucasian Republics were counted as part of Europe. After 1996, from 1997 onwards they were counted as part of Asia).
* The Harbin Jews (~1,000) from China counted as Mizrachim, although they were Russian speaking Ashkenazim.
* After 1996, Russian speaking Ashkenazim from Kazakhstan, Kyrghizia and Armenia counted as Mizrachim.
* Close to 20,000 South African Jews were classified as Mizrachim, although almost all of them are Ashkenazim (Lithuanian, English and Afrikaans speaking).
* A few hundred Black Hebrews from the United States were classified as Ashkenazim.
* All Jews from Latin America were classified as Ashkenazim, although significant numbers are Sephardim (1520% in Argentina and Mexico, 20%+ in Brazil, similar percentages in other countries). Close to three fifths of the Latin American Jews in Israel are Argentine, with one tenth each from Uruguay and Brazil.
* 86,000 Bulgarian/Greek Jews are classified as Ashkenazim, although the majority are Sephardim/Romaniotes.
* Jews whose Jewishness was not recognized were not counted; almost all of them were Ashkenazim (~275,000 in 2007).

====Secularity====
The 2009 survey by the Guttman Center found the following distribution:
* Believing in the existence of God  80%
* Not believing in the existence of God  20%

Fertility rates also differ significantly. Professor Arnon Soffer found that in 2007, 110,000 Jewish babies were born, of which only around 18,000 to secular families. 

===Arabs===

Proportion of Arab population by region, 2000
Arab citizens of Israel are those Arab residents of Mandatory Palestine, who remained within Israel's borders following the 1948 Arab-Israeli War, and the establishment of the state of Israel. It is including those born within the state borders subsequent to this time, as well as those who had left during the exodus (or their descendants), who have since re-entered by means accepted as lawful residence by the Israeli state (primarily family reunifications).

In 2006, the official number of Arab residents in Israel was 1,413,500 people, about 20 percent of Israels population. This figure includes 209,000 Arabs (14% of the Israeli Arab population) in East Jerusalem, also counted in the Palestinian statistics, although 98 percent of East Jerusalem Palestinians have either Israeli residency or Israeli citizenship. Most Arab citizens of Israel are Muslim, particularly of the Sunni branch of Islam, and there is a significant Arab Christian minority from various denominations, numbering 122,000a majority group of Christians in Israel. As of 2008, Arab citizens of Israel comprise just over 20 percent of the country's total population. About 82.6 percent of the Arab population in Israel is Sunni Muslim (with a very small minority of Shia), another 9 percent is Druze, and around 9 percent is Christian (mostly Eastern Orthodox and Catholic denominations).

====Bedouin====

The Arab Muslim citizens of Israel include also the Bedouins, who are divided into two main groups: the Bedouin in the north of Israel, who live in villages and towns for the most part, and the Bedouin in the Negev, who include half-nomadic and inhabitants of towns and Unrecognized villages. According to the Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs, as of 1999, 110,000 Bedouins live in the Negev, 50,000 in the Galilee and 10,000 in the central region of Israel. 

===Other Arabic-speaking groups===

====Druze====

The Arab citizens of Israel include also the Druze who were numbered at an estimated 129,800 at the end of 2011. All of the Druze living in what was then British Mandate Palestine became Israeli citizens after the declaration of the State of Israel. Though some individuals identify themselves as "Palestinian Druze", most Druze do not consider themselves to be 'Palestinian', and consider their Israeli identity stronger than their Arab identity. Druze serve prominently in the Israel Defense Forces, and are represented in mainstream Israeli politics and business as well, unlike Muslim Arabs who are not required to and choose not to serve in the Israeli army.

====Maronites====

The Maronite Christian community in Israel of around 7,000 resides mostly in the Galilee, with a presence in Haifa, Nazareth and Jerusalem. It is largely composed of families that lived in Palestine in villages such as Jish long before the establishment of Israel in 1948. In recent years, the community was joined by some former pro-Israeli Lebanese militia members and their families, who fled Lebanon after 2000 withdrawal of IDF from South Lebanon.

====Copts====
Some 1,000 Israeli citizens belong to the Coptic community, originated in Egypt.

===Other citizens===

====Samaritans====

The Samaritans are an ethnoreligious group of the Levant. Ancestrally, they claim descent from a group of Israelite inhabitants who have connections to ancient Samaria from the beginning of the Babylonian Exile up to the beginning of the Common Era. 2007 population estimates show that 712 Samaritans live half in Holon, Israel and half at Mount Gerizim in the West Bank. The Holon community holds Israeli citizenship, while the Gerizim community resides at an Israeli controlled enclave, holding dual Israeli-Palestinian citizenship.

====Argentines====

Argentines in Israel are the largest immigrant group from Latin America and one of the fastest growing groups. The vast majority of Argentines in Israel are Jewish Argentines who make Aliyah but there is also an important group of non-Jewish Argentines who choose Israel as their new home. There are about 50,000 Argentines residing in Israel although some estimates put the figure at 70,000. 

Most Jewish Argentines are Ashkenazi Jews.

====Armenians====

About 4,000 Armenians reside in Israel mostly in Jerusalem (including in the Armenian Quarter), but also in Tel Aviv, Haifa and Jaffa. Armenians have a Patriarchate in Jerusalem and churches in Jerusalem, Haifa and Jaffa. Although Armenians of Old Jerusalem have Israeli identity cards, they are officially holders of Jordanian passports. Joyce M. Davis. Jerusalems Armenian Quarter. Catholic Near East Welfare Association. 

====Circassians====

Circassians in Kfar Kama
In Israel, there are also a few thousand Circassians, living mostly in Kfar Kama (2,000) and Reyhaniye (1,000). These two villages were a part of a greater group of Circassian villages around the Golan Heights. The Circassians in Israel enjoy, like Druzes, a status aparte. Male Circassians (at their leader's request) are mandated for military service, while females are not.

====Assyrians====

There are around 1,000 ethnic Assyrians living in Israel, mostly in Jerusalem and Nazareth. Assyrians are an Aramaic speaking, Eastern Rite Christian minority who are descended from the ancient Mesopotamians. The old Syriac Orthodox monastery of Saint Mark lies in Jerusalem. Other than followers of the Syriac Orthodox Church, there are also followers of the Assyrian Church of the East and the Chaldean Catholic Church living in Israel.

====People from post-Soviet states====
Non-Jewish immigrants from the former Soviet Union many of whom are ethnic Russians, Ukrainians, and Belarusians, who were eligible to immigrate due to having, or being married to somebody who has, at least one Jewish grandparent. A very small number of these immigrants also belong to various non-Slavic ethnic groups from the Former Soviet Union such as Moldovans, Tatars, Germans among others. In addition, a certain number of former Soviet citizens, primarily women of Russian and Ukrainian ethnicity, immigrated to Israel, after marrying Muslim or Christian Arab citizens of Israel, who went to study in the former Soviet Union in the 1970s and 1980s. The total number of those primarily Slavic ancestry people among Israeli citizens is around 40,000.

====Finns====
Although most Finns in Israel are either Finnish Jews or their decedents, a small number of Finnish Christians moved to Israel in the 1940s before the independence and have since then gained citizenship following the independence, for the most part many of the original Finnish settlers intermarried with the other Israeli communities in the country, and therefore remain very small in number, A moshav near Jerusalem named "Yad Ha'Shmona"" meaning the Memorial for the eight or the hand for the eight was established in 1971 by a group of Finnish Christian-Israelis although today most members are Israeli and are predominantly Hebrew speakers. 

====Romani====
Some Eastern European Romani are known to have arrived in Israel in the late 1940s and early 1950s, being from Bulgaria or having intermarried with Jews in the post-WWII displaced persons camps or, in some cases, having pretended to be Jews when Zionist representatives arrived in those camps. The exact numbers of these Romanies living in Israel are unknown, since such individuals tended to assimilate into the Israeli Jewish environment. According to several recent accounts in the Israeli press, some families preserve traditional Romani lullabies and a small number of Romani expressions and curse words, and pass them on to generations born in Israel who, for the most part, are Jews and speak Hebrew. The Romani community in Israel has grown since the 1990s, as some Roma immigrated there from the former Soviet Union. A community related to the Romanies and living in Israel and the Palestinian territories and in neighboring countries are known as Dom people.

====Vietnamese====
The number of Vietnamese people in Israel is estimated at 200400. Most of them came to Israel in between 19761979, after prime minister Menachem Begin authorized their admission to Israel and granted them political asylum. The Vietnamese people living in Israel are Israeli citizens who also serve in the Israel Defense Forces. Today, the majority of the community lives in the Gush Dan area in the center of Tel Aviv but also a few dozen Vietnamese-Israelis or Israelis of Vietnamese origin live in Haifa, Jerusalem and Ofakim.

====African Hebrew Israelites of Jerusalem====

The African Hebrew Israelite Nation of Jerusalem is a small spiritual group whose members believe they are descended from the Ten Lost Tribes of Israel. With a population of over 5,000, most members live in their own community in Dimona, Israel, with additional families in Arad, Mitzpe Ramon, and the Tiberias area. At least some of them consider themselves to be Jewish, but mainstream scholarship does not consider them to be of Israelite but of subsaharan African origin. Their ancestors were African Americans who after several years in Liberia migrated to Israel in the late 1960s and demanded that Israel give them citizenship in the state. When Israel refused they relinquished their United States citizenship and de facto became stateless. After some deliberation the Israeli government granted them citizenship. The African Hebrew Israelites like the Haredim and Israeli Arabs are not required to serve in the military however they do receive social benefits from the state including free healthcare. Most believe in Jesus and the New Testament however one member of the community underwent a conversion to Orthodox Judaism and served in the Israeli army.

====Naturalized foreign workers====
Some naturalized foreign workers and their Israeli born children, predominantly from the Philippines, Nepal, Nigeria, Senegal, Romania, China, Cyprus, Turkey, Thailand and South America.

===Non-citizens===

====African migrants====

Meeting between Sudanese refugees and Israeli students, 2007.
The number and status of African refugees in Israel is disputed and controversial but it is estimated that at least 70,000 refugees mainly from Eritrea, Sudan, South Sudan, Ethiopia and the Ivory Coast reside and work in Israel. A recent check (late 2011) published in Ynet pointed out the Number only in Tel Aviv is 40,000 which represents 10 percent of the city's population. The vast majority is living at the southern parts of the city. There is a significant population in the southern Israeli cities of Eilat, Arad and BeerSheva.

====Foreign workers====

There are around 300,000 foreign workers, residing in Israel under temporary work visas. Most of those foreign workers engage in agriculture and construction. The main groups of those foreign workers include the Chinese, Thai, Filipino, Nigerian, Romanian and Latin Americans.

====Other refugees====
Approximately 100200 refugees from Bosnia, Kosovo, Kurdistan and North Korea who were absorbed in Israel as refugees, most of them were also given Israeli resident status and currently reside in Israel. 

==Languages==

Signs in Hebrew, Arabic and English
Due to its immigrant nature, Israel is one of the most multicultural and multilingual societies in the world. Hebrew and Arabic are the official languages in the country, while English and Russian are the two most widely spoken non official languages. Georgian, Yiddish, Romanian, Ukrainian, Azerbaijani, Amharic, Armenian, Bulgarian, Ladino, French, Persian, Hungarian, Spanish, German, Chinese, Vietnamese, Thai, Tagalog, Fur, Tigrinya, Bilen, Turkish, Portuguese, Greek, Hindi, Malayalam, Mizo, Kukish and Polish are the most commonly used other foreign languages. A certain degree of English is spoken widely, and is the language of choice for many Israeli businesses. Courses of Hebrew and English language are mandatory in the Israeli school system, and most schools offer either Arabic, Spanish, German or French.

==Religion==

Percentage changes of the main religious groups in the years 19492008
According to a 2010 Israel Central Bureau of Statistics study on Israelis aged over 18, 8% of Israeli Jews define themselves as haredim (or Ultra-Orthodox); an additional 12% are "religious" (non-haredi orthodox, also known as: dati leumi/national-religious or religious zionist); 13% consider themselves "religious-traditionalists" (mostly adhering to Jewish Halakha); 25% are "non-religious traditionalists" (only partly respecting the Jewish Halakha), and 43% are "secular". Among the seculars, 53% say they believe in God. Due to the higher birth rate of religious and traditionalists over seculars, the share of religious and traditionalists among the overall population is even higher.

 Religious makeup, 2011 
 Group Population % 
 Jews 5,907,500 75.4% 
 Muslims 1,354,300 17.3% 
 Christians 155,100 2.0% 
 Druze 129,800 1.6% 
 Other 289,900 3.7% 

==Education==

Education between ages 5 and 15 is compulsory. It is not free, but it is subsidized by the government, individual organizations (such as the Beit Yaakov System) or a combination. Parents are expected to participate in courses as well. The school system is organized into kindergartens, 6-year primary schools, and either 6-year secondary schools or 3-year junior secondary schools + 3-year senior secondary schools (depending on region), after which a comprehensive examination is offered for university admissions.

==Policy==

As Israel's continued existence as a Jewish state relies upon maintenance of a Jewish demographic majority, Israeli demographers, politicians and bureaucrats have treated Jewish population growth promotion as a central question in their research and policymaking. Non-Jewish population growth and immigration is regarded as a threat to the Jewish demographic majority and to Israel's security, as detailed in the Koenig Memorandum.

Israel is the thirty-fourth most-densely crowded country in the world. In an academic article, Jewish National Fund Board member Daniel Orenstein, argues that, as elsewhere, overpopulation is a stressor on the environment in Israel; he shows that environmentalists have conspicuously failed to consider the impact of population on the environment and argues that overpopulation in Israel has not been appropriately addressed for ideological reasons. Daniel Orenstein and Steven Hamburg."The JNF's Assault on the Negev"; The Jerusalem Report, 28 November 2005 

===Citizenship and Entry Law===

The Citizenship and Entry into Israel Law (Temporary Order) 5763 was first passed on 31 July 2003 and has since been extended until 31 July 2008. The law places age restrictions for the automatic granting of Israeli citizenship and residency permits to spouses of Israeli citizens, such that spouses who are inhabitants of the West Bank and Gaza Strip are ineligible. On 8 May 2005, The Israeli ministerial committee for issues of legislation once again amended the Citizenship and Entry into Israel Law, to restrict citizenship and residence in Israel only to Palestinian men over the age of 35, and Palestinian women over the age of 25. Those in favor of the law say the law not only limits the possibility of the entrance of terrorists into Israel, but, as Ze'ev Boim asserts, allows Israel "to maintain the state's democratic nature, but also its Jewish nature" (i.e. its Jewish demographic majority). Critics, including the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, say the law disproportionately affects Arab citizens of Israel, since Arabs in Israel are far more likely to have spouses from the West Bank and Gaza Strip than other Israeli citizens. 

In the constitutional challenges to the Citizenship and Entry to Israel Law, the state, represented by the Attorney General, insisted that security was the only objective behind the law. The state also added that even if the law was intended to achieve demographic objectives, it is still in conformity with Israel's Jewish and democratic definition and thus constitutional. In a 2012 ruling by the Supreme Court on the issue, some of the judges on the panel discussed demography and were inclined to accept that demography is a legitimate consideration in devising family reunification policies that violate the right to family life. Mazen Masri, "Love Suspended: Demography, Comparative Law and Palestinian Couples in the Israeli Supreme Court", Social & Legal Studies (2013) 22(3) 309334. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2330291 

===Soviet immigration===

During the 1970s about 163,000 people immigrated to Israel from the USSR. Later Ariel Sharon, in his capacity as Minister of Housing & Construction and member of the Ministerial Committee for Immigration & Absorption, launched an unprecedented large-scale construction effort to accommodate the new Russian population in Israel so as to facilitate their smooth integration and encourage further Jewish immigration as an ongoing means of increasing the Jewish population of Israel. 

==Statistics==

===Total population===
* 8,051,200 (June 2013) 

Note: includes over 200,000 Israelis and 250,000 Arabs in East Jerusalem, about 325,000 Israeli settlers in the West Bank, and about 42,000 in the Golan Heights (July 2007 est.). Does not include Arab populations in the West Bank and Gaza Strip Does not include 222,000 foreigners living in the country.  . Cbs.gov.il. Retrieved on 8 September 2011. 

===Age structure===
A population pyramid that shows the age of the population by sex in 2010.
Total:
* 014 years: 28.0%
* 1564 years: 62.1%
* 65 years and over: 9.9%

Jews:
* 014 years: 25.5%
* 1564 years: 63.1%
* 65 years and over: 11.4%

Arab:
* 014 years: 37.5%
* 1564 years: 58.6%
* 65 years and over: 3.9% (2010 est.)

===Median age===
* Total: 29.7
* Jewish: 31.6
* Arab: 21.1

The Jewish median age in Jerusalem district and Judea and Samaria (West Bank) are 24.9 and 19.7 respectively and both account for 16% of the Jewish population but 24% of 04 year olds. The lowest median age in Israel and one of the lowest in the world is found in two of West Bank biggest Jewish cities: Modiin Ilit (11), Beitar Ilit (11) followed by Bedouin towns in the Negev (15.2). 

===Population growth rate===
* 1.9% (2013)

During the 1990s, the Jewish population growth rate was about 3% per year, as a result of massive immigration to Israel, primarily from the republics of the former Soviet Union. There is also a high population growth rate among certain Jewish groups, especially adherents of Haredi Judaism. The growth rate of the Arab population in Israel is 2.2%, while the growth rate of the Jewish population in Israel is 1.7%. The growth rate of the Arab population has slowed from 3.8% in 1999 to 2.2% in 2013, and for the Jewish population the growth rate declined from 2.7% to its lowest rate of 1.4% in 2005, before picking up moderately since then to 1.7%.

===Birth rate===
* 21.4 births/1,000 population (May 2013)

 Births, by mother Central Bureau of Statistics, Vital Statistics: Live births 
 Year Jewish Muslim Christian Druze Total % Jewish % Muslim 
 1996 83,710 30,802 2,678 2,682 121,333 69.0% 25.4% 
 2000 91,936 35,740 2,789 2,708 136,390 67.4% 26.2% 
 2005 100,657 34,217 2,487 2,533 143,913 69.9% 23.8% 
 2006 104,513 34,337 2,500 2,601 148,170 70.5% 23.2% 
 2007 107,986 34,572 2,521 2,510 151,679 71.2% 22.8% 
 2008 112,803 34,860 2,511 2,534 156,923 71.9% 22.2% 
 2009 116,599 35,253 2,514 2,517 161,042 72.4% 21.9% 
 2010 120,673 36,221 2,511 2,535 166,255 72.6% 21.8% 
 2011 121,520 35,247 2,596 2,469 166,296 73.1% 21.2% 
 2012 125,409 36,041 2,610 2,371 170,940 73.4% 21.1% 
 2013 sees record number of births in Israel 127,101 34,766 2,602 2,350 171,207 74.2% 20.3% 

According to research culled by Haaretz, between the mid-1980s and 2000, the birth rate in the Muslim sector was stable at 4.64.7 children per woman; After 2001 a gradual decline became evident, reaching 3.51 children per woman in 2011. By point of comparison, in 2011 there was a slowly rising birthrate of 2.98 children among the Jewish population. 

===Death rate===
* 5.52 deaths/1,000 population (2013 est.)

There were a total of 38,666 deaths in 2006. (39,026 in 2005 & 37,688 in 2000). Of this 33,568 were Jews (34,031 in 2005 & 33,421 in 2000). 3,078 were Muslims (2,968 in 2005 & 2,683 in 2000). 360 were Druze (363 in 2005 & 305 in 2000). 712 were Christian (686 in 2005 & 666 in 2000).

===Net migration rate===
* 1.81 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2013 est.)

There were a total of 19,269 immigrants in 2006: 7,472 from the Former Soviet Union, 3,595 from Ethiopia, 2,411 from France, 2,159 from the United States, 594 from the United Kingdom, 304 from India, 293 from Argentina, 232 from Brazil, 228 from Canada, 142 from Colombia, 134 from Venezuela, 114 from South Africa, 112 from Germany, 91 from Belgium, 91 from Central America, 85 from Switzerland, 73 from Uruguay, 72 from Mexico, 66 from Oceania, 63 from Hungary, 61 from Chile, 50 from Romania and 50 from the Netherlands.

====Emigration====
For many years definitive data on Israeli emigration was unavailable. Henry Kamm. "Israeli emigration inspires anger and fear;" New York Times 4 January 1981 In The Israeli Diaspora sociologist Stephen J. Gold maintains that calculation of Jewish emigration has been a contentious issue, explaining, "Since Zionism, the philosophy that underlies the existence of the Jewish state, calls for return home of the world's Jews, the opposite movementIsraelis leaving the Jewish state to reside elsewhereclearly presents an ideological and demographic problem." Stephen J. Gold. The Israeli Diaspora; Routledge 2002, p.8 

In the past several decades, emigration (yerida) has seen a considerable increase. From 1990 to 2005, 230,000 Israelis left the country; a large proportion of these departures included people who initially immigrated to Israel and then reversed their course (48% of all post-1990 departures and even 60% of 2003 and 2004 departures were former immigrants to Israel). 8% of Jewish immigrants in the post-1990 period left Israel, while 15% of non-Jewish immigrants did. In 2005 alone, 21,500 Israelis left the country and had not yet returned at the end of 2006; among them 73% were Jews, 5% Arabs, and 22% "Others" (mostly non-Jewish immigrants, with Jewish ancestry, from USSR). At the same time, 10,500 Israelis came back to Israel after over one year abroad; 84% were Jews, 9% Others, and 7% Arabs. ICBS 2005 departures and returns. Cbs.gov.il. Retrieved on 8 September 2011. 

According to the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics, as of 2005, 650,000 Israelis had left the country for over one year and not returned. Of them, 530,000 are still alive today. This number does not include the children born overseas. It should also be noted that Israeli law grants citizenship only to the first generation of children born to Israeli emigrants.

===Density===
Population density per square kilometer, by district and sub-district
Geographic deployment:
* Central District: 24% (1,649,800)
* Tel Aviv District: 17% (1,190,000)
* Northern District: 17% (1,185,400)
* Southern District: 14% (1,002,400)
* Haifa District: 12% (858,000)
* Jerusalem District: 12% (851,400)
* Judea and Samaria Area (Israelis only): 4.5% (360,000) (2012 est.)

===Sex ratio===
* At birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
* Under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
* 1564 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
* 65 years and over: 0.78 male(s)/female
* Total population: 1.01 male(s)/female (2011 est.)

===Maternal mortality rate===
* 7 deaths/100,000 live births (2010)

===Infant mortality rate===
* Total: 4.03 deaths/1,000 live births
* Male: 4.20 deaths/1,000 live births
* Female: 3.84 deaths/1,000 live births (2013 est.)

===Life expectancy at birth===
* Total population: 81.17 years
* Male: 78.96 years
* Female: 83.49 years (2012 est.)

===Total fertility rate===
* 3.00 children born/woman (2011)

 Fertility rate, by year and religion 
 Year Jews Muslims Christians Druze Others Total 
 2010 2.97 3.75 2.14 2.48 1.64 3.03 
 2011 2.98 3.51 2.19 2.33 1.75 3.00 
 2012 3.04 3.54 2.17 2.26 1.68 3.05 

Jewish total fertility rate increased by 10.2% during 19982009, and was recorded at 2.90 during 2009. During the same time period, Arab TFR decreased by 20.5%. Muslim TFR was measured at 3.73 for 2009. During 2000, the Arab TFR in Jerusalem (4.43) was higher than that of the Jews residing there (3.79). But as of 2009, Jewish TFR in Jerusalem was measured higher than the Arab TFR (2010: 4.26 vs 3.85, 2009: 4.16 vs 3.87). TFR for Arab residents in the West Bank was measured at 2.91 in 2013, while that for the Jewish residents was reported at 5.10 children per woman. 

The ethnic group with highest recorded TFR is the Bedouin of Negev. Their TFR was reported at 10.06 in 1998 and 5.73 in 2009. TFR is also very high among Haredi Jews. For Ashkenazi Haredim, the TFR rose to 8.51 in 1996 from 6.91 in 1980. The figure for 2008 is estimated to be even higher. TFR for Sephardi/Mizrahi Haredim rose from 4.57 in 1980 to 6.57 in 1996. The Fertility Dynamic of Israels Ultra-Orthodox Jews and Pronatalist Governmental Policy \

===Health expenditures===
* 7.6% of total GDP (2010)

===Physicians density===
* 3.63 physicians/1,000 population (2007)

===Hospital bed density===
* 3.5 beds/1,000 population (2010)

===HIV/AIDS  adult prevalence rate===
* 0.2% (2009 est.)

===Obesity  adult prevalence rate===
* 26.2% (2008)

===Education expenditures===
* 5.9% of total GDP (2009)

===Literacy===
Age 15 and over can read and write:
* Total population: 97.1%
* Male: 98.5%
* Female: 95.9% (2004 est.)

==Future Projections==
In June 2013, the Central Bureau of Statistics released a demographic report, projecting that Israel's population would grow to 11.4 million by 2035, with the Jewish population numbering 8.3 million, or 73% of the population, and the Arab population at 2.6 million, or 23%. This includes some 2.3 million Muslims (20% of the population), 185,000 Druze, and 152,000 Christians. The report predicts that the Israeli population growth rate will decline to 1.4% annually, with growth in the Muslim population remaining higher than the Jewish population until 2035, at which point the Jewish population will begin growing the fastest. Peering into the crystal ball: How Israel will look, statistically, in 2035  Haaretz 

==See also==

* Aliyah
* Crime in Israel
* Culture of Israel
* Demographics of Palestine
* Health care in Israel
* Israel Central Bureau of Statistics
* Jewish population by country
* Standard of living in Israel
* Women in Israel

==References==

==Further reading==

* 
* 

==External links==

* Official website of the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics
* Demographics of Israel at the Jewish Virtual Library
* Population of Israel by the Tourism Ministry
* 
* Issues in Israeli Society at the Jewish Agency for Israel
* 

 

[[Economy of Israel]]

The economy of Israel is a market economy. , Israel ranks 16th among 187 nations on the UN's Human Development Index, which places it in the category of "Very Highly Developed".

The major industrial sectors include high-technology products, metal products, electronic and biomedical equipment, agricultural products, processed foods, chemicals, and transport equipment; the Israeli diamond industry is one of the world's centers for diamond cutting and polishing. Relatively poor in natural resources, Israel depends on imports of petroleum, raw materials, wheat, motor vehicles, uncut diamonds and production inputs, though the country's nearly total reliance on energy imports may change with recent discoveries of large natural gas reserves off its coast. Israel is active in software, telecommunication and semiconductors development. http://www.iaesi.org.il/_Uploads/dbsAttachedFiles/HongKongbusinessdelegation.pdf The high concentration of high-tech industries in Israel, which are backed by a strong venture capital industry, gave it the nickname "Silicon Wadi", which is considered second in importance only to its Californian counterpart. Numerous Israeli companies have been acquired by global corporations for its reliable and quality corporate personnel. The country was the destination for Berkshire Hathaway's first investment outside the United States when it purchased ISCAR Metalworking, and the first research and development centers outside the United States for companies including Intel, Microsoft, and Apple. American business magnates and investors Bill Gates, Warren Buffett, and Donald Trump have each praised Israel's economy and each entrepreneur has invested heavily in numerous Israeli industries that range include real estate, high technology, and manufacturing beyond their traditional business activities and investments back in the United States. Israel is also a major tourist destination, with 3.54 million foreign tourists visiting it in 2013. 

In September 2010, Israel was invited to join the OECD. Israel has also signed free trade agreements with the European Union, the United States, the European Free Trade Association, Turkey, Mexico, Canada, Jordan, Egypt, and on 18 December 2007, became the first non-Latin-American country to sign a free trade agreement with the Mercosur trade bloc. . 

==History==
The first survey of the Dead Sea in 1911, by the Russian Jewish engineer Moshe Novomeysky, led to the establishment of Palestine Potash Ltd. in 1930, later renamed the Dead Sea Works. The political economy of Israel: From ideology to stagnation, Yakir Plessner, p.72. Google Books. Retrieved on 8 September 2011. In 1923, Pinhas Rutenberg was granted an exclusive concession for the production and distribution of electric power. He founded the Palestine Electric Company, later the Israel Electric Corporation. Between 1920 and 1924, some of the countries largest factories were established, including the Shemen Oil Company, the Societe des Grand Moulins, the Palestine Silicate Company and the Palestine Salt Company. The Roots of Separatism in Palestine: British Economic Policy, 1920-1929, ed. Barbara Jean Smith In 1937, there were 86 spinning and weaving factories in the country, employing a workforce of 1,500. Capital and technical expertise were supplied by Jewish professionals from Europe. The Ata textile plant in Kiryat Ata, which went on to become an icon of the Israeli textile industry, was established in 1934. Tsur, Doron. (12 October 2010) "When the guns fell silent", Haaretz. Retrieved on 8 September 2011. The industry underwent rapid development during World War II, when supplies from Europe were cut off while local manufacturers were commissioned for army needs. By 1943, the number of factories had grown to 250, with a workforce of 5,630, and output increased tenfold. "Textiles", Jewish Virtual Library. Retrieved on 8 September 2011. 

From 1924, trade fairs were held in Tel Aviv. The Orient Fair was inaugurated in 1932. "City of Work and Prosperity": The Levant Fair 

===After independence===
After statehood, Israel faced a deep economic crisis. As well as having to recover from the devastating effects of the 1948 Arab-Israeli War, it also had to absorb hundreds of thousands of Jewish refugees from Europe and the Arab world. Israel was financially overwhelmed and faced a deep economic crisis, which led to a policy of austerity from 1949 to 1959. Unemployment was high, and foreign currency reserves were scarce. 

In 1952, Israel and West Germany signed an agreement stipulating that West Germany was to pay Israel for the persecution of Jews during the Holocaust, and compensate for Jewish property stolen by the Nazis. Over the next 14 years, West Germany paid Israel 3 billion marks. The reparations became a decisive part of Israel's income, comprising as high as 87.5% of Israel's income in 1956. In 1950, the Israeli government launched Israel Bonds for American and Canadian Jews to buy. In 1951, the final results of the bonds program exceeded $52 million. Additionally, many American Jews made private donations to Israel, which in 1956 were thought to amount to $100 million a year. In 1957, bond sales amounted to 35% of Israel's special development budget. Later in the century Israel became significantly reliant on economic aid from the United States, a country which also became Israel's most important source of political support internationally.

The proceeds from these sources was invested in industrial and agricultural development projects, which allowed Israel to become economically self-sufficient. Among the projects made possible by the aid was the Hadera power plant, the Dead Sea Works, the National Water Carrier, port development in Haifa, Ashdod, and Eilat, desalination plants, and national infrastructure projects.

After statehood, priority was given to establishing industries in areas slated for development, among them Lachish, Ashkelon, the Negev and Galilee. The expansion of Israel's textile industry was a consequence of the development of cotton growing as a profitable agricultural branch. By the late 1960s, textiles were one of the largest industrial branches in Israel, second only to the foodstuff industry. Textiles constituted about 12% of industrial exports, becoming the second-largest export branch after polished diamonds. In the 1990s, cheap East Asian labor decreased the profitability of the sector. Much of the work was subcontracted to 400 Israeli Arab sewing shops. As these closed down, Israeli firms, among them Delta, Polgat, Argeman and Kitan, began doing their sewing work in Jordan and Egypt, usually under the QIZ arrangement. In the early 2000s, Israeli companies had 30 plants in Jordan. Israeli exports reached $370 million a year, supplying such retailers and designers as Marks & Spencer, The Gap, Victoria's Secret, Wal-Mart, Sears, Ralph Lauren, Calvin Klein, and Donna Karan. 

In its first two decades of existence, Israel's strong commitment to development led to economic growth rates that exceeded 10% annually. Average living standards steadily rose, with the expenditure of an average wage-earners family rising in real terms by 97.% between 1950 and 1963. The Challenge Of Israel by Misha Louvish The years after the 1973 Yom Kippur War were a lost decade economically, as growth stalled, inflation soared and government expenditures rose significantly. Also worthy of mention is the 1983 Bank stock crisis. By 1984, the economic situation became almost catastrophic with inflation reaching an annual rate close to 450% and projected to reach over 1000% by the end of the following year. However, the successful economic stabilization plan implemented in 1985 Eleventh Knesset. Knesset.gov.il. Retrieved on 8 September 2011. and the subsequent introduction of market-oriented structural reforms Generating a Sharp Disinflation: Israel 1985 Michael Bruno, National Bureau of Economic Research Israel's Economy: 19862008, Rafi Melnick and Yosef Mealem reinvigorated the economy and paved the way for its rapid growth in the 1990s and became a model for other countries facing similar economic crises. 

1 Israeli new shekel coin
Two developments have helped to transform Israel's economy since the beginning of the 1990s. The first is waves of Jewish immigration, predominantly from the countries of the former USSR, that has brought over one million new citizens to Israel. These new immigrants, many of them highly educated, now constitute some 16% of Israel's 7.5 million population. The second development benefiting the Israeli economy is the peace process begun at the Madrid conference of October 1991, which led to the signing of accords and later to a peace treaty between Israel and Jordan (1994).

Despite the Second Intifada, which cost Israel billions of dollars in economic terms, Israel managed to open up new markets to Israeli exporters farther afield, such as in the rapidly growing countries of East Asia.

In the past few years there has been an unprecedented inflow of foreign investment in Israel, as companies that formerly shunned the Israeli market now see its potential contribution to their global strategies. In 2006, foreign investment in Israel totaled $13 billion, according to the Manufacturers Association of Israel. "Israeli Growth", Dateline World Jewry, September 2007 The Financial Times said that 'bombs drop, yet Israel's economy grows'. / Middle East / Arab-Israel conflict  Israeli economy shrugs off political turmoil. Financial Times (7 May 2007). Retrieved on 8 September 2011. Moreover, while Israel's total gross external debt is US$95 billion, or approximately 41.6% of GDP, since 2001 it has become a net lender nation in terms of net external debt (the total value of assets vs. liabilities in debt instruments owed abroad), which stood at a significant surplus of US$60 billion. The country also maintains a current account surplus in an amount equivalent to about 3% of its gross domestic product in 2010.

alt=Photo of Stanley Fischer, Former governor of Bank of Israel.
The Israeli economy withstood the late-2000s recession, registering positive GDP growth in 2009 and ending the decade with an unemployment rate lower than that of many western countries. There are several reasons behind this economic resilience, for example, the fact, as stated above, that the country is a net lender rather than a borrower nation and the government and the Bank of Israel's generally conservative macro-economic policies. Two policies in particular can be cited, one is the refusal of the government to succumb to pressure by the banks to appropriate large sums of public money to aid them early in the crisis, thus limiting their risky behavior. The second is the implementation of the recommendations of the Bach'ar commission in the early to mid-2000s which recommended decoupling the banks' depository and investment banking activities, contrary to the then-opposite trend, particularly in the United States, of easing such restrictions which had the effect of encouraging more risk-taking in the financial systems of those countries. 

===OECD membership===
In May 2007, Israel was invited to open accession discussions with the OECD. In May 2010, the OECD voted unanimously to invite Israel to join, despite Palestinian objections. It became a full member on 7 September 2010. The OECD praised Israel's scientific and technological progress and described it as having "produced outstanding outcomes on a world scale." OECD members vote unanimously to invite Israel to join. BBC News (10 May 2010). Retrieved on 8 September 2011. 

===Challenges===
The Israeli economy faces many challenges, some are short term and some are long term challenges. On the short term its inability to duplicate its success in the telecommunication industry into other growing industries hampers its economic outlooks. Its inability to foster large multinational companies in the last decade also calls into question its ability to employ large numbers of people in advanced industries. On the long term, Israel is facing challenges of high dependency of the growing number of Ultra-Orthodox Jews who have a low level of official labor force participation amongst men, and this situation could lead to a materially lower employment-to-population ratio and a higher dependency ratio in the future. OECD Economic Outlook: Israel The governor of the Bank of Israel, Stanley Fischer, stated that the growing poverty amongst the Ultra-Orthodox is hurting the Israeli economy. BoI chief: Haredi unemployment is hurting Israel's economy According to the data published by Ian Fursman, 60% of the poor households in Israel are of the Haredi Jews and the Israeli Arabs. Both groups together represent 25&ndash;28% of the Israeli population.

==Sectors==

===Agriculture===

alt=Men loading hay bales onto truck at a Kibbutz.
2.8% of the country's GDP is derived from agriculture. Of a total labor force of 2.7 million, 2.6% are employed in agricultural production while 6.3% in services for agriculture. Agriculture in Israel  Facts and Figures 2008  Israeli ministry of Agriculture Presentation. Moag.gov.il. Retrieved on 8 September 2011. While Israel imports substantial quantities of grain (approximately 80% of local consumption), it is largely self-sufficient in other agricultural products and food stuffs. For centuries, farmers of the region have grown varieties of citrus fruits, such as grapefruit, oranges and lemons. Citrus fruits are still Israel's major agricultural export. In addition, Israel is one of the world's leading greenhouse-food-exporting countries. The country exports more than $1.3 billion worth of agricultural products every year, including farm produce as well as $1.2 billion worth of agricultural inputs and technology. 

===Financial sector===

Jerusalem Venture Partners (JVP) compound in Jerusalem, one of Israel's largest Venture Capital firms.
Israel has over 100 active funds operating throughout the country with $10 billion under management. In 2004, international foreign funds from various nations around the world committed over 50% of the total dollars invested exemplifying the country's strong and sound reputation as an internationally sought after foreign investment by many countries. Israel's venture capital sector has rapidly developed from the early 1990s, and has about 70 active venture capital funds (VC), of which 14 international VCs have Israeli offices. Israel's thriving venture-capital and business-incubator industry played an important role in the booming high-tech sector. Venture Capital in Israel. Investinisrael.gov.il (21 June 2010). Retrieved on 8 September 2011. In 2008, venture capital investment in Israel, rose 19 percent to $1.9 billion. International venture funding rose 5 percent in 2008. VentureBeat (18 February 2009). Retrieved on 8 September 2011. 

Between 1991 and 2000, Israel's annual venture-capital outlays, nearly all private, rose nearly 60-fold, from $58 million to $3.3 billion; companies launched by Israeli venture funds rose from 100 to 800; and Israel's information-technology revenues rose from $1.6 billion to $12.5 billion. By 1999, Israel ranked second only to the United States in invested private-equity capital as a share of GDP. Israel led the world in the share of its growth attributable to high-tech ventures: 70 percent." 

Israel's thriving venture capital industry has played an important role in the booming high-tech sector, the financial crisis of 2007-2010 also affected the availability of venture capital locally. In 2009, there were 63 mergers and acquisitions in the Israeli market worth a total of $2.54 billion; 7% below 2008 levels ($2.74 billion), when 82 Israeli companies were merged or acquired, and 33% lower than 2007 proceeds ($3.79 billion) when 87 Israeli companies were merged or acquired. Venture Capital in Israel Numerous Israeli high tech companies have been acquired by global corporations for its reliable and quality corporate personnel. In addition to venture capital funds, many of the worlds leading investment banks, pension funds, and insurance companies have a strong presence in Israel to financially back Israeli high-tech firms and benefit from its burgeoning high tech sector. These companies include Goldman Sachs, Bear Stearns, Deutsche Bank, JP Morgan, Credit Swiss First Boston, Merrill Lynch, CalPERS, Ontario Teachers Pension Plan, and AIG. 

Israel also has a small but fast growing hedge fund industry. Within the last five years between 2007 to 2012, the number of active hedge funds have doubled to 60 while the total asset values that the funds control have quadrupled since 2006. Israel based hedge funds have registered an increase of 162% since 2006 and currently manage a total of $2 billion (NIS 8 billion) as well as employing about 300 people. Israel belatedly joins the global hedge fund boom - Israel News | Haaretz Daily Newspaper Israel Stakes Claim As Future Hedge Fund Center | FINalternatives Israeli hedge fund industry enjoys massive growth Tzur Management - Israel Hedge Fund Survey | Tzur Management The ever growing hedge fund industry in Israel is also attracting a myriad of investors from around the world, particularly from the United States. How Israeli hedge funds can exploit their US potential - Globes 

===Technology sector===

alt=Orb-tower of Weizmann Institute of Science
Science and technology in Israel is one of the country's most highly developed and industrialized sectors. The percentage of Israelis engaged in scientific and technological inquiry, and the amount spent on research and development (R&D) in relation to gross domestic product (GDP), is amongst the highest in the world. Invest In Israel. Where Breakthroughs Happen Israel ranks fourth in the world in scientific activity, as measured by the number of scientific publications per million citizens. Israel's percentage of the total number of scientific articles published worldwide is almost 10 times higher than its percentage of the world's population. Despite its small population relative to other industrialized nations around the world, Israel has the highest number of scientists, technicians, and engineers per capita in the world with 140 scientists, technicians, and engineers per 10,000 employees. In comparison, the same is 85 per 10,000 in the United States and 83 per 10,000 in Japan. http://sun.inc.hse.ru/sites/default/files/Shteinbuk.pdf Israel_cover+text.qxd Investing in Israel 

Israeli scientists have contributed to the advancement of the natural sciences, agricultural sciences, computer sciences, electronics, genetics, medicine, optics, solar energy and various fields of engineering. Israel is home to major players in the high-tech industry and has one of the world's technologically most literate populations. In 1998, Tel Aviv was named by Newsweek as one of the ten technologically most influential cities in the world. In 2012, the city was also named one of the best places for high-tech startup companies, placed second behind its California counterpart. Tel Aviv named top startup center | ISRAEL21c 
In 2013, Tel Aviv repeated the feat where the American newspaper, Boston Globe ranked Tel Aviv as the second best city for business start-ups, after Silicon Valley 
Israel also remains of the largest centers in the world for technology start-up enterprises. 200 start-ups are created annually and more than 2500 start-up companies are operating throughout the country. 

===Energy===
Known oil and gas fields in the Levant Basin (US EIA)
Consumption of fossil fuel energy sources in Israel since 1980. Coal consumption rose steadily since 1980 when it was negligible. Natural gas consumption was nearly zero in 2003 and has risen steadily since.
Historically, Israel relied on external imports for meeting most of its energy needs, spending an amount equivalent to over 5% of its GDP per year in 2009 on imports of energy products. The transportation sector relies mainly on gasoline and diesel fuel, while the majority of electricity production is generated using imported coal. The country possesses negligible reserves of crude oil but does have abundant domestic natural gas resources which were discovered in large quantities starting in 2009, after many decades of previously unsuccessful exploration. 

====Natural gas====
Until the early 2000s, natural gas use in Israel was minimal. In the late 1990s, the government of Israel decided to encourage the usage of natural gas because of environmental, cost, and resource diversification reasons. At the time however, there were no domestic sources of natural gas and the expectation was that gas would be supplied from overseas in the form of LNG and by a future pipeline from Egypt (which eventually became the ArishAshkelon pipeline). Plans were made for the Israel Electric Corporation to construct several gas-driven power plants, for erecting a national gas distribution grid, and for an LNG import terminal. Soon thereafter, gas began to be located within Israeli territory, first in modest amounts and a decade later in very large quantities located in deep water off the Israeli coastline. This has greatly intensified the utilization of natural gas within the Israeli economy, especially in the electrical generation and industrial sectors, with consumption growing from an annual average of 350 million cubic feet between 2000 and 2002 to 129 billion cubic feet in 2010. 

 Natural Gas Usage in Israel 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2014* 2016* 2018* 2020* 2022* 2024* 2026* 2028* 2030* 
 1.2 1.6 2.3 2.7 3.7 4.2 5.2 8.1 9.5 10.1 11.1 11.7 13 14.3 15.3 16.8 
 Figures are in Billion Cubic Meters (BCM) per year. *Estimated. 

=====Gas discoveries=====
Proved reserves of natural gas in Israel
Production of natural gas in Israel, 1980-2012 (US Energy Information Administration)

In 2000, a modest discovery was made when a 33-billion-cubic-metre (BCM), or 1,200-billion-cubic-foot, natural-gas field was located offshore Ashkelon, with commercial production starting in 2004. however, this field is nearly depletedearlier than expected due to increased pumping to partially compensate for the loss of imported Egyptian gas in the wake of unrest associated with the fall of the Mubarak regime in 2011. In 2009, a significant gas find named Tamar, with proven reserves of 223 BCM or 223 e9m3 (307 BCM total proven + probable) was located in deep water approximately 90 km west of Haifa, as well as a smaller 15 BCM (15 e9m3) field situated nearer the coastline. Furthermore, results of 3D seismic surveys and test drilling conducted since 2010 have confirmed that an estimated 535 BCM (535 e9m3) natural-gas deposit exists in a large underwater geological formation nearby the large gas field already discovered in 2009. As of early 2014, Israel has verified gas finds of 35 trillion cubic feet. http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21595039-obstacles-still-block-flow-oil-and-gas-eastern-mediterranean-too Israels and Palestines gas and oil: Too optimistic? 

The Tamar field began commercial production on 30 March 2013 after four years of extensive development works. The supply of gas from Tamar is expected to provide a boost to the Israeli economy, which has suffered losses of more than NIS20 billion between 2011 and 2013 resulting from the disruption of gas supplies from neighboring Egypt (and which are not expected to resume due to Egypt's decision to indefinitely suspend its gas supply agreement to Israel). As a result Israel, as well as its other neighbor Jordan, which also suffered from disruption of gas deliveries from Egypt, had to resort to importing significantly more expensive and polluting liquid heavy fuels as substitute sources of energy. While Egyptian gas supplies to Jordan were partially restored in 2013, supplies from Tamar, and in the future from the Leviathan field, are expected to satisfy all Israeli domestic natural gas needs for decades to come. Moreover, due to the erratic supply of gas from Egypt, Jordan has reportedly been considering signing an agreement to import gas from Israel. While less desirable to the kingdom from a political standpoint, such an agreement represents the most expedient and least costly option for Jordan to compensate for its loss of Egyptian gas. The energy shortages in Egypt which led it to curtail its exports of natural gas mean that Egypt too may someday obtain natural gas from Israel, though so far Egypt has rejected such deals on political grounds, despite the fact that procuring gas from Israel would be significantly cheaper than from other sources of imported natural gas. 

The large gas discoveries so far have confirmed that the Levant basin of the Eastern Mediterranean contains significant quantities of natural gas and, potentially, crude oil. Consequently, additional exploration for oil and gas off Israel's coastline is continuing. A source close to Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has valued Israel's natural gas reserves at $130 billion, while in 2012 BusinessWeek estimated the reserves' value at $240 billion. The businesses involved in exploration aim to export a share of future production, but others argue that it would be preferable, on geopolitical grounds, to use the gas within the country instead of other energy sources. In early 2012 the Israeli cabinet announced plans to set up a sovereign wealth fund that would allocate part of the royalties from energy exploration to education, defense and overseas investments. 

 Field Israels Natural Gas Bonanza. Energy Tribune. Retrieved on 8 September 2011. Discovered Production Estimated size 
 Noa North 1999 2012 50 billion cubic feet 
 Mari-B 2000 2004 1 trillion cubic feet 
 Tamar 2009 2013 10.8 trillion cubic feet 
 Dalit 2009 Not in production 700 billion cubic feet 
 Leviathan 2010 Not in production 19 trillion cubic feet 
 Dolphin 2011 Not in production 81.3 billion cubic feet 
 Tanin 2012 Not in production 1.21.3 trillion cubic feet 
 Karish 2013 Not in production 2.33.6 trillion cubic feet 

====Electricity====
The Israel Electric Corporation (IEC), a state-owned enterprise, produces nearly all of the electricity generated in Israel. The IEC has an aggregate installed generating capacity of 11,690 MW, virtually all of it produced from fossil fuels. The company sold 52,037 GWh of electricity in 2010. The IEC is in the midst of adding several thousand megawatts of generating capacity due to increased demand and a low operating reserve, though a debate is currently raging with respect to how much should be generated from new coal-fired versus gas-fired plants, a determination complicated by the fact that some of the company's capital investment decisions predate the recent discoveries of significant reserves of natural gas offshore. In addition, in order to encourage competition in the electricity market, the government of Israel is currently (mid-2010) considering proposals from four private companies to generate up to 3,640 MW of electricity in 11 new sites, most of which would be gas-fired combined cycle power stations.

While the country possesses sufficient generation and transmission capacity to meet all domestic electricity needs, a chronic problem faced by Israel's electricity market is a persistently low operating reserve, which is mostly the result of Israel being an "electricity island". Most countries have the capability of relying on power drawn from producers in adjacent countries in the event of a power shortage. Israel's grid however, is unconnected to those of neighboring countries. This is mostly due to political reasons but also to the considerably less-developed nature of the power systems of Jordan and Egypt, whose per-capita electric generation is one quarter to one fifth that of Israel's. Nevertheless, unlike in the countries surrounding it, rolling blackouts in Israel are rare, even at periods of extreme demand. However, to help alleviate the low reserve situation and to enable the potential of electricity exports when surplus electricity is available, Israel and Cyprus are considering implementing the proposed EuroAsia Interconnector project. This consists of laying a 2000MW HVDC undersea power cable between them and between Cyprus and Greece, thus connecting Israel to the greater European power grid. 

 Share of Total Electricity Generation Capacity at Full Outputby Plant Type and Fuel Types Used by the IEC in 2010 Coal Fuel oil Natural gas Diesel 
 Installed capacity by plant type 39.7% 3.4% 39.8% 18.9% 
 Total annual generation by fuel source 61.0% 0.9% 36.6% 1.5% 

====Solar power====

alt=Large solar dish scaffolding at Ben-Gurion National Solar Energy Center.
Solar power in Israel and the Israeli solar energy industry has a history that dates to the founding of the country. In the 1950s, Levi Yissar developed a solar water heater to help assuage an energy shortage in the new country. Petrotyranny by John C. Bacher, David Suzuki, published by Dundurn Press Ltd., 2000; reference is at Page 70 Petrotyranny By 1967 around one in twenty households heated their water with the sun and 50,000 solar heaters had been sold. With the 1970s oil crisis, Harry Zvi Tabor, the father of Israel's solar industry, developed the prototype solar water heater that is now used in over 90% of Israeli homes. Israeli engineers are on the cutting edge of solar energy technology, Israel Pushes Solar Energy Technology, Linda Gradstein, National Public Radio, 22 October 2007. and its solar companies work on projects around the world. Looking to the sun, Tom Parry, Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, 15 August 2007. 

===Industrial sector===
Israel has a well-developed chemical industry with many of its products aimed at the export market. Most of the chemical plants are located in Ramat Hovav, the Haifa Bay area and near the Dead Sea. Israel Chemicals is one of largest fertilizer and chemical companies in Israel and its subsidiary, the Dead Sea Works in Sdom is the world's fourth largest producer and supplier of potash products. The company also produces other products such as magnesium chloride, industrial salts, de-icers, bath salts, table salt, and raw materials for the cosmetic industry. One of the country's largest employers is Israel Aerospace Industries which produces mainly aviation and defense products. Another large employer is Teva Pharmaceutical Industries, one of the world's largest pharmaceutical companies, currently employing 40,000 people as of 2011. It specializes in generic and proprietary pharmaceuticals and active pharmaceutical ingredients. It is the largest generic drug manufacturer in the world and one of the 15 largest pharmaceutical companies worldwide. WebCite query result WebCite query result 

====Diamond industry====

Israel is one of the world's three major centers for polished diamonds, alongside Belgium and India. Israel's net polished diamond exports slid 22.8 percent in 2012 as polished diamond exports fell to $5.56 billion from $7.2 billion in 2011. Net exports of rough diamonds dropped 20.1 percent to $2.8 billion and net exports of polished diamonds slipped 24.9 percent to $4.3 billion, while net rough diamond imports dropped 12.9 percent to $3.8 billion. Net exports and imports have dropped due to the ongoing Global financial crisis, particularly within the Eurozone and the United States. The United States is the largest market accounting for 36% of overall export market for polished diamonds while Hong Kong remains at second with 28 percent and Belgium at 8 percent coming in third. Jewellery Business - Israels 2012 polished diamond exports decline Diamonds.net - Israel's Polished Diamond Exports -22% in 2012 

===Defense industry===

Israel is one of the world's major exporters of military equipment, accounting for 10% of the world total in 2007. Three Israeli companies were listed on the 2010 Stockholm International Peace Research Institute index of the world's top 100 arms-producing and military service companies: Elbit Systems, Israel Aerospace Industries and RAFAEL. The Defense industry in Israel is a strategically important sector and a large employer within the country. It is also a major player in the global arms market and is the 11th largest arms exporter in the world as of 2012. Top List TIV Tables-SIPRI. Armstrade.sipri.org. Retrieved on 2012-05-09. Total arms transfer agreements topped 12.9 billion between 2004 to 2011. Israel among top arms exporters and importers - JPost - Defense There are over 150 active defense companies based in the country with combined revenues of more than 3.5 billion USD annually. Thenakedfacts Israeli defense equipment exports have reached 7 billion U.S. dollars in 2012, making it a 20 percent increase from the amount of defense-related exports in 2011. Much of the exports are sold to the United States and Europe. Other major regions that purchase Israeli defense equipment include Southeast Asia and Latin America. Defense equipment and arms exports from Israel to reach $7 billion in 2012 1101134 - Army Recognition Israel's arms exports increased by 20 percent in 2012 - Israel News | Haaretz Daily Newspaper Israel's arms industry hoping success of Iron Dome will bring it sales - Israel News | Haaretz Daily Newspaper India is also major country for Israeli arms exports and has remained Israel's largest arms market in the world. Israel & India: New Allies | Brookings Institution Israel is considered to be the leading UAV exporter in the world. Israel builds up its war robot industry. United Press International. April 26, 2013. According to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, Israeli defense companies were behind 41% of all drones exported in 2001-2011. Israel  an unmanned air systems (UAS) super power. Defense Update. 

===Tourism===

Tourism is one of Israel's major sources of income and economic growth engine in the country, attracting 3.54 million foreign tourists in 2013, averaging a 2.5 percent growth since 2008 and representing a 3 percent increase since 2012 making it an all-time record. Israel offers a plethora of historical and religious sites, beach resorts, archaeological tourism, heritage tourism and ecotourism. Israel has the highest number of museums per capita in the world. The most popular paid site is Masada. 

==External trade==

alt=World map of Israeli exports in 2006
For 2006, Israeli exports grew by 11%, to just over $29 billion; the hi-tech sector accounted for $14 billion, a 20% increase from the previous year. 

Graphical depiction of Israel's product exports in 28 color-coded categories.
The United States is Israel's largest trading partner, and Israel is the United States' 26th-largest trading partner; http://www.ustr.gov/countries-regions/europe-middle-east/middle-east/north-africa/israel two-way trade totaled some $24.5 billion in 2010, up from $12.7 billion in 1997. The principal U.S. exports to Israel include computers, integrated circuits, aircraft parts and other defense equipment, wheat, and automobiles. Israel's chief exports to the U.S. include cut diamonds, jewelry, integrated circuits, printing machinery, and telecommunications equipment. The two countries signed a free trade agreement (FTA) in 1985 that progressively eliminated tariffs on most goods traded between the two countries over the following ten years. An agricultural trade accord was signed in November 1996, which addressed the remaining goods not covered in the FTA. Some non-tariff barriers and tariffs on goods remain, however. Israel also has trade and cooperation agreements in place with the European Union and Canada, and is seeking to conclude such agreements with a number of other countries, including Turkey, Jordan and several countries in Eastern Europe.

In regional terms, the European Union is the top destination for Israeli exports. In the four-month period between October 2011 and January 2012, Israel exported goods totalling $5 billion to the EU  amounting to 35% of Israel's overall exports. During the same period, Israeli exports to the Far East came to $3.1 billion. 

Until 1995, Israel's trade with the Arab world was minimal due to the Arab League boycott, which was begun against the Jewish community of Palestine in 1945. Arab nations not only refused to have direct trade with Israel (the primary boycott), but they also refused to do business with any corporation that operated in Israel (secondary boycott), or any corporation that did business with a corporation that did business with Israel (tertiary boycott).

In 2013, commercial trade between Israel and the Palestinian territories were valued at US$ 20 billion annually. Israeli-Palestinian business arbitration center established 

In 2012, ten companies were responsible for 47.7% of Israel's exports. These companies were Intel, Elbit Systems, Oil Refineries Ltd, Teva Pharmaceuticals, Iscar, Israel Chemicals, Makhteshim Agan, Paz Oil Company, Israel Aerospace Industries and the Indigo division of Hewlett-Packard. The Bank of Israel and Israel's Export Institute have warned that the country is too dependent on a small number of exporters. 

==Rankings==

Gross National Income per capita: 
, Israel ranks 26th in Global Competitiveness Report by World Economic Forum, and 16th among 187 world nations on the UN's Human Development Index, which places it in the category of "Very Highly Developed". Israel's economy also ranks 17th among the world's most economically developed nations, according to IMD's World Competitiveness Yearbook rankings. The Israeli economy was ranked as the world's most durable economy in the face of crises, and was also ranked first in the rate research and development center investments. 'Israel's economy most durable in face of crises'. Ynet News (20 May 2010). Retrieved on 8 September 2011. The Bank of Israel was ranked first among central banks for its efficient functioning, up from the 8th place in 2009. Israel was ranked first also in its supply of skilled manpower. Israeli companies, particularly in the high-tech area, have enjoyed considerable success raising money on Wall Street and other world financial markets: Israel ranked second among foreign countries in the number of its companies listed on U.S. stock exchanges. U.S. listed Israeli companies. Ishitech.co.il. Retrieved on 8 September 2011. 

Having moved away from the socialist economic model since the mid-1980s and early 1990s, Israel has made dramatic moves toward the free-market capitalist paradigm. , Israel's economic freedom score is 67.8, making its economy the 48th freest in the 2012 Index of Economic Freedom. Israel's economic competitiveness is helped by strong protection of property rights, relatively low corruption levels, and high openness to global trade and investment. Income and corporate tax rates remain relatively high. , Israel ranks 36th out of 182 countries in Transparency International's Corruption Perceptions Index. Bribery and other forms of corruption are illegal in Israel, which is a signatory to the OECD Bribery Convention since 2008. 

==Indicators==
Average wages in 2007 hovered around $133 per day. IMF Report. Imf.org (29 April 2003). Retrieved on 8 September 2011. 

 Annual data 2011 
 Population (m)  7.6 Population growth  1.5% 
 GDP per head (US$; PPP)  $31,400 Real GDP growth  4.7% 
 Percent of unemployed persons (2011)  5.6% Inflation  3.5% 
 Exchange rate (av) NIS:US$  3.9 Current-account balance (% of GDP)  0.1% 

==See also==

* Energy Triangle
* List of companies of Israel
* Ministry of Finance (Israel)
* Taxation in Israel
* Privatization in Israel
* Transport in Israel
* Telecommunications in Israel
* Tel Aviv Stock Exchange
* Silicon Wadi
* Start-up Nation
* Standard of living in Israel
* Trajtenberg Committee
* Economy of the Middle East

==References==

==Further reading==
* Ben-Porath, Yoram ed. The Israeli Economy: Maturing through Crises. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1986.
* Chill, Dan. The Arab Boycott of Israel: Economic Aggression and World Reaction. New York: Praeger, 1976.
* Kanovsky, Eliyahu. The Economy of the Israeli Kibbutz. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1966.
* Klein, Michael. A Gemara of the Israel Economy. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, 2005.
* Michaely, Michael. Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development: Israel. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1975.
* 
* .
* Senor, Dan and Singer, Saul, Start-up Nation: The Story of Israel's Economic Miracle, Hachette, New York (2009) ISBN 0-446-54146-X
* Rubner, Alex. The Economy of Israel: A Critical Account of the First Ten Years. New York: Frederick A Praeger, 1960.
* .
* Maman, Daniel and Rosenhek, Zeev. The Israeli Central Bank: Political Economy: Global Logics & Local Actors. Routledge, 2011.
* The Global Political Economy of Israel

==External links==

* .
* 
* Israel and the IMF, International Monetary Fund
* World Bank Trade Summary Statistics Israel 2012
* .
* .
* 

 
Israel
Israel



[[Israeli Declaration of Independence]]

David Ben-Gurion declaring independence beneath a large portrait of Theodor Herzl, founder of modern Zionism
The Israeli Declaration of Independence (, Hakhrazat HaAtzma'ut or Megilat HaAtzma'ut), was made on 14 May 1948 (5 Iyar 5708), the British Mandate terminating soon afterwards at midnight Palestine time. Communication dated 11 May 1948 from J. Fletcher-Cooke of the United Kingdom delegation to the United Nations Commission on Palestine to Dr. Ralph J. Bunche, Principal Secretary to the Commission: Retrieved 7 December 2013 David Ben-Gurion, the Executive Head of the World Zionist Organization Then known as the Zionist Organization. and the chairman of the Jewish Agency for Palestine, declared the establishment of a Jewish state in Eretz-Israel, to be known as the State of Israel. Israel Ministry of Foreign Affirs: Declaration of Establishment of State of Israel: 14 May 1948 

The event is celebrated annually in Israel with a national holiday Yom Ha'atzmaut (, lit. Independence Day) on 5 Iyar of every year according to the Hebrew calendar.

==Background==
The possibility of a Jewish homeland in Palestine had been a goal of Zionist organizations since the late 19th century. The British Foreign Secretary stated in the Balfour Declaration of 1917:

His Majesty's government view with favour the establishment in Palestine of a national home for the Jewish people, and will use their best endeavours to facilitate the achievement of this object, it being clearly understood that nothing shall be done which may prejudice the civil and religious rights of existing non-Jewish communities in Palestine, or the rights and political status enjoyed by Jews in any other country. Yapp, M.E. (1987). The Making of the Modern Near East 17921923. Harlow, England: Longman. p. 290. ISBN 0-582-49380-3. 

After World War I, the United Kingdom was given a mandate over the area known as Palestine, which it had conquered from the Ottomans during the war. In 1937 the Peel Commission suggested partitioning Mandate Palestine into an Arab state and a Jewish state, though it was rejected as unworkable by the government and was at least partially to blame for the renewal of the 193639 Arab revolt.

The UN partition plan
In the face of increasing violence after World War II, the British handed the issue over to the recently established United Nations. The result was Resolution 181(II), a plan to partition Palestine into Independent Arab and Jewish States and the Special International Regime for the City of Jerusalem. The Jewish state was to receive around 56% of the land area of Mandate Palestine, encompassing 82% of the Jewish population, though it would be separated from Jerusalem. The plan was accepted by most of the Jewish population, but rejected by much of the Arab populace. On 29 November 1947, the resolution to recommend to the United Kingdom, as the mandatory Power for Palestine, and to all other Members of the United Nations the adoption and implementation, with regard to the future government of Palestine, of the Plan of Partition with Economic Union was put to a vote in the United Nations General Assembly. UNITED NATIONS General Assembly: A/RES/181(II): 29 November 1947: Resolution 181 (II): Future government of Palestine: Retrieved 26 April 2012 
The result was 33 to 13 in favour of the resolution, with 10 abstentions. The Arab countries (all of which had opposed the plan) proposed to query the International Court of Justice on the competence of the General Assembly to partition a country against the wishes of the majority of its inhabitants, but were again defeated. Resolution 181(II): PART I: Future constitution and government of Palestine: A. TERMINATION OF MANDATE, PARTITION AND INDEPENDENCE: Clause 3. provides:- Independent Arab and Jewish States and the Special International Regime for the City of Jerusalem, ..., shall come into existence in Palestine two months after the evacuation of the armed forces of the mandatory Power has been completed but in any case not later than 1 October 1948.

===Drafting the text===
The first draft of the declaration was made by Zvi Berenson, the Histadrut trade union's legal advisor and later a justice of the Supreme Court, at the request of Pinchas Rosen. A revised second draft was made by three lawyers, A. Beham, A. Hintzheimer and Z.E. Baker, and was framed by a committee including David Remez, Pinchas Rosen, Haim-Moshe Shapira, Moshe Sharett and Aharon Zisling. A second committee meeting, which included David Ben-Gurion, Yehuda Leib Maimon, Sharett and Zisling produced the final text. Harris, J. (1998) The Israeli Declaration of Independence The Journal of the Society for Textual Reasoning, Vol. 7 

===Minhelet HaAm Vote===
On 12 May 1948, the Minhelet HaAm (, lit. People's Administration) was convened to vote on declaring independence. Tuvia Friling, S. Ilan Troen (1998) "Proclaiming Independence: Five Days in May from Ben-Gurion's Diary" Israel Studies, 3.1, pp170-194 Zeev Maoz, Ben D. Mor (2002) Bound by Struggle: The Strategic Evolution of Enduring International Rivalries, University of Michigan Press, p137 Three of the members were missing; Yehuda Leib Maimon and Yitzhak Gruenbaum were blocked in besieged Jerusalem, while Yitzhak-Meir Levin was in the United States.

The meeting started at 1:45 and ended after midnight. The decision was between accepting the American proposal for a truce, or declaring independence. The latter option was put to a vote, with six of the ten members present supporting it:
*For: David Ben-Gurion, Moshe Sharett (Mapai); Peretz Bernstein (General Zionists); Haim-Moshe Shapira (Hapoel HaMizrachi); Mordechai Bentov, Aharon Zisling (Mapam).
*Against: Eliezer Kaplan, David Remez (Mapai); Pinchas Rosen (New Aliyah Party); Bechor-Shalom Sheetrit (Sephardim and Oriental Communities).

Chaim Weizmann, chairman of the World Zionist Organization and soon to be the first President of Israel, endorsed the decision, after reportedly asking "What are they waiting for, the idiots?" 

===Final wording===
The draft text was submitted for approval to a meeting of Moetzet HaAm (, lit. People's Council) at the JNF building in Tel Aviv on 14 May. The meeting started at 13:50 and ended at 15:00, an hour before the declaration was due to be made, and despite ongoing disagreements, with a unanimous vote in favour of the final text.

During the process, there were two major debates, centering around the issues of borders and religion. On the border issue, the original draft had declared that the borders would be that decided by the UN partition plan. While this was supported by Rosen and Bechor-Shalom Sheetrit, it was opposed by Ben-Gurion and Zisling, with Ben-Gurion stating, "We accepted the UN Resolution, but the Arabs did not. They are preparing to make war on us. If we defeat them and capture western Galilee or territory on both sides of the road to Jerusalem, these areas will become part of the state. Why should we obligate ourselves to accept boundaries that in any case the Arabs don't accept?" The State of Israel Declares Independence Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs The inclusion of the designation of borders in the text was dropped after the provisional government of Israel, the Minhelet HaAm, voted 54 against it. The Revisionists, committed to a Jewish state on both sides of the Jordan River (that is, including Transjordan), wanted the phrase "within its historic borders" included but were unsuccessful.

The second major issue was over the inclusion of God in the last section of the document, with the draft using the phrase "and placing our trust in the Almighty". The two rabbis, Shapira and Yehuda Leib Maimon, argued for its inclusion, saying that it could not be omitted, with Shapira supporting the wording "God of Israel" or "the Almighty and Redeemer of Israel". It was strongly opposed by Zisling, a member of the secularist Mapam. In the end the phrase "Rock of Israel" was used, which could be interpreted as either referring to God, or the land of Eretz Israel, Ben-Gurion saying "Each of us, in his own way, believes in the 'Rock of Israel' as he conceives it. I should like to make one request: Don't let me put this phrase to a vote." Although its use was still opposed by Zisling, the phrase was accepted without a vote.

At the meeting on 14 May, several other members of Moetzet HaAm suggested additions to the document. Meir Vilner wanted it to denounce the British Mandate and military but Sharett said it was out of place. Meir Argov pushed to mention the Displaced Persons camps in Europe and to guarantee freedom of language. Ben-Gurion agreed with the latter but noted that Hebrew should be the main language of the state.

The writers also had to decide on the name for the new state. Eretz Israel, Ever (from the name Eber), Judea, and Zion were all suggested, as were Ziona, Ivriya and Herzliya. Gilbert, M. (1998) Israel: A History, London: Doubleday. p. 187. ISBN 0-385-40401-8 Judea and Zion were rejected because, according to the partition plan, Jerusalem (Zion) and most of Judean mountains would be outside the new state. Why not Judea? Zion? State of the Hebrews? Haaretz, 7 May 2008 Ben-Gurion put forward "Israel" and it passed by a vote of 63. 

The debate over wording did not end completely even after the Declaration had been made. Declaration signer Meir David Loewenstein later claimed, "It ignored our sole right to Eretz Israel, which is based on the covenant of the Lord with Abraham, our father, and repeated promises in the Tanach. It ignored the aliya of the Ramban and the students of the Vilna Gaon and the Ba'al Shem Tov, and the of Jews who lived in the 'Old Yishuv'." Wallish and the Declaration of Independence The Jerusalem Post, 1998 (republished on Eretz Israel Forever) 

==Declaration ceremony==
The invitation to the ceremony, dated 13 May 1948.
A celebratory crowd outside the Tel Aviv Museum to hear the Declaration
The ceremony was held in the Tel Aviv Museum (today known as Independence Hall) but was not widely publicised as it was feared that the British Authorities might attempt to prevent it or that the Arab armies might invade earlier than expected. An invitation was sent out by messenger on the morning of 14 May telling recipients to arrive at 15:30 and to keep the event a secret. The event started at 16:00 (a time chosen so as not to breach the sabbath) and was broadcast live as the first transmission of the new radio station Kol Yisrael.

The final draft of the declaration was typed at the Jewish National Fund building following its approval earlier in the day. Ze'ev Sherf, who stayed at the building in order to deliver the text, had forgotten to arrange transport for himself. Ultimately, he had to flag down a passing car and ask the driver (who was driving a borrowed car without a license) to take him to the ceremony. Sherf's request was initially refused but he managed to persuade the driver to take him. The car was stopped by a policeman for speeding while driving across the city though a ticket was not issued after it was explained that he was delaying the declaration of independence. Sherf arrived at the museum at 15:59.

At 16:00, Ben-Gurion opened the ceremony by banging his gavel on the table, prompting a spontaneous rendition of Hatikvah, soon to be Israel's national anthem, from the 250 guests. One Day that Shook the world The Jerusalem Post, 30 April 1998, by Elli Wohlgelernter On the wall behind the podium hung a picture of Theodor Herzl, the founder of modern Zionism, and two flags, later to become the official flag of Israel.

After telling the audience "I shall now read to you the scroll of the Establishment of the State, which has passed its first reading by the National Council", Ben-Gurion proceeded to read out the declaration, taking 16 minutes, ending with the words "Let us accept the Foundation Scroll of the Jewish State by rising" and calling on Rabbi Fishman to recite the Shehecheyanu blessing. 

The entire declaration ceremony was recorded and broadcast live on Kol Yisrael (Voice of Israel) radio station.

===Signatories===
David Ben-Gurion declaring independence beneath a large portrait of Theodor Herzl, founder of modern Zionism
As leader of the Yishuv, David Ben-Gurion was the first person to sign. The declaration was due to be signed by all 37 members of Moetzet HaAm. However, twelve members could not attend, eleven of them trapped in besieged Jerusalem and one abroad. The remaining 25 signatories present were called up in alphabetical order to sign, leaving spaces for those absent. Although a space was left for him between the signatures of Eliyahu Dobkin and Meir Vilner, Zerach Warhaftig signed at the top of the next column, leading to speculation that Vilner's name had been left alone to isolate him, or to stress that even a communist agreed with the declaration. 

When Herzl Rosenblum, a journalist, was called up to sign, Ben-Gurion instructed him to sign under the name Herzl Vardi, his pen name, as he wanted more Hebrew names on the document. Although Rosenblum acquiesced to Ben-Gurion's request and legally changed his name to Vardi, he later admitted to regretting not signing as Rosenblum. Several other signatories later Hebraised their names, including Meir Argov (Grabovsky), Peretz Bernstein (then Fritz Bernstein), Avraham Granot (Granovsky), Avraham Nissan (Katznelson), Moshe Kol (Kolodny), Yehuda Leib Maimon (Fishman), Golda Meir (Myerson), Pinchas Rosen (Felix Rosenblueth) and Moshe Sharett (Shertok). Other signatories added their own touches, including Saadia Kobashi who added the phrase "HaLevy", referring to the tribe of Levi. For this reason we congregated Iton Tel Aviv, 23 April 2004 

After Sharett, the last of the signatories, had put his name to paper, the audience again stood and the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra played "Hatikvah". Ben-Gurion concluded the event with the words "The State of Israel is established! This meeting is adjourned!" 

==Context and aftermath==
Ben Gurion (Left) Signing the Declaration of Independence held by Moshe Sharet

The declaration was signed in a context of civil war between the Arab and Jewish populations of the Mandate that had started the day after the partition vote at the UN six months earlier. Neighbouring Arab states and the Arab League were opposed to the vote and had declared they would intervene to prevent its implementation. In a cablegram on 15 May 1948 to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States claimed that "the Arab states find themselves compelled to intervene in order to restore law and order and to check further bloodshed". PDF copy of Cablegram from the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States of the 15 May 1948: Retrieved 13 December 2013 

Over the next few days after the declaration, armies of Egypt, Trans-Jordan, Iraq, and Syria engaged Israeli troops inside the area of what had just ceased to be Mandatory Palestine, threatening officially and militarily to occupy the whole of the former Mandate territorycitation required: 14 December 2013, thereby starting the 1948 ArabIsraeli War. A truce began on 11 June, but fighting resumed on 8 July and stopped again on 18 July, before restarting in mid-October and finally ending on 24 July 1949 with the signing of the armistice agreement with Syria. By then Israel had retained its independence and increased its land area by almost 50% compared to the 1947 UN Partition Plan.

Following the declaration, Moetzet HaAm became the Provisional State Council, which acted as the legislative body for the new state until the first elections in January 1949.

Many of the signatories would play a prominent role in Israeli politics following independence; Moshe Sharett and Golda Meir both served as Prime Minister, Yitzhak Ben-Zvi became the country's second president in 1952, and several others served as ministers. David Remez was the first signatory to pass away, dying in May 1951, while Meir Vilner, the youngest signatory at just 29, was the longest living, serving in the Knesset until 1990 and dying in June 2003. Eliyahu Berligne, the oldest signatory at 82, died in 1959.

Eleven minutes after midnight, the United States de facto recognized the State of Israel. United states de facto Regnition of State of Israel: 14 May 1948: Retrieved 14 December 2013 This was followed by Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi's Iran (which had voted against the UN partition plan), Guatemala, Iceland, Nicaragua, Romania, and Uruguay. The Soviet Union was the first nation to fully recognize Israel de jure on 17 May 1948, followed by Poland, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, Ireland, and South Africa. The United States extended official recognition after the first Israeli election, as Truman had promised, Press Release, 31 January 1949. Official File, Truman Papers Truman Library on 31 January 1949. Israel became a member of the United Nations on 11 May 1949. United Nations General Assembly Resolution 273. 

In the three years following the 1948 Palestine war, about 700,000 Jews immigrated to Israel, residing mainly along the borders and in former Arab lands. Benny Morris, Righteous Victims, chap. VI. Around 136,000 were some of the 250,000 displaced Jews of World War II. Displaced Persons Retrieved 29 October 2007 from the US Holocaust Museum. And from the 1948 ArabIsraeli War until the early 1970s, 800,0001,000,000 Jews left, fled, or were expelled from their homes in Arab countries; 260,000 of them reached Israel between 1948 and 1951; and 600,000 by 1972. Malka Hillel Shulewitz, The Forgotten Millions: The Modern Jewish Exodus from Arab Lands, Continuum 2001, pp. 139 and 155. Ada Aharoni "The Forced Migration of Jews from Arab Countries", Historical Society of Jews from Egypt website. Accessed 1 February 2009. 

At the same time, a large number of Arabs left, fled or were expelled from, what became Israel. In the Report of the Technical Committee on Refugees (Submitted to the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine in Lausanne on 7 September 1949)- (A/1367/Rev.1), in paragraph 15, Report of the Technical Committee on Refugees (Submitted to the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine in Lausanne on 7 September 1949)- (A/1367/Rev.1)] the estimate of the statistical expert, which the Committee believed to be as accurate as circumstances permitted, indicated that the refugees from Israel- controlled territory amounted to approximately 711,000.

==Status in Israeli law==
Independence Hall as it appears today
The declaration stated that the State of Israel would ensure complete equality of social and political rights to all its inhabitants irrespective of religion, race or sex, and guaranteed freedom of religion, conscience, language, education and culture. However, the Knesset maintains that the declaration is neither a law nor an ordinary legal document. The Proclamation of Independence Knesset website The Supreme Court has ruled that the guarantees were merely guiding principles, and that the declaration is not a constitutional law making a practical ruling on the upholding or nullification of various ordinances and statutes. Whenever an explicit statutory measure of the Knesset leaves no room for doubt, it is honored even if inconsistent with the principles in the Declaration of Independence. The Declaration of the Establishment of the State of Israel Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs 

In 1994 the Knesset amended two basic laws, Law: Human Dignity and Liberty|Human Dignity and Liberty] and Freedom of Occupation, introducing (among other changes) a statement saying "the fundamental human rights in Israel will be honored (...) in the spirit of the principles included in the declaration of the establishment of the State of Israel."

==The scroll==

Although Ben-Gurion had told the audience that he was reading from the scroll of independence, he was actually reading from handwritten notes because only the bottom part of the scroll had been finished by artist and calligrapher Otte Wallish by the time of the declaration (he did not complete the entire document until June). The scroll, which is bound together in three parts, is generally kept in the country's National Archives, though it is currently on display at the Israel Museum.

==See also==
* Yom Ha'atzmaut
* Nakba Day
* The Recording of the Israel Declaration of Independence

==References==

==External links==

* Official text
* Original Recording
* Original Document: Press Release Announcing U.S. Recognition of Israel
* "Signatorius", exhibition held at the Engel Gallery dealing with the independence declaration in Israeli art.

 



[[Geography of Italy]]

Italy viewed from space
Italy is located in southern Europe and comprises the long, boot-shaped Italian Peninsula, the southern side of Alps, the large plain of Po Valley and some islands including Sicily and Sardinia. Corsica, although belonging to the Italian geographical region, has been a part of France since 1769.

Its total area is 301,340 km2, of which 294,140 km2 is land and 7,200 km2. It lies between latitudes 35 and 48 N, and longitudes 6 and 19 E.

Italy borders with Switzerland (740 km), France (488 km), Austria (430 km) and Slovenia (199 km). San Marino (39 km) and Vatican city (3.2 km) are enclaves. 

Including islands, Italy has a coastline of 7,600 km on the Adriatic Sea, Ionian Sea, Tyrrhenian Sea, Ligurian Sea, Sea of Sardinia and Strait of Sicily. 

==Mountains and plains==
Mont Blanc seen from Aosta Valley.
Topographic map of Italy
Almost 40% of the Italian territory is mountainous, with the Alps as the northern boundary and the Apennine Mountains forming the backbone of the peninsula and extending for 1350 km. In between the two lies a large plain in the valley of the Po, the largest river in Italy, which flows 652 km eastward from the Cottian Alps to the Adriatic. The Po Valley is the largest plain in Italy, with 46,000 km2, and it represents over 70% of the total plain area in the country. 

The Alpine mountain range is linked with the Apennines with the Colle di Cadibona pass in the Ligurian Alps.

Worldwide-known mountains in Italy are Matterhorn (Cervino), Monte Rosa, Gran Paradiso in the West Alps, and Bernina, Stelvio and Dolomites along the eastern side of the Alps. The highest peak in Italy is Mont Blanc, at 4810 m above sea level.

===Volcanoes===
Many elements of the Italian territory are of volcanic origin. Most of the small islands and archipelagos in the south, like Capraia, Ponza, Ischia, Eolie, Ustica and Pantelleria are volcanic islands.
There are also active volcanoes: Etna, in Sicily, the largest active volcano in Europe; Vulcano, Stromboli, and Vesuvius, near Naples, the only active volcano on mainland Europe.

==Rivers and seas==
Most of Italy's rivers drain either into the Adriatic Sea (like Po, Piave, Adige, Brenta, Tagliamento, Reno) or into the Tyrrhenian (like Arno, Tiber and Volturno), though the waters from some border municipalities (Livigno in Lombardy, Innichen and Sexten in Trentino-Alto Adige/Sdtirol) drain into the Black Sea through the basin of the Drava, a tributary of the Danube, and the waters from the Lago di Lei in Lombardy drain into the North Sea through the basin of the Rhine.

===Maritime claims===
* Contiguous zone: 24 nmi
* Continental shelf: 200 m or to the depth of exploitation
* Territorial sea: 12 nmi

==Lakes==
Lake Garda is the largest of the Italian lakes.
In the north of the country are a number of subalpine moraine-dammed lakes, the largest of which is Garda (370 km2). Other well known of these subalpine lakes are Lake Maggiore (212.5 km2), whose most northerly section is part of Switzerland, Como (146 km2), Orta, Lugano, Iseo, Idro.

Other notable lakes in the Italian peninsula are Trasimeno, Bolsena, Bracciano, Vico, Varano and Lesina in Gargano and Omodeo in Sardinia.

==Islands==
Italy includes several islands. The largest are Sicily 25708 km2 and Sardinia 24090 km2. The third largest island is Elba, the largest island of the Tuscan Archipelago (224 km2).

===Latitude and longitude===
* Northernmost point &mdash; Testa Gemella Occidentale/Westliches Zwillingskpfl, Prettau (Predoi), South Tyrol at 
* Southernmost point &mdash; Punta Pesce Spada, Lampedusa, Sicily at (whole territory); Capo Spartivento, Calabria at (mainland)
* Westernmost point &mdash; Rocca Bernauda, Bardonecchia, Piedmont at 
* Easternmost point &mdash; Capo d'Otranto, Otranto, Apulia at 

===Elevation===
* Highest: Mont Blanc, Courmayeur (4807.5 m) at 
* Lowest: Le Contane, Jolanda di Savoia (-3.44m) at 
* Highest settlement: Trepalle, Livigno (2,209 m) at 

==Land use==
 2006 estimates. 
* Artificial (urban, industrial etc.): 4.9%
* Agricultural: 52.2%
** Arable land: 27.9%
** Permanent: 7.1%
** Other: 17.2%
* Wood: 41.4%
* Wetlands: 0.4%
* Water (lakes etc.): 1.1%

===Irrigated Land===
* 39,510 km2 (2007)

===Total renewable water resources===
* 191.3 km3 (2011)

==Gallery==

File:ItalyOMC.png|Italy's cities and main towns.
File:Southern Italian Peninsula at Night.JPG|Astronaut photograph highlighting the night-time appearance of southern Italy.
File:ItalySouth1849.jpg|Southern Italy and Sicily on the 1849 map.
File:EtnaAvi.JPG|Etna, the highest active volcano in Europe.
File:Torre della pelosa + isola piana + asinara da capo falcone.jpg|Asinara island with the Aragonese Torre della Pelosa (16th century), Sardinia.
File:Vernazza.JPG|The coastal areas of Liguria have a Mediterranean climate.
File:San Quirico d'Orcia - Chiesetta Val d'Orcia.jpg|Landscape of Tuscany.
File:RisaieVercellesi_Panorama2.jpg|Rice paddies in the Po Valley near Vercelli.
File:Cascatemarmore.jpg|Marmore waterfall, the world's tallest man-made waterfall, was created by the ancient Romans.
File:Vesuvius_from_Pompeii_%28hires_version_2_scaled%29.png|Mount Vesuvius looms over the ruins of Pompeii.
File:Venice_as_seen_from_the_air_with_bridge_to_mainland.jpg|Panorama of Venice and its lagoon.
File:Rilke_05.jpg|The Karst Plateau drops vertically into the Adriatic Sea near Trieste.
File:Gran_sasso_italia.jpg|Gran Sasso d'Italia, the highest peak of the Apennines.
File:Monviso_from_San_Marzano_Oliveto.jpg|Vineyards in the Montferrat hills, with the Monviso in the background.
File:Panoramic_Livigno.jpg|Livigno, the tallest 'comune' of Italy, during winter.
File:Reggio_calabria_panorama_dal_fortino.jpg|The Strait of Messina as seen from mainland.
File:Filicudi_%288_of_28%29.jpg|'La Canna' rock off the coast of Filicudi.
File:Tuaredda_beach,_Sardinia,_Italy.jpg|Southern coast of Sardinia.
File:Cremona_Po_Bridge.jpg|The Po river at Cremona, in a foggy winter day.

== See also ==

* Climate of Italy
* List of islands of Italy

==Notes==

==References==

Italy
 


[[Demographics of Italy]]

Population 19602006. Number of inhabitants in thousands.

This article is about the demographic features of the population of Italy, including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.

Italy has 60,626,442 inhabitants according to 1/1/2011 municipal records (Anagrafe). Its population density, at 201/km (520/sq. mile), is higher than that of most Western European countries. However the distribution of the population is widely uneven. The most densely populated areas are the Po Valley (that accounts for almost a half of the national population) and the metropolitan areas of Rome and Naples, while vast regions such as the Alps and Apennines highlands, the plateaus of Basilicata and the island of Sardinia are very sparsely populated.

The population of Italy almost doubled during the twentieth century, but the pattern of growth was extremely uneven due to large-scale internal migration from the rural South to the industrial cities of the North, a phenomenon which happened as a consequence of the Italian economic miracle of the 1950-60s. In addition, after centuries of net emigration, from the 1980s Italy has experienced large-scale immigration for the first time in modern history. According to the Italian government, there were 4,570,317 foreign residents in Italy as of January 2011. 

High fertility and birth rates persisted until the 1970s, after which they started to dramatically decline, leading to rapid population aging. At the end of the 2000s, one in five Italians was over 65 years old. However, as a result of the massive immigration of the last two decades, in recent years Italy experienced a significant growth in birth rates. The total fertility rate has also climbed from an all-time low of 1.18 children per woman in 1995 to 1.41 in 2008. 
The TFR is expected to reach 1.5 in 2030. http://demo.istat.it/uniprev2011/index.html?lingua=ita 

Italy has no official religion. The 1984 Lateran Treaty revision abolished the Roman Catholic Church as the official state religion, while recognizing the role it plays in Italian society. 87.8% of the population define themselves as Catholic, 5.8% as non-believers or atheists, and 6.4% other religions, of which 2.6% Islam.

==Urbanization==

About 68% of Italian population is classified as urban, CIA World Factbook 2010 a relatively low figure among developed countries. During the last two decades, Italy underwent a devolution process, that eventually led to the creation of administrative metropolitan areas, in order to give major cities and their metropolitan areas a provincial status (somehow similar to PRC's direct-controlled municipality). However, none of these new local authorities has yet become fully operative. According to OECD, the largest conurbations are:
* Milan  7.4 million
* Rome  3.7 million
* Naples  3.1 million
* Turin  2.2 million
the population over the last few weeks has raised up to 345 billion this is a very big amount of increase in a week

==Ethnic groups==

Little Italy in New York, ca.1900.

Italy used to be a country of mass emigration from the late 19th century until the 1970s. Between 1898 and 1914, the peak years of Italian diaspora, approximately 750,000 Italians emigrated each year. Italian communities once thrived in the former African colonies of Eritrea (nearly 100,000 at the beginning of World War II), Somalia and Libya (150,000 Italians settled in Libya, constituting about 18% of the total population). Libya  Italian colonization. Britannica Online Encyclopedia. All of Libya's Italians were expelled from the North African country in 1970. Libya cuts ties to mark Italy era.. BBC News. 27 October 2005. In addition, after the communist occupation of Istria in 1945, up to 350,000 ethnic Italians left Titoist Yugoslavia. Election Opens Old Wounds In Trieste. The New York Times. 6 June 1987. Today, large numbers of people with full or significant Italian ancestry are found in
Brazil (35 million), Consulta Nazionale Emigrazione. Progetto ITENETs  Gli italiani in Brasile; pp. 11, 19 . Retrieved 10 September 2008. Argentina (20 million), US (17.8 million), France (5 million), "The Cambridge survey of world migration". Robin Cohen (1995). Cambridge University Press. p. 143. ISBN 0-521-44405-5 Uruguay (1.5 million), Canada (1.4 million), Venezuela (900,000) Santander Laya-Garrido, Alfonso. Los Italianos forjadores de la nacionalidad y del desarrollo economico en Venezuela. Editorial Vadell. Valencia, 1978 and Australia (800,000). 

As a result of the profound economic and social changes induced by postwar industrialization, including low birth rates, an aging population and thus a shrinking workforce, during the 1980s Italy became to attract rising flows of foreign immigrants. The present-day figure of about 4.6 million foreign residents, that make up some 8% of the total population, include more than half a million children born in Italy to foreign nationalssecond generation immigrants, but exclude foreign nationals who have subsequently acquired Italian nationality; this applied to 53,696 people in 2008. The official figures also exclude illegal immigrants, the so-called clandestini, whose numbers are very difficult to determine. In May 2008 The Boston Globe quoted an estimate of 670,000 for this group. Elisabeth Rosenthal, "Italy cracks down on illegal immigration". The Boston Globe. 16 May 2008. Since the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, and more recently, the 2004 and 2007 enlargements of the European Union, the main waves of migration came from the former socialist countries of Eastern Europe (especially Romania, Albania, Ukraine and Poland). The second most important area of immigration to Italy has always been the neighbouring North Africa (in particular, Morocco, Egypt and Tunisia), with soaring arrivals as a consequence of the Arab Spring. Furthermore, in recent years, growing migration fluxes from the Far East (notably, China "Milan police in Chinatown clash". BBC News. 13 April 2007. and the Philippines) and Latin America (Ecuador, Peru) have been recorded. Currently, circa one million Romanians (around one tenth of them being Roma "EUROPE: Home to Roma, And No Place for Them". IPS ipsnews.net. ) are officially registered as living in Italy, representing thus the most important individual country of origin, followed by Albanians and Moroccans with about 500,000 people each. The number of unregistered Romanians is difficult to estimate, but the Balkan Investigative Reporting Network suggested that in 2007 that there might have been half a million or more. Overall, at the end of the 2000s the foreign born population of Italy was from: Europe (54%), Africa (22%), Asia (16%), the Americas (8%) and Oceania (0.06%). The distribution of immigrants is largely uneven in Italy: 87% of immigrants live in the northern and central parts of the country (the most economically developed areas), while only 13% live in the southern half of the peninsula.

Estimated foreign-born population by country of birth, 2006 figures.

+Origin of the population Origin Population Percent 
 Italian 92.00% 
 Romanian 1.81% 
 North African 1.07% 
 Albanian 0.77% 
 Chinese 0.28% 
 Ukrainian 0.31% 
 Asian (non-Chinese) 0.83% 
 Sub-Saharan Africa 0.54% 
 Latin American 0.47% 
 Other 1.29% 
 

== Languages ==

"Italophone" world. Dark blue:official language; green: secondary, widely spoken or understood; light blue: understood by some due to former colonisation.

Italy's official language is Italian. Ethnologue has estimated that there are about 55 million speakers of the language in Italy and a further 6.7 million outside of the country. Ethnologue report for language code:ita (Italy) - Gordon, Raymond G., Jr. (ed.), 2005. Ethnologue: Languages of the World, Fifteenth edition. Dallas, Tex.: SIL International. Online version However, between 120 and 150 million people use Italian as a second or cultural language, worldwide. Italian Language: Geographic Distribution Discovery Media'.' Retrieved 2010-05-16. 

Italian, adopted by the state after the unification of Italy, is based on the Florentine variety of Tuscan and is somewhat intermediate between the Italo-Dalmatian languages and the Gallo-Romance languages. Its development was also influenced by the Germanic languages of the post-Roman invaders.

Italy has numerous dialects spoken all over the country. However, the establishment of a national education system has led to decrease in variation in the languages spoken across the country. Standardisation was further expanded in the 1950s and 1960s thanks to economic growth and the rise of mass media and television (the state broadcaster RAI helped set a standard Italian).

Several minority and regional languages are legally recognized and protected, 26 febbraio 1948, n. 4, Statuto speciale per la Valle d'Aosta; L.cost. 26 febbraio 1948, n. 5, Statuto speciale per il Trentino-Alto Adige; L.cost. 31 gennaio 1963, n. 1, Statuto speciale della Regione Friuli Venezia Giulia and they have co-official status alongside Italian in various parts of the country. French is co-official in the Valle dAostaalthough in fact Franco-Provencal is more commonly spoken there. German has the same status in the province of South Tyrol as, in some parts of that province and in parts of the neighbouring Trentino, does Ladin. Slovene is officially recognised in the provinces of Trieste, Gorizia and Udine in Venezia Giulia.

In these regions official documents are bilingual (trilingual in Ladin communities), or available upon request in either Italian or the co-official language. Traffic signs are also multilingual, except in the Valle dAosta wherewith the exception of Aosta itself which has retained its Latin form in Italian as in EnglishFrench toponyms are generally used, attempts to Italianise them during the Fascist period having been abandoned. Education is possible in minority languages where such schools are operating.

==Historical data==

Vital statistics since 1900 B.R. Mitchell. European historical statistics, 1750-1975. http://unstats.un.org/unsd/demographic/products/dyb/dybsets/1948%20DYB.pdf United nations. Demographic Yearbook 1948 ISTAT 

 Average population (x 1,000) Live births Deaths Natural change Crude birth rate (per 1,000) Crude death rate (per 1,000) Natural change (per 1,000) Fertility rates 
 1900 32,377 1,067,376 768,917 298,459 33.0 23.7 9.2 
 1901 32,550 1,057,763 715,036 342,727 32.5 22.0 10.5 
 1902 32,787 1,093,074 727,181 365,893 33.3 22.2 11.2 
 1903 33,004 1,042,090 736,311 305,779 31.6 22.3 9.3 
 1904 33,237 1,085,431 698,604 386,827 32.7 21.0 11.6 
 1905 33,489 1,084,518 730,340 354,178 32.4 21.8 10.6 
 1906 33,718 1,070,978 696,875 374,103 31.8 20.7 11.1 
 1907 33,952 1,062,333 700,333 362,000 31.3 20.6 10.7 
 1908 34,198 1,138,813 770,054 368,759 33.3 22.5 10.8 
 1909 34,455 1,115,831 738,460 377,371 32.4 21.4 11.0 
 1910 34,751 1,144,410 682,459 461,951 32.9 19.6 13.3 
 1911 35,033 1,093,545 742,811 350,734 31.2 21.2 10.0 
 1912 35,246 1,133,985 635,788 498,197 32.2 18.0 14.1 
 1913 35,351 1,122,482 663,966 458,516 31.8 18.8 13.0 
 1914 35,701 1,114,091 643,355 470,736 31.2 18.0 13.2 
 1915 36,271 1,109,183 809,703 299,480 30.6 22.3 8.3 
 1916 36,481 881,626 854,703 26,923 24.2 23.4 0.7 
 1917 36,343 713,732 948,710 -234,978 19.6 26.1 -6.5 
 1918 35,922 655,353 1,268,290 -612,937 18.2 35.3 -17.1 
 1919 35,717 770,620 676,329 94,291 21.6 18.9 2.6 
 1920 35,960 1,158,041 681,749 476,292 32.2 19.0 13.2 
 1921 37,869 1,163,344 670,234 493,110 30.7 17.7 13.0 
 1922 38,196 1,175,834 690,054 485,780 30.8 18.1 12.7 
 1923 38,571 1,155,157 654,827 500,330 29.9 17.0 13.0 
 1924 38,927 1,124,650 663,077 461,573 28.9 17.0 11.9 
 1925 39,265 1,108,565 669,695 438,870 28.2 17.1 11.2 
 1926 39,590 1,094,666 680,274 414,392 27.7 17.2 10.5 
 1927 39,926 1,093,772 639,843 453,929 27.4 16.0 11.4 
 1928 40,281 1,072,316 645,654 426,662 26.6 16.0 10.6 
 1929 40,607 1,037,700 667,223 370,477 25.6 16.4 9.1 
 1930 40,956 1,092,678 576,751 515,927 26.7 14.1 12.6 3,38 
 1931 41,339 1,026,197 609,405 416,792 24.8 14.7 10.1 3,21 
 1932 41,584 990,995 610,646 380,349 23.8 14.7 9.1 3,06 
 1933 41,928 995,979 574,113 421,866 23.8 13.7 10.1 3,04 
 1934 42,277 992,966 563,339 429,627 23.5 13.3 10.2 3,00 
 1935 42,631 996,708 594,722 401,986 23.4 14.0 9.4 3,00 
 1936 42,965 962,686 593,380 369,306 22.4 13.8 8.6 2,87 
 1937 43,269 991,867 618,290 373,577 22.9 14.3 8.6 2,93 
 1938 43,596 1,037,180 614,988 422,192 23.8 14.1 9.7 3,05 
 1939 44,018 1,040,213 591,483 448,730 23.6 13.4 10.2 3,07 
 1940 44,467 1,046,479 606,907 439,572 23.5 13.6 9.9 3,07 
 1941 44,830 937,546 621,735 315,811 20.9 13.9 7.0 2,74 
 1942 45,098 926,063 643,607 282,456 20.5 14.3 6.3 2,69 
 1943 44,641 885,300 679,708 205,592 19.8 15.2 4.6 2,61 
 1944 44,794 817,704 685,171 132,533 18.3 15.3 3.0 2,39 
 1945 44,946 817,812 615,092 202,720 18.2 13.7 4.5 2,37 
 1946 45,253 1,039,432 547,952 491,480 23.0 12.1 10.9 3,01 
 1947 45,641 1,014,712 524,019 490,693 22.2 11.5 10.8 2,89 
 1948 46,381 1,009,299 490,450 518,849 21.8 10.6 11.2 2,83 
 1949 46,733 940,293 485,277 455,016 20.1 10.4 9.7 2,62 
 1950 47,104 911,805 455,169 456,636 19.4 9.7 9.7 2,50 
 1951 47,417 863,849 485,208 378,641 18.2 10.2 8.0 2,35 
 1952 47,666 847,354 477,894 369,460 17.8 10.0 7.8 2,33 
 1953 47,957 842,274 476,015 366,259 17.6 9.9 7.6 2,31 
 1954 48,299 870,689 441,897 428,792 18.0 9.1 8.9 2,35 
 1955 48,633 869,333 446,689 422,644 17.9 9.2 8.7 2,33 
 1956 48,920 873,608 497,550 376,058 17.9 10.2 7.7 2,33 
 1957 49,181 878,906 484,190 394,716 17.9 9.8 8.0 2,36 
 1958 49,475 870,468 457,690 412,778 17.6 9.3 8.3 2,31 
 1959 49,831 901,017 454,740 446,277 18.1 9.1 9.0 2,38 
 1960 50,198 910,192 480,932 429,260 18.1 9.6 8.6 2.373 
 1961 50,523 929,657 468,455 461,202 18.4 9.3 9.1 2.421 
 1962 50,843 937,257 509,174 428,083 18.4 10.0 8.4 2.441 
 1963 51,198 960,336 516,377 443,959 18.8 10.1 8.7 2.501 
 1964 51,600 1,016,120 490,050 526,070 19.7 9.5 10.2 2.652 
 1965 51,987 990,458 518,008 472,450 19.1 10.0 9.1 2.593 
 1966 52,332 979,940 496,281 483,659 18.7 9.5 9.2 2.574 
 1967 52,667 948,772 510,122 438,650 18.0 9.7 8.3 2.499 
 1968 52,987 930,172 532,571 397,601 17.6 10.1 7.5 2.493 
 1969 53,317 932,466 539,129 393,337 17.5 10.1 7.4 2.464 
 1970 53,661 901,472 521,096 380,376 16.8 9.7 7.1 2.383 
 1971 54,074 906,182 522,654 383,528 16.8 9.7 7.1 2.397 
 1972 54,381 888,203 523,828 364,375 16.3 9.6 6.7 2.347 
 1973 54,751 874,546 547,487 327,059 16.0 10.0 6.0 2.305 
 1974 55,111 868,882 532,052 336,830 15.8 9.7 6.1 2.285 
 1975 55,441 827,852 554,346 273,506 14.9 10.0 4.9 2.171 
 1976 55,718 781,638 550,565 231,073 14.0 9.9 4.1 2.044 
 1977 55,955 741,103 546,694 194,409 13.2 9.8 3.5 1.931 
 1978 56,155 709,043 540,671 168,372 12.6 9.6 3.0 1.840 
 1979 56,318 670,221 538,352 131,869 11.9 9.6 2.3 1.729 
 1980 56,434 640,401 554,510 85,891 11.3 9.8 1.5 1.641 
 1981 56,502 623,103 545,291 77,812 11.0 9.7 1.4 1.585 
 1982 56,544 617,507 522,332 95,175 10.9 9.2 1.7 1.562 
 1983 56,564 600,218 553,568 46,650 10.6 9.8 0.8 1.506 
 1984 56,577 587,871 534,676 53,195 10.4 9.5 0.9 1.457 
 1985 56,593 577,345 547,436 29,909 10.2 9.7 0.5 1.418 
 1986 56,596 554,845 537,453 17,392 9.8 9.5 0.3 1.351 
 1987 56,602 552,329 524,999 27,330 9.8 9.3 0.5 1.329 
 1988 56,629 569,698 539,426 30,272 10.1 9.5 0.5 1.360 
 1989 56,672 560,688 525,960 34,728 9.8 9.3 0.5 1.326 
 1990 56,719 563,019 543,708 19,311 9.9 9.5 0.5 1.334 
 1991 56,751 562,787 553,833 8,954 9.9 9.8 0.2 1.302 
 1992 56,797 575,216 545,038 30,178 10.1 9.6 0.5 1.300 
 1993 56,832 552,587 555,043 -2,456 9.7 9.8 -0.0 1.252 
 1994 56,843 536,665 557,513 -20,848 9.4 9.8 -0.4 1.211 
 1995 56,844 526,064 555,203 -29,139 9.3 9.8 -0.5 1.192 
 1996 56,860 536,740 557,756 -21,016 9.4 9.8 -0.4 1.197 
 1997 56,890 540,048 564,679 -24,631 9.5 9.9 -0.4 1.213 
 1998 56,907 532,843 576,911 -44,068 9.4 10.1 -0.8 1.214 
 1999 56,917 537,242 571,356 -34,114 9.4 10.0 -0.6 1.233 
 2000 56,942 543,039 560,241 -17,202 9.5 9.8 -0.3 1.257 
 2001 56,977 535,264 548,227 -12,963 9.4 9.6 -0.2 1.251 
 2002 57,158 538,198 557,393 -19,195 9.4 9.8 -0.3 1.270 
 2003 57,605 544,063 586,468 -42,405 9.4 10.2 -0.8 1.289 
 2004 58,175 562,599 546,658 15,941 9.7 9.4 0.3 1.342 
 2005 58,607 554,022 567,304 -13,282 9.5 9.7 -0.2 1.337 
 2006 58,942 560,010 557,892 2,118 9.6 9.5 0.1 1.373 
 2007 59,375 563,933 570,801 -6,868 9.5 9.7 -0.2 1.400 
 2008 59,832 576,659 585,126 -8,467 9.6 9.8 -0.2 1.447 
 2009 60,193 568,857 591 663 -22,806 9.5 9.8 -0.3 1.449 
 2010 60,626 561,944 587,488 -25,544 9.3 9.7 -0.4 1.455 
 2011 60,820 546,585 593,402 -46,817 9.1 9.7 -0.6 1.437 
 2012 59,478 534,186 612,883 -78,697 9.0 10.3 -1.3 1.428 
 2013 515,000 1.39 

== Religion ==

Roman Catholicism is by far the largest religion in the country, although the Catholic Church is no longer officially the state religion. Fully 87.8% of Italy's population identified themselves as Roman Catholic, although only about one-third of these described themselves as active members (36.8%).

Most Italians believe in God, or a form of a spiritual life force. According to the most recent Eurobarometer Poll 2005: ReportDGResearchSocialValuesEN2.PDF 74% of Italian citizens responded that 'they believe there is a God', 16% answered that 'they believe there is some sort of spirit or life force' and 6% answered that 'they do not believe there is any sort of spirit, God, or life force'. This makes Italians much more theist than those of most other European countries, including France, Spain, and Germany.

===Christianity===
The Santa Maria del Fiore cathedral in Florence, which has the biggest brick dome in the world, and is considered a masterpiece of Italian architecture.

The Italian Catholic Church is part of the global Roman Catholic Church, under the leadership of the Pope, curia in Rome, and the Conference of Italian Bishops. In addition to Italy, two other sovereign nations are included in Italian-based dioceses, San Marino and Vatican City. There are 225 dioceses in the Italian Catholic Church, see further in this article and in the article List of the Roman Catholic dioceses in Italy. Even though by law Vatican City is not part of Italy, it is in Rome, and along with Latin, Italian is the most spoken and second language of the Roman Curia. 

Italy has a rich Catholic culture, especially as numerous Catholic saints, martyrs and popes were Italian themselves. Roman Catholic art in Italy especially flourished during the Middle Ages, Renaissance and Baroque periods, with numerous Italian artists, such as Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci, Raphael, Caravaggio, Fra Angelico, Gian Lorenzo Bernini, Sandro Botticelli, Tintoretto, Titian, Raphael and Giotto. Roman Catholic architecture in Italy is equally as rich and impressive, with churches, basilicas and cathedrals such as St Peter's Basilica, Florence Cathedral and St Mark's Basilica. Roman Catholicism is the largest religion and denomination in Italy, with around 87.8% of Italians considering themselves Catholic. Italy is also home to the greatest number of cardinals in the world, The Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church - Living cardinals arranged by country and is the country with the greatest number of Roman Catholic churches per capita. 

Even though the main Christian denomination in Italy is Roman Catholicism, there are some minorities of Protestant, Waldensian, Eastern Orthodox and other Christian churches.

In the 20th century, Jehovah's Witnesses, Pentecostalism, non-denominational Evangelicalism, and Mormonism were the fastest-growing Protestant churches. Immigration from Western, Central, and Eastern Africa at the beginning of the 21st century has increased the size of Baptist, Anglican, Pentecostal and Evangelical communities in Italy, while immigration from Eastern Europe has produced large Eastern Orthodox communities.

In 2006, Protestants made up 2.1% of Italy's population, and members of Eastern Orthodox churches comprised 1.2% or more than 700,000 Eastern Orthodox Christians including 180,000 Greek Orthodox, The Holy Orthodox Archdiocese of Italy and Malta 550,000 Pentecostals and Evangelists (0.8%), of whom 400,000 are members of the Assemblies of God, 245,657 Jehovah's Witnesses (0.4%), 30,000 Waldensians, Waldensian Evangelical Church 25,000 Seventh-day Adventists, 22,000 Mormons, 15,000 Baptists (plus some 5,000 Free Baptists), 7,000 Lutherans, 4,000 Methodists (affiliated with the Waldensian Church). World Council of Churches 

===Other religions===
The longest-established religious faith in Italy is Judaism, Jews having been present in Ancient Rome before the birth of Christ. Italy has seen many influential Italian-Jews, such as Luigi Luzzatti, who took office in 1910, Ernesto Nathan served as mayor of Rome from 1907 to 1913 and Shabbethai Donnolo (died 982). During the Holocaust, Italy took in many Jewish refugees from Nazi Germany. However, with the creation of the Nazi-backed puppet Italian Social Republic, about 15% of Italy's Jews were killed, despite the Fascist government's refusal to deport Jews to Nazi death camps. This, together with the emigration that preceded and followed the Second World War, has left only a small community of around 45,000 Jews in Italy today.

Due to immigration from around the world, there has been an increase in non-Christian religions. In 2009, there were 1.0 million Muslims in Italy Italy: Country's muslims raise funds to help quake victims - Adnkronos Religion forming 1.6 percent of population although, only 50,000 hold Italian citizenship. Independent estimates put the Islamic population in Italy anywhere from 0.8 million to 1.5 million. 

There are more than 200,000 followers of faith originating in the Indian subcontinent worth some 70,000 Sikhs with 22 gurdwaras across the country, NRI Sikhs in Italy 70,000 Hindus, and 50,000 Buddhists. Unione Buddhista Italiana - UBI: L'Ente There are an estimated some 4,900 Bah's in Italy in 2005. 

==Demographic statistics==
The following demographic statistics are from Italy's Istituto Nazionale di Statistica and Cia World Factbook.

===Population===
: 61,482,297 (July 2013 est.)

===Age structure===
: 0-14 years: 13.5% (male 4,056,156/female 3,814,070)
: 15-64 years: 66.3% (male 19,530,696/female 18,981,084)
: 65 years and over: 20.2% (male 4,903,762/female 6,840,444) (2010 est.)

===Median age===
: total: 44.2 years 
: male: 43.0 years
: female: 45.3 years (2013 est.)

===Population growth rate===
: 0.34% (2013 est.)

===Birth rate===
: 8.94 births/1,000 population (2013 est.) 

===Death rate===
: 10.01 deaths/1,000 population (2013 est.)

===Net migration rate===
: 4.47 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2013 est.)

===Urbanization===
: urban population: 68% of total population (2010)
: rate of urbanization: 0.5% annual rate of change (2010-15 est.)

===Sex ratio===
: at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
: under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
: 15-64 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
: 65 years and over: 0.74 male(s)/female
: total population: 0.93 male(s)/female
(2013 est.)

===Maternal mortality rate===
: 4.0 deaths/100,000 live births (2010)

===Infant mortality rate===
: total: 3.33 deaths/1,000 live births
: male: 3.54 deaths/1,000 live births
: female: 3.12 deaths/1,000 live births
(2013 est.)

===Life expectancy at birth===
: total population: 81.95 years 
: male: 79.32 years 
: female: 84.73 years (2013)

===Total fertility rate===
: 1.41 children born/woman (2013 est.)

===Health expenditures===
: 9.5% of total GDP (2010)

===Physicians density===
: 4.24 physicians/1,000 population (2008)

===Hospital bed density===
: 3.6 beds/1,000 population (2009)

===HIV/AIDS===
: Adult prevalence rate: 0.3% (2009 est.)
: People living with HIV/AIDS: 140,000 (2009 est.)
: Deaths: fewer than 1,000 (2009 est.)

===Obesity - adult prevalence rate===
: 19.8% (2008)

===Nationality===
: noun: Italian(s)
: adjective: Italian

===Ethnic groups===
Italian: 92%, other European (mostly Romanian, Albanian, Ukrainian and others) 4%, North African (mostly Moroccan) 1.5%, others 2.5% Statistiche demografiche ISTAT 

===Religions===
Roman Catholic: 87% (approximately; one third practicing), other Christians: 2%, Muslim: 1.8%, Atheist or Agnostic: 9%

===Education expenditure===
: 4.7% of total GDP (2009)

===Literacy===
: definition: age 15 and over can read and write
: total population: 98.6%
: male:
(2003 est.)

==Genetics==
Genealogical tree of Y chromosome haplogroups with main Italian ones highlighted in green
The overwhelming majority of Italian males belong to the Y-DNA haplogroup R1b which is standard amongst most west European populations. According to data found through different sources, samples, and studies by Eurpedia, the percentages of Y-dna haplogroups observed were :

*R1 (51.5% : 49% R1b and 2.5% R1a)
*J (20% : 18% J2 and 2% J1)
*E1b1b (11%)
*G (7%)
*I (6.5% : 2.5% I1, 3% I2 + I2a and 1% I2b)
*T (4%)

==See also==
* List of Italians
* Italian diaspora

==Footnotes==

==References==

==External links==

* Demographic page 
* Demographic Profile Italy Allianz Knowledge

 

[[Politics of Italy]]

The politics of Italy is conducted through a parliamentary, democratic The current Parliament, ruling since 2013, was elected with a law that was subsequently recognized to be unconstitutional by Italy's top court (). Therefore, Italy is currently ruled by an assembly elected without complying with the citizens' Constitutional full right of vote. republic with a multi-party system. Italy has been a democratic republic since June 2, 1946, when the monarchy was abolished by popular referendum (see Italian constitutional referendum, 1946). The constitution was written by the Constituent Assembly of Italy and promulgated on January 1, 1948.
The executive power is exercised collectively by the Council of Ministers, which is led by the Prime Minister, officially referred to as President of the Council ("Presidente del Consiglio"). 
Legislative power is vested in the two houses of parliament primarily, and secondarily on the Council of Ministers, which can introduce bills and holds the majority in the parliament.
The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislative branches. It is headed by the High Council of the Judiciary. 
The President is the head of state, though his position is separate from all branches.

The current President of Italy is Giorgio Napolitano and current Prime Minister of Italy is Matteo Renzi.

==Government==
Article 1 of the Italian Constitution states 

Italy is a democratic Republic founded on labour. Sovereignty belongs to the people and is exercised by the people in the forms and within the limits of the Constitution.

By stating that Italy is a democratic republic, the article solemnly declares the results of the constitutional referendum which took place on 2 June 1946. The State is not anymore an hereditary property of the ruling monarch, but it is instead a Res Publica, it belongs to everyone.

The people who are called to temporarily administer the republic are not owners, but servants; and the governed are not subjects, but citizens. And the sovereignty, that is the power to make choices that involve the entire community, belongs to the people, in accordance with the concept of a democracy, from the Greek demos (people) and krata (power). This power, however, is not to be exercised arbitrarily, but in the forms and within the limits established by the rule of law.

===Head of State===

President Giorgio Napolitano was elected on 10 May 2006.
As the head of state, the President of the Republic represents the unity of the nation and has many of the duties previously given to the king of Italy. The President serves as a point of connection between the three branches: he is elected by the lawmakers, he appoints the executive, and is the president of the judiciary. The president is also commander-in-chief of the armed forces.

The President of the Republic is elected for seven years by Parliament in joint session, together with three representatives of each region, except for the Aosta Valley, which gets only one representative. These delegates are elected by their respective Regional Councils so as to guarantee representation to minorities. The election needs a wide majority that is progressively reduced from two-thirds to one-half plus one of the votes after the third ballot. The only Presidents ever to be elected on the first ballot are Francesco Cossiga and Carlo Azeglio Ciampi. Mr. Ciampi was replaced by Giorgio Napolitano, who was elected on 10 May 2006. While it is not forbidden by law, no president had ever served two terms, until 20 April 2013, when president Giorgio Napolitano was re-elected.

According to the Constitution, any citizen that is fifty on the day of the election, and enjoys civil and political rights, can be elected President. The President cannot hold office in any other branch of power, and the office's salary and privileges are established by law.

Among the powers of the President are the capacity to 
* send messages to Parliament, authorise the introduction of bills by the Government, and promulgate laws, decrees and regulations,
* dissolve one or both Houses of Parliament, in consultation with their presidents, except during the last six months of his terms, unless that period coincides at least in part with the final six months of the Parliament,
* call a general referendum under certain circumstances established by the Constitution,
* appoint State officials in the cases established by law,
* accredit and receive diplomats, and ratify international treaties, after the Parliament's authorisation when required,
* make declarations of war agreed upon by the Parliament, as commander-in-chief of the armed forces,
* grant pardons, commute sentences, and confer honorary distinctions of the Republic.
The President also presides over the High Council of the Judiciary and the Supreme Council of Defence.

Usually, the President tries to stay out of the political debate, and to be an institutional guarantee for all those involved in the political process. The president can also reject openly anti-constitutional acts as the guardian of the Constitution of Italy.

The President is not responsible for the actions performed in the exercise of his duties, except for high treason and violation of the Constitution, for which the President can be impeached by the Parliament in joint session, with an absolute majority of its members.

===Legislative branch===

With article 48 of the Constitution, which guarantees the right to vote, the people exercise their power through their elected representatives in the Parliament. The Parliament has a bicameral system, and consists of the Chamber of deputies and the Senate, elected every five years.

The Chamber of deputies is elected by direct and universal suffrage by voters who are eighteen. There are 630 deputies, twelve of which are elected in the overseas constituencies. All voters who are twenty-five on election day are eligible to be deputies. 

The Senate is elected by direct and universal suffrage by voters who are twenty-five. There are 315 senators, six of whom are elected in the overseas constituencies. There are also a number of senators for life, such as former Presidents or citizens appointed by the President, during his term in office, for having brought honor to the nation with their achievements. All voters who are forty on election day are eligible to be senators. 

===Executive branch===

Matteo Renzi is the Prime Minister since 22 February 2014.
The Constitution establishes the Government of Italy as composed of the Prime Minister (President of the Council) and Ministers. The President of Italy appoints the Prime Minister and, on his proposal, the Ministers that form its cabinet. The appointee can be the leader of the majority coalition that won the election, or it can be a person instructed by the President to form a national unity government in times of crisis for the nation. Either way, the government must receive the confidence of both Houses, so the Executive derives its legitimacy from the Parliament and the great number of political parties forces the Prime Minister to bend to their will. If the majority coalition no longer supports the government, the Prime Minister can be ousted with a vote of no confidence, and a new government must be formed, or new elections scheduled.

===Judicial branch===

The Constitution states that justice is administered in the name of the people and that judges are subject only to the law. So the judiciary is a branch that is completely autonomous and independent of all other branches of power, even though the Minister of Justice is responsible for the organization and functioning of those services involved with justice and has the power to originate disciplinary actions against judges, which are then administered by the High Council of the Judiciary, presided over by the President. 

The Italian judicial system is based on Roman law, the Napoleonic code and later statutes. It is based on a mix of the adversarial and inquisitorial civil law systems, although the adversarial system was adopted in the Appeal Courts in 1988. Appeals are treated almost as new trials, and three degrees of trial are present. The third is a legitimating trial.

There is only partial judicial review of legislation in the American sense. Judicial review exists under certain conditions, established by the Constitutional Law, in the Constitutional Court, or Corte Costituzionale, which can reject anti-constitutional laws after scrutiny. When the Court declares a law unconstitutional, the law ceases to have effect the day after the publication of the ruling.

According to Article 134 of the Constitution, the Constitutional Court shall pass judgement on: 

* controversies on the constitutional legitimacy of laws issued by the State and Regions;

* conflicts arising from allocation of powers of the State and those powers allocated to State and Regions, and between Regions;

* charges brought against the President and until 1989, the Ministers.

The Constitutional Court is composed of 15 judges one of which is the President of the Italian Constitutional Court elected from the court itself. One third of the judges are appointed by the President of the Italian Republic, one-third are elected by Parliament and one-third are elected by the ordinary and administrative supreme courts. The Constitutional Court passes on the constitutionality of laws, and is a post-World War II innovation. Its powers, case load, and frequency of decisions are not as extensive as those of the U.S. Supreme Court.

Italy has not accepted compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice.

==Political parties and elections==

All Italian citizens older than 18 can vote. However, to vote for the senate, the voter must be at least 25 or older.

===Chamber of Deputies===
Composition of the Chamber of Deputies. Matteo Renzi led a Grand coalition government composed by Democratic Party, New Centre-Right, Civic Choice and For Italy.

 Coalition Party Votes % Seats 
 Pier Luigi Bersani:Italy. Common Good Democratic Party 8,644,187 25.42 292 
 Left Ecology Freedom 1,089,442 3.20 37 
 Democratic Centre 167,170 0.49 6 
 South Tyrolean People's Party 146,804 0.43 5 
 Total 10,047,603 29.54 340 
 Silvio Berlusconi:Center-right coalition The People of Freedom 7,332,667 21.56 97 
 Lega Nord 1,390,156 4.08 18 
 Brothers of Italy 666,035 1.95 9 
 The Right 219,816 0.64 0 
 Great South-MPA 148,534 0.43 0 
 Moderates in Revolution 81,982 0.24 0 
 Pensioners' Party 55,050 0.16 0 
 Popular Agreement 25,631 0.07 0 
 Independents for a Fair Italy 3,238 0.00 0 
 Total 9,923,109 29.18 124 
 Beppe Grillo: Five Star Movement 8,689,168 25.55 108 
 Mario Monti:With Monti for Italy Civic Choice 2,824,001 8.30 37 
 Union of the Centre 608,199 1.78 8 
 Future and Freedom 159,429 0.46 0 
 Total 3,591,629 10.56 45 
 Antonio Ingroia: Civil Revolution 765,172 2.25 0 
 Act to Stop the Decline 380,937 1.12 0 

===Senate of the Republic===
Composition of the Chamber of Deputies. Matteo Renzi led a Grand coalition government composed by Democratic Party, New Centre-Right, Civic Choice and For Italy.

 Coalition Party Votes % Seats 
 Pier Luigi Bersani: Italy. Common Good Democratic Party 8,400,255 27.43 105 
 Left Ecology Freedom 912,374 2.97 7 
 Democratic Centre 163,427 0.53 0 
 The Megaphone - Crocetta List 138,581 0.45 1 
 Italian Socialist Party 57,688 0.18 0 
 Moderates 14,358 0.04 0 
 Total 9,686,683 31.63 113 
 Silvio Berlusconi: Centre-right coalition The People of Freedom 6,829,373 22.30 98 
 Lega Nord 1,328,555 4.33 17 
 Brothers of Italy 590,083 1.92 0 
 The Right 221,112 0.72 0 
 Pensioners' Party 123,458 0.40 0 
 Great South 122,100 0.39 1 
 Moderates in Revolution 69,649 0.22 0 
 Party of Sicilians-MPA 48,618 0.15 0 
 Popular Agreement 24,979 0.08 0 
 Popular Construction 21,685 0.07 0 
 Stop Taxes 19,298 0.06 0 
 Independents for a Fair Italy 6,769 0.02 0 
 Total 9,405,679 30.71 116 
 Beppe Grillo: Five Star Movement 7,285,850 23.79 54 
 Mario Monti: With Monti for Italy 2,797,486 9.13 18 
 Antonio Ingroia: Civil Revolution 549,987 1.79 0 
 Act to Stop the Decline 278,396 0.90 0 

===Political parties===
A poster for the European Parliament election 2004 in Italy, showing party lists

Italy's dramatic self-renewal transformed the political landscape between 1992 and 1997. Scandal investigations touched thousands of politicians, administrators, and businessmen; the shift from a proportional to an Additional Member System (with the requirement to obtain a minimum of 4% of the national vote to obtain representation) also altered the political landscape.

Party changes were sweeping. The Christian Democratic party dissolved; the Italian People's Party and the Christian Democratic Center emerged. Other major parties, such as the Socialists, saw support plummet. A new liberal movement, Forza Italia, gained wide support among moderate voters. The Alleanza Nazionale (National Alliance) broke from the (alleged neo-fascist) Italian Social Movement (MSI). A trend toward two large coalitions (one on the center-left and the other on the center-right) emerged from the April 1995 regional elections. For the 1996 national elections, the center-left parties created the Olive Tree coalition while the center-right united again under the House of Freedoms. These coalitions continued into the 2001 and 2006 national elections.

This emerging bipolarity represents a major break from the fragmented, multi-party political landscape of the postwar era, although it appears to have reached a plateau, since efforts via referendums to further curtail the influence of small parties were defeated in 1999, 2000 and 2009.

==Regional governments==

Five regions (Aosta Valley, Friuli-Venezia Giulia, Sardinia, Sicily, Trentino-Alto Adige/Sdtirol) have special charters granting them varying degrees of autonomy. The raisons d'tre of these charters is in most cases the presence of significant linguistic and cultural minorities, but in the case of Sicily it was to calm down separatist movements. The other 15 regions were in practice established in 1970, even if their ideation had been a much earlier idea.

==History of the post-war political landscape==
Campaigners working on posters in Milan, Italy, 2004

===First Republic: 1946-1994===
There have been frequent government turnovers since 1945, indeed there have been 61 governments in this time. "Pasta and fries".The Economist (February 24th -March 2nd 2007 Issue) Volume 382, Number 8517 The dominance of the Christian Democratic party during much of the postwar period lent continuity and comparative stability to Italy's political situation, mainly dominated by the attempt of keeping the Italian Communist Party (PCI) out of power in order to maintain Cold War equilibrium in the region (see May 1947 crisis).

The communists were in the government only in the national unity governments before 1948, in which their party's secretary Palmiro Togliatti was minister of Justice. After the first democratic elections with universal suffrage in 1948, in which the Christian Democracy and their allies won against the Popular front of the Italian Communist and Socialists parties, the communist party never returned in the government.

Even though many repeat the clich that Italy had over fifty governments in its first fifty years of democracy to stigmatise its alleged political instability, Italy's main political problem was actually the opposite: in all the course of the so-called First Republic, the government was in the hands of the Christian Democrats and their allies, since it was unacceptable for a communist party to rule a western country during the Cold war. The system had been nicknamed the imperfect bipolarism, referring to more proper bipolarism in other western countries (the United States, Germany, the United Kingdom, France etc.) where right-wing and left-wing parties alternated in government.

====The Socialists enter the Government====
The main event in the First Republic in the 1960s was the inclusion of the Socialist party in the government, after the reducing edge of the Christian Democracy (DC) had forced them to accept this alliance; attempts to incorporate the Italian Social Movement (MSI) in the Tambroni government led to riots, and were short-lived.

Aldo Moro, a relatively left-leaning Christian democrat, inspired this alliance. He would later try to include the Communist Party as well, with a deal called the historic compromise. This attempt at compromise was, however, stopped by the kidnapping and murder of Moro in 1978 by the Red Brigades, an extremist left-wing terrorist organization.

The Communist party was at this point the largest communist party in western Europe, and remained such for the rest of its existence. Their ability to attract members was largely due to their pragmatic stance, especially their rejection of extremism, and to their growing independence from Moscow (see Eurocommunism). The Italian communist party was especially strong in areas like Emilia-Romagna, where communists had been elected to stable government positions. This practical political experience may have contributed to their taking a more pragmatic approach to politics.

====The Years of Lead====

On 12 December 1969 a roughly decade-long period of extremist left- and right-wing political terrorism, known as the years of lead (as in the metal of bullets, ), began with the Piazza Fontana bombing in the center of Milan. Neofascist Vincenzo Vinciguerra later declared the bombing to be an attempt to push the Italian state to declare a state of emergency, in order to lead to a more authoritative state. A bomb left in a bank killed about twenty, and was initially blamed on anarchist Giuseppe Pinelli. This accusation was hotly contested by left-wing circles, especially the Maoist Student Movement, which had support in those years from some students of Milan's universities, and who considered the bombing to have all the marks of a fascist operation. Their guess proved correct, but only after many years of difficult investigations.

The strategy of tension attempted to blame the left for bombings carried out by right-wing terrorists. Fascist "black terrorists," such as Ordine Nuovo and the Avanguardia Nazionale, were, in the 1980s-1990s, found to be responsible for several terrorist attacks. On the other extreme of the political spectrum, the leftist Red Brigades carried out assassinations against specific persons, but weren't responsible for any blind bombings. The Red Brigades killed socialist journalist Walter Tobagi, and, in their most famous operation, kidnapped and assassinated Aldo Moro, president of the Christian Democracy, who was trying to involve the Communist Party in the government through the compromesso storico ("historic compromise"), to which the radical left, as well as Washington, were opposed. It is worth noting that the Red Brigades met fierce resistance from the Communist Party and the trade unions; some left-wing politicians, however, used the sympathetic expression "comrades who are mistaken" (Italian: Compagni che sbagliano) to refer to the Red Brigades. Some, including the prosecutor of Moro case Ferdinando Imposimato, have alleged that the 2nd Red Brigades (those led by Mario Moretti) were exploited - or anyway allowed to act freely - by Andreotti's government and possibly foreign forces (notably United States) to destabilize Italy, discredit the Communist Party and impede the historic compromise.

The last and largest of the bombings, known as the Bologna massacre, destroyed the city's railway station in 1980. This was found to be a neofascist bombing, in which Propaganda Due was involved.

On 24 October 1990 Prime minister Giulio Andreotti (DC) revealed to the Parliament the existence of Gladio, NATO's secret "stay-behind" networks which stocked weapons in order to facilitate an armed resistance in case of a communist coup. In 2000, a Parliament Commission report from the Olive Tree (centre-left) coalition concluded that the strategy of tension followed by Gladio had been supported by the United States to "stop the PCI and, to a certain degree, the PSI Socialist Party from reaching executive power in the country."

====The 1980s====
With the end of the lead years, the communist party gradually increased their votes under the leadership of Enrico Berlinguer. The Italian Socialist Party, led by Bettino Craxi, became more and more critical of the communists and of the Soviet Union; Craxi himself pushed in favor of Ronald Reagan's positioning of Pershing missiles in Italy, a move many communists strongly disapproved of.

As the socialist party moved to more moderate positions, it attracted many reformists, some of whom were irritated by the failure of the communists to modernize. Increasingly, many on the left began to see the communists as old and out of fashion, while Craxi and the socialists seemed to represent a new liberal-socialism. The Communist party surpassed the Christian Democrats only in the European elections of 1984, held barely two days after Berlinguer's death, a passing that likely drew sympathy from many voters. The election of 1984, however, was to be the only time the Christian Democrats did not emerge as the largest party in a nation-wide election in which they participated.

In 1987, one year after the Chernobyl disaster following a referendum in that year, a nuclear phase-out was commenced. Italy's four nuclear power plants were closed down, the last in 1990. A moratorium on the construction of new plants, originally in effect from 1987 until 1993, has since been extended indefinitely. http://energytrends.pnl.gov/italy/it004.htm 

In these years, corruption began to be more extensive, a development that would be exposed in the early 1990s and nicknamed Tangentopoli. With the Mani Pulite investigation, starting just one year after the collapse of the Soviet Union, the whole power structure faltered, and seemingly indestructible parties, such as the Christian Democrats and the Socialist party, disbanded; the communist party changed its name to the Democratic Party of the Left and took the role of the socialist party as the main social democratic party in Italy. What was to follow was then called the transition to the Second Republic.

===Second Republic: 1994-present===
Regions of Italy, by President's party.
From 1992 to 1997, Italy faced significant challenges, as voters, disenchanted with past political paralysis, massive government debt, extensive corruption, and organized crime's considerable influencecollectively called Tangentopoli after being uncovered by Mani pulitedemanded political, economic, and ethical reforms.

In the Italian referendums of 1993, voters approved substantial changes, including moving from a proportional to an Additional Member System, which is largely dominated by a majoritarian electoral system and the abolition of some ministries, some of which, however, have been reintroduced with only partly modified names, such as the Ministry of Agriculture reincarnated as the Ministry of Agricultural Resources.

Major political parties, beset by scandal and loss of voter confidence, underwent far-reaching changes. New political forces and new alignments of power emerged in the March 1994 national elections. This election saw a major turnover in the new parliament, with 452 out of 630 deputies and 213 out of 315 senators elected for the first time.

The 1994 elections also swept media magnate Silvio Berlusconi (leader of "Pole of Freedoms" coalition) into office as Prime Minister. Berlusconi, however, was forced to step down in December 1994 when the Lega Nord withdrew support. The Berlusconi government was succeeded by a technical government headed by Prime Minister Lamberto Dini, which left office in early 1996.

A series of center-left coalitions dominated Italy's political landscape between 1996 and 2001. In April 1996, national elections led to the victory of a center-left coalition, Olive Tree, under the leadership of Romano Prodi. Prodi's government became the third-longest to stay in power before he narrowly lost a vote of confidence, by three votes, in October 1998.

In May 1999, the Parliament selected Carlo Azeglio Ciampi as the President of the Republic. Ciampi, a former Prime Minister and Minister of the Treasury and, before entering the government, the governor of the Bank of Italy, was elected on the first ballot by a comfortable margin over the required two-thirds of the votes.

A new government was formed by the Democrats of the Left leader and former communist Massimo D'Alema, but in April 2000, following poor performance by his coalition in regional elections, D'Alema resigned.

The succeeding center-left government, including most of the same parties, was headed by Giuliano Amato, a social-democrat, who had previously served as Prime Minister in 1992-93, and had at the time sworn never to return to active politics.

National elections held on 13 May 2001 returned Berlusconi to power at the head of the five-party center-right "Freedom House" coalition, comprising the prime minister's own party, Forza Italia, the National Alliance, the North League, the Christian Democratic Center, and the United Christian Democrats.

Between 17 May 2006 and 21 February 2007 Romano Prodi served as Prime Minister of Italy following the narrow victory of his l'Unione coalition over the Casa delle Libert led by Silvio Berlusconi in the April 2006 Italian elections. Following a government crisis, Prodi submitted his resignation on 21 February 2007. Three days later he was asked by the Italian President, Giorgio Napolitano to stay on as Prime Minister and he agreed to do so. On 28 February 2007 Prodi narrowly survived a senate no confidence vote. 

Later, on 24 January 2008 the Prodi II Cabinet went through a new crisis, because the Minister of Justice, Clemente Mastella, retracted his support to the Cabinet. Consequently the Prodi Cabinet lost the vote of confidence and the President Giorgio Napolitano called a new general election.

The election set against two new parties, the Democratic Party (founded in October 2007 by the union of the Democrats of the Left and Democracy is Freedom  The Daisy) led by Walter Veltroni, and The People of Freedom (federation of Forza Italia, National Alliance and other parties) led by Silvio Berlusconi. The Democratic Party was in alliance with Italy of Values, while The People of Freedom forged an alliance with Lega Nord and the Movement for the Autonomy. The coalition led by Berlusconi won the election and the leader of the centre-right created the Berlusconi IV Cabinet.

Present-day Italy is often considered a gerontocracy, http://www.svd.se/nyheter/utrikes/ung-ilska-mot-italiens-politiska-dinosaurier_6887573.svd even in the internal Italian debate. http://espresso.repubblica.it/dettaglio/il-parlamento-italiano-maschio-e-di-mezza-eta/2159841 http://www.lastampa.it/2012/05/17/italia/politica/abbiamo-i-potenti-piu-vecchi-d-europapolitici-e-manager-sfiorano-i-anni-bvZs8WQYLtO40axUjOYsoJ/pagina.html Even recently, the Monti government has the highest average age in the western world (64 years), with its youngest members being 57. The previous Italian prime minister Mario Monti is 70, his predecessor Silvio Berlusconi was 75 at the time of resignation (2011), the previous head of the government Romano Prodi was 70 when he stepped down (2008), the Italian president Giorgio Napolitano is 88 and his predecessor Carlo Azeglio Ciampi was 86. In 2013, the youngest among the candidates for prime minister (Pier Luigi Bersani) is 62, the others being 70 and 78. The current average age of Italian university professors is 63, of bank directors and CEOs 67, of members of parliament 56, of labor union representatives 59. http://www.senato.it/leg/16/BGT/Schede_v3/Statistiche/Composizione/Copertina.html 

The new Italian government headed by Enrico Letta took two months to form and made international news when Luigi Preiti shot at policemen near the building where they were swearing in the new government on Sunday 28 April 2013.

=== Unelected and unconstitutional governments ===

At different times, since his entering the Italian Parliament, Silvio Berlusconi, leader of the centre-right, had repeatedly vowed to stop the communist, while leftist parties had insisted that they would oust Berlusconi. Thus, despite the fact that the executive branch bears responsibility toward the Parliament, the governments led by Mario Monti (since 2011) and by Enrico Letta (since 2013) were called unelected governments because they won a vote of confidence by a Parliament coalition formed by centre-right and left-right parties that had in turn obtained parliamentary seats by taking part in the elections as competitors, rather than allies. While formally complying with law and procedures, the creation of these governments did not comply with the decision made by people through the election.

Meanwhile, in 2013, a ruling by the Constitutional Court of Italy established that the Italian electoral system employed to elect the Parliament breached a number of Constitutional requirements. This means that, despite being called - and acting as  a legitimate parliament, the legislative assembly of Italy was chosen with a vote system by which the right of vote was not exercised according to the Italian fundamental chart of citizen's rights and duties. The issue was a major one, to the extent that the Constitutional Court itself ruled that the Italian Parliament should remain in charge only to reform the electoral system and then should be dissolved. 

Despite these facts, Enrico Letta's Cabinet was replaced on 24 February 2014 with a new executive led by Matteo Renzi, without changing the electoral laws nor holding new elections. Thus, the executive received a vote of confidence by a parliamentary assembly that so far did not comply with the ruling of Italy's top court and that officially did not meet the constitutional requirements necessary to act as a Parliament that gives confidence to governments. Hence the impossibility for the executive to act as a legal Government. In addition to this, the very Head of State, President Giorgio Napolitano was chosen by that "legitimate-yet-unconstitutional" Parliament, thus suggesting that he might not have the constitutional powers to act as a President of Italy.

While this intertwisted issue has remained within the limits of a political debate, so far, and Italian media have maintained a low profile, it could become a major problem if it were to be brought to the attention of European and International Courts.

==See also==
* Italian government debt
* Convicted Italian MPs
* Elections in Italy
* Foreign relations of Italy
* Italian order of precedence
* List of political parties in Italy
* List of Presidents of Italy
* List of Prime Ministers of Italy

==References==

 



[[Economy of Italy]]

Italy has a diversified industrial economy with high gross domestic product (GDP) per capita and developed infrastructure. According to the International Monetary Fund in 2014 (see List of countries by past and future GDP (nominal) ) Italy is the 8th-largest economy in the world, the fourth-largest in Europe and in EU and the third-largest in the Eurozone in terms of nominal GDP, http://siteresources.worldbank.org/DATASTATISTICS/Resources/GDP.pdf and the eleventh-largest economy in the world and fifth-largest in Europe in terms of purchasing power parity (PPP) GDP. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/DATASTATISTICS/Resources/GDP_PPP.pdf 

Italy is a member of the G7 and the Group of Eight (G8) industrialized nations, the European Union and the OECD. It is predicted that Italian GDP will grow 0.6% in 2014, 1.15% in 2015 and 1.25% in 2016.

== History ==

Terni steel mills in 1912
The Unification of Italy in 1861 broke down the feudal land system that had survived in the South since Middle Ages, especially where land had been the inalienable property of aristocrats, religious bodies, or the king. The redistribution of land did not necessarily lead to small farmers in the South winding up with land of their own or land they could work and profit from. Many remained landless, and plots grew smaller and smaller and thus more and more unproductive as land was subdivided among heirs. 

At the same time, the early industrialization process that characterized the northern and central parts of the country starting from the 1880s, completely excluded large areas in the North-East. The resulting Italian diaspora concerned nearly 25 million Italians, the most part immigrated in the period 18801914, and it is considered the biggest mass migration of contemporary times. Favero, Luigi e Tassello, Graziano. Cent'anni di emigrazione italiana (18611961) Introduction 

During the Great War, the Italian Royal Army increased in size from 15,000 men in 1914 to 160,000 men in 1918, with 5 million recruits in total entering service during the war. Clark, Martin. "Modern Italy: 18711982. Longman History of Italy. London and New York: Longman. Pp. 186 This came at a terrible cost: by the end of the war, Italy had lost 700,000 soldiers and had a budget deficit of billions of lira.

=== Fascist era ===

Fascist hierarcs visit Alfa Romeo
Italy emerged from World War I in a poor and weakened condition. The National Fascist Party of Benito Mussolini came to power in 1922, at the end of a period of social unrest. During the first years of the new regime, the Fascist pursued a laissez-faire economic policy: they initially reduced taxes, regulations and trade restrictions on the whole. Sheldon Richman, "Fascism". However, once Mussolini acquired a firmer hold of power, laissez-faire and free trade were progressively abandoned in favour of government intervention and protectionism. Patricia Knight, Mussolini and Fascism, Routledge 2003 page 64 

In 1929, Italy was hit hard by the Great Depression. William G. Welk, "Fascist economy policy; an analysis of Italy's economic experiment", Harvard University Press, 1938. pp. 166 Trying to handle the crisis, the Fascist government nationalized the holdings of large banks which had accrued significant industrial securities, establishing the Istituto per la Ricostruzione Industriale. Gaetano Salvemini, "Italian Fascism". London: Victor Gollancz Ltd., 1938. A number of mixed entities were formed, whose purpose it was to bring together representatives of the government and of the major businesses. These representatives discussed economic policy and manipulated prices and wages so as to satisfy both the wishes of the government and the wishes of business. Patricia Knight, Mussolini and Fascism, Routledge (UK), ISBN 978-0-415-27921-5, p. 65 

This economic model based on a partnership between government and business was soon extended to the political sphere, in what came to be known as corporatism. At the same time, the aggressive foreign policy of Mussolini led to an increasing military expenditure. After the invasion of Ethiopia, Italy intervened to support Francisco Franco's nationalists in the Spanish Civil War. By 1939, Italy had the highest percentage of state-owned enterprises after the Soviet Union. 

Italy's involvement in World War II as a member of the Axis powers required the establishment of a war economy. The Allied invasion of Italy in 1943 eventually caused the Italian political structure  and the economy  to rapidly collapse. The Allies, on the one hand, and the Germans on the other, took over the administration of the areas of Italy under their control. By the end of the war, Italian per capita income was at its lowest point since the beginning of the 20th century. Adrian Lyttelton (editor), "Liberal and fascist Italy, 19001945", Oxford University Press, 2002. pp. 13 

=== Post-war economic miracle ===

After the end of World War II, Italy was in rubble and occupied by foreign armies, like Germany and other Axis powers, a condition that worsened the chronic development gap towards the more advanced European economies. However, the new geopolitical logic of the Cold War made possible that the former enemy Italy, a hinge-country between Western Europe and the Mediterranean, and now a new, fragile democracy threatened by the proximity of the Iron Curtain and the presence of a strong Communist party, was considered by the USA as an important ally for the Free World, and received under the Marshall Plan US$1,204 million from 1947 to 1951.

The end of aid through the Plan could have stopped the recovery but its end coincided with a crucial point in the Korea War whose demand for metal and manufactured products was a further stimulus of Italian industrial production. In addition, the creation in 1957 of the European Common Market, with Italy as a founding member, provided more investment and eased exports. 

These favorable developments, combined with the presence of a large and cheap labour force, laid the foundation for spectacular economic growth that lasted almost uninterrupted until the "Hot Autumn's" massive strikes and social unrest of 196970, which then combined with the later 1973 oil crisis and put an abrupt end to the prolonged boom. It has been calculated that the Italian economy experienced an average rate of growth of GDP of 5.8% per year between 195163, and 5.0% per year between 196473. Italian rates of growth were second only, but very close, to the German rates, in Europe, and among the OEEC countries only Japan had been doing better. 

=== From stagflation to stagnation===

Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti (far left) with G7 leaders in Bonn, 1978.
The 1970s were a period of economic, political turmoil and social unrest in Italy. Unemployment rose sharply, especially among the young. By 1977 there were one million unemployed people under age 24. Inflation continued, aggravated by the increases in the price of oil in 1973 and 1979. The budget deficit became permanent and intractable, averaging about 10 percent of the gross domestic product (GDP), higher than any other industrial country. The lira fell steadily, from 560 lira to the U.S. dollar in 1973 to 1,400 lira in 1982. 

The economic recession went on into the mid-1980s until a reduce of public costs and spendings, tighter budgets and deficits, a steady economic growth, and a lowered inflation rate meant that by the recovery plan of 1983, Italy left recession. This plan led to an increasing GDP growth, lower inflation, and increased industrial/agricultural/commercial produce, exports and output, yet made the unemployment rate rise. A decrease in energy prices and lowered value of the dollar led to foreign exchange being liberalised and the economy to re-grow rapidly. 

As a matter of fact, in 1987, Italy had a period when it surpassed the British economy (an event known as il sorpasso), becoming the fifth in the world. On 15 May 1991 Italy became for a while the fourth worldwide economic power, overcoming France, with a GDP of US$1.268 trillion, compared to France's GDP of US$1.209 trillion and Britain's of US$1.087 trillion. Despite this, however, Italy's alleged 1987 GDP growth of a phenomenal 18%, it was shortly re-overtaken by both France and the United Kingdom during the 1990s, when Italy's economic growth was particularly stagnant, with an average of 1.23% compared to an EU average of 2.28%. 

=== Late 2000s recession ===
Gross domestic product (in purchasing power standard) per capita in the European Union regions (% of the EU-27 average, EU-27=100). Eurostat, 2009
A graph showing Italy's GDP growth from 2000 to 2012 (including forecasts for 2013) compared with EU's GDP growth.
Italy was hit hard by the economic crisis of 200711. The national economy shrunk by 6.76% during the whole period, totalizing seven-quarters of recession. http://stats.oecd.org/index.aspx?queryid=350 Quarterly National Accounts: Quarterly Growth Rates of real GDP, OECD. Accessed on 4 September 2010. According to the EU's statistics body Eurostat, Italian public debt stood at 116% of GDP in 2010, ranking as the second biggest debt ratio after Greece (with 126.8%). However, the biggest chunk of Italian public debt is owned by national subjects, and relatively high levels of private savings and low levels of private indebtedness are seen as making it the safest among Europe's struggling economies. 

As a result of austerity measures passed in December 2010, Italy is targeting a public budget deficit of 3.9% in 2011 and 2.7% in 2012, both among the lowest in the European Union. In Autumn 2011, Standard & Poor's and Moody's downgraded Italian sovereign debt rating because of "Italy's weakening economic growth prospects." Italy also has a weak coalition government which would "limit the government's ability to respond decisively" to events. Both rating agencies give a negative outlook on the debt, meaning further downgrades are possible. 

The government had adopted austerity measures on 15 July and 14 September 2011, together meant to save 124 billion euro. Nonetheless, by 8 November 2011 the Italian bond yield was 6.74 percent for 10-year bonds, nearing a 7 percent level where Italy is thought to lose access to financial markets, but it was under 5.0% in February 2012. As a result of austerity measures passed in 2011, Italy is targeting a public budget deficit of 1.5% in 2013.

== Overview ==
GDP per capita big four Western Europe 

In the post-war period, Italy was transformed from an agricultural based economy which had been severely affected by the consequences of World War II, into one of the world's most industrialized nations, and a leading country in world trade and exports. According to the Human Development Index, the country enjoys a very high standard of living, and, according to The Economist, has the world's 8th highest quality of life. The Economist Intelligence Units quality-of-life index, Economist, 2005 

From the last Eurostat data, Italian per capita GDP at purchasing power parity remains approximately equal to the EU average, while the unemployment rate (8.5%) stands as one of the EU's lowest. Ocse, tasso di disoccupazione stabile nell'eurozona Italy owns the world's third-largest gold reserve. The country is also well known for its influential and innovative business economic sector, an industrious and competitive agricultural sector (Italy is the world's largest wine producer ), and for its creative and high-quality automobile, industrial, appliance and fashion design. 

Despite these important achievements, the country's economy today suffers from many and relevant problems. After a strong GDP growth in 19451990, the last two decades's average annual growth rates lagged well below the EU average; moreover, Italy was hit particularly hard by the late-2000s recession. The stagnation in economic growth, and the political efforts to revive it with massive government spending from the 1980s onwards, eventually produced a severe rise in public debt. In addition, Italian living standards have a considerable northsouth divide: the average GDP per capita in Northern and Central Italy significantly exceeds the EU average, whilst some regions and provinces in Southern Italy are dramatically below. Between 2000 and 2006, Italy received 27.4 billion from the European Development Fund for investments in depressed areas of the South. 
Italy is the first net contributor to the European Union. 
A graph which shows the current account balance of Italy (% of GDP) from 1980 to 2012 (IMF data).
More specifically, Italian economy is weakened by the lack of infrastructure development, market reforms and research investment, and also high public deficit. In the Index of Economic Freedom 2011, the country ranked only 87th in the world, in particular due to the high rate of corruption, an excessive state interventionism, and a strong labor law. In addition, the most recent data show that Italy's spending in R&D in 2011 was equal to 1.1% of GDP (12th in the world by expenditures), below the European average of 1.7% and the Lisbon Strategy target of devoting 3% of GDP to research and development activities. 

Italy has a smaller number of global multinational corporations than other economies of comparable size, but there is a large number of small and medium-sized enterprises, as in the Northern "industrial triangle" (Milan-Turin-Genoa), where there is an area of intense industrial and machinery production, notably in their several industrial districts, which are the backbone of the Italian industry. This has produced a manufacturing sector often focused on the export of niche market and luxury products, that on one side is less capable of competing on quantity, but on the other side is more capable of facing the competition from emerging economies based on lower labor costs, with higher quality products. 

The country was the world's seventh-largest exporter in 2009. Italy's major exports and companies by sector are motor vehicles (Fiat, Aprilia, Ducati, Piaggio, Iveco); tyre manufacturing (Pirelli); chemicals and petrochemicals (Eni); energy and electrical engineering (Enel, Edison); home appliances (Candy, Indesit); aerospace and defense technologies (Finmeccanica, Alenia Aeronautica, AgustaWestland, Oto Melara); firearms (Beretta, Benelli); fashion (Armani, Valentino, Versace, Dolce & Gabbana, Roberto Cavalli, Benetton, Prada, Luxottica); food processing (Ferrero, Barilla Group, Martini & Rossi, Campari, Parmalat); sport and luxury vehicles (Ferrari, Maserati, Lamborghini, Pagani); yachts (Ferretti, Azimut). Italy's closest trade ties are with the other countries of the European Union, with whom it conducts about 59% of its total trade. Its largest EU trade partners, in order of market share, are Germany (12.9%), France (11.4%), and Spain (7.4%). 

===NorthSouth divide===
European Regional Development Fund 20072013: Southern Italy is almost all classified under the Convergence objective (GDP per capita less than 75% of the EU average).
Starting with the unification of Italy in 1861, a wide and increasing economic divide has been noticeably growing between the northern provinces and the southern half of the Italian state. In the early decades of the new kingdom, the lack of an effective land reform, heavy taxes and other economic measures imposed on the South, together with the removal of protectionist tariffs on agricultural goods, made the situation virtually impossible for many tenant farmers and land owners. Multitudes chose to emigrate rather than try to eke out a meager living, especially from 1892 to 1921. Dennis Mack Smith (1997). Modern Italy; A Political History. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press. ISBN 978-0-472-10895-4, pp. 209210. 

In addition, the surge of brigandage and the mafia provoked widespread violence, corruption and illegality. After the rise of Benito Mussolini, the "Iron Prefect" Cesare Mori tried to defeat the already powerful criminal organizations flourishing in the South with some degree of success. Fascist policy aimed at the creation of an Italian empire and Southern Italian ports were strategic for all commerce towards the colonies. Naples enjoyed a demographic and economic rebirth, mainly thanks to the interest of King Victor Emmanuel III who was born there. With the invasion of Southern Italy, the Allies restored the lost authority of the mafia families during the Fascist period and used their influence to maintain public order. 

In the 1950s the Cassa per il Mezzogiorno was set up as a huge public master plan to help industrializing the South, aiming to do this in two ways: through land reforms creating 120,000 new smallholdings, and through the "Growth Pole Strategy" whereby 60% of all government investment would go to the South, thus boosting the Southern economy by attracting new capital, stimulating local firms, and providing employment. However, the objectives were largely missed, and as a result the South became increasingly subsidized and state dependent, incapable of generating private growth itself. 

Even at present, huge regional disparities persist. Problems in Southern Italy still include widespread political corruption, pervading organized crime and very high unemployment rates. T. Astarita, Between Salt Water and Holy Water: A History of Southern Italy, 2005 It is estimated that about 80% of the businesses in the Sicilian cities of Catania and Palermo regularly pay protection money. The Confesercenti reported that organized crime generated 140 billion in gross sales, an estimated annual profit of 100 billion, and boasted estimated cash reserves of 65 billion. 

=== Regional economic differences ===
First level NUTS of the European Union in Italy.

+2011 Gross Domestic Product in Italy (2014 data) NUTS-1 region  mil.  per cap. % of the EU average 
 North-Western Italy 511,484 31,700 124 
 North-Eastern Italy 364,560 31,200 122 
 Central Italy 340,669 28,400 111 
 Southern Italy 243,895 17,200 67 
 Insular Italy 117,031 17,400 68 

+2011 Gross Domestic Product in Italy (2014 data) Region  mil.  per cap. NUTS-1 region 
 Abruzzo South 
 Aosta Valley North-West 
 Apulia South 
 Basilicata South 
 Calabria South 
 Campania South 
 Emilia-Romagna North-East 
 Friuli-Venezia Giulia North-East 
 Lazio Centre 
 Liguria North-West 
 Lombardy North-West 
 Marche Centre 
 Molise South 
 Piedmont North-West 
 Sardinia Islands 
 Sicily Islands 
 Tuscany Centre 
 Trentino-South Tyrol North-East 
 Umbria Centre 
 Veneto North-East 

*The regions highlighted in red are autonomous and have special financial privileges.

==Economic sectors==

=== Agriculture ===
Vineyards near Certaldo, Tuscany. Italy is the world's top wine producer (22% of global market). http://www.decanter.com/news/wine-news/529822/italian-wine-now-22-of-global-market 
The northern part of Italy produces primarily maize corn, rice, sugar beets, soybeans, meat, fruits and dairy products, while the South specializes in wheat and citrus fruits. Italy is the first or the second largest producer of wine in the world, and one of the leading in olive oil, fruits (apples, olives, oranges, lemons, pears, apricots, peaches, cherries, strawberries and kiwi), flowers and vegetables.

According to the agriculture census, there were 2.6 million farms in 2000 (down from 3 million in 1990,) covering 19.6 million hectares. The vast majority (94.7%) are family-operated and small, averaging only 5 hectares in size. Of the total surface area in agricultural use (forestry excluded,) grain fields take up 31%, olive tree orchards 8.2%, vineyards 5.4%, citrus orchards 1%, other orchards 3.8%, sugarbeets 1.7%, and horticulture 2.4%. The remainder is primarily dedicated to pastures (25.9%) and feed grains (11.6%.) Livestock includes 6 million head of cattle, 8.6 million head of swine, 6.8 million head of sheep, and 0.9 million head of goats.

The most famous Italian wines are probably the Tuscan Chianti and Pinot grigio. Other famous wines are Barbaresco, Barolo and Barbera (Piedmont), Brunello di Montalcino (Tuscany), Montepulciano d'Abruzzo (Abruzzo) and Nero d'Avola (Sicily). Quality goods in which Italy specialises are often DOC or 'of controlled origin'. This DOC certificate, which is attributed by the European Union, ensures that the origins and work that goes into a product are recognised. This certification is considered important by producers and consumers alike, in order to avoid confusion with low-quality mass-produced ersatz products.

=== Energy and natural resources ===

Wind turbines in Campania

Italy has few natural resources. There are no substantial deposits of iron, coal, or oil. Proven natural gas reserves, mainly in the Po Valley and offshore Adriatic, have grown in recent years and constitute the country's most important mineral resource. Most raw materials needed for manufacturing and more than 80% of the country's energy sources are imported. The energy sector is highly dependent on imports from abroad: in 2006 the country imported more than 86% of its total energy consumption (99.7% of the solid fuels demand, 92.5% of oil, 91.2% of natural gas and 15% of electricity). 

 Italy's Export Treemap by Product (2012) from Harvard Atlas of Economic Complexity

In the last decade, Italy has became one of the world's largest producers of renewable energy, ranking as the world's fifth-largest solar energy producer in 2009 and the sixth largest producer of wind power in 2008. Global installed wind power capacity (MW) Global Wind Energy Council 6.2.2008 

Italy has managed four nuclear reactors until the 1980s, but in 1987, after the Chernobyl disaster, a large majority of Italians passed a referendum opting for phasing out nuclear power. The government responded by closing existing nuclear power plants and stopping work on projects underway, completely putting a halt to the national nuclear program. Currently, the majority of Italian electricity is produced gas, oil, coal, and hydro. Italy also imports about 16% of its electricity need from France for 6.5 GWe, which makes it the world's biggest importer of electricity. Due to its reliance on expensive fossil fuels and imports, Italians pay approximately 45% more than the EU average for electricity. "Emerging Nuclear Energy Countries." Australian Uranium Association. April 2008 

In 2004, a new Energy Law brought the possibility of joint ventures with foreign companies to build nuclear power plants and import electricity. Public opinion on nuclear power was positive, as Italy's younger generations embraced nuclear energy. In 2005, Italy's power company, ENEL made an agreement with Electricite de France for 200 MWe from a nuclear reactor in France and potentially an additional 1,000 MWe from new construction. As part of the agreement, ENEL received a 12.5% stake in the project and direct involvement in design, construction, and operation of the plants. In another move, ENEL also bought 66% of the Slovak Electric utility that operates six nuclear reactors. As part of this agreement, ENEL will pay the Slovak government EUR 1.6 billion to complete a nuclear power plant in Mochovce, which has a gross output of 942 MWe. With these agreements, Italy has managed to access nuclear power without placing reactors on Italian territory. 

===Industry and manufacturing===

=== Transport ===

Rome-Fiumicino Airport in 2013 was the eighth-busiest airport in Europe.

In 2004 the transport sector in Italy generated a turnover of about 119.4 billion euros, employing 935,700 persons in 153,700 enterprises. Regarding to the national road network, in 2002 there were 668,721 km (415,612 mi) of serviceable roads in Italy, including 6,487 km (4,031 mi) of motorways, state-owned but privately operated mainly by Atlantia company. In 2005, about 34,667,000 passenger cars (equal to 590 cars per 1,000 people) and 4,015,000 road good vehicles circulated on the national road network.

The railway network in Italy totalled 16,862 kilometres (2008) of which 69% are electrified and on which 4,937 locomotives and railcars circulate. It is the 15th largest in the world, and is operated by Ferrovie dello Stato. High speed trains include ETR-class trains, with the ETR 500 reaching 300 km/h (190 mph). The rail tracks and infrastructure are managed by Rete Ferroviaria Italiana 

In 1991 Treno Alta Velocit SpA was created for the planning and construction of high-speed rail lines along Italy's most important and saturated transport routes. One of the focuses of the project is to turn the rail network of Italy into a modern high-tech passenger rail system in accordance with updated European rail standards. A secondary purpose is to introduce high-speed rail to the country's high-priority corridors, namely the Milan-Naples and Turin-Milan-Venice lines.

When demand on regular lines is lessened with the opening of dedicated high-speed lines, those regular lines will be used primarily for low-speed regional rail service and freight trains. With these plans realised, the Italian rail network would be integrated with other European rail networks, particularly the French TGV, German ICE, and Spanish AVE systems.In 2005, about 34,667,000 passenger cars (equal to 590 cars per 1,000 people) and 4,015,000 road good vehicles circulated on the national road network.

The national inland waterway network comprised 1,477 km (918 mi) of navigable rivers and channels in 2002. In 2004 there were approximately 30 main airports (including the two hubs of Malpensa International in Milan and Leonardo Da Vinci International in Rome) and 43 major seaports including the seaport of Genoa, the country's largest and the second largest in the Mediterranean Sea after Marseille. In 2005 Italy maintained a civilian air fleet of about 389,000 units and a merchant fleet of 581 ships. 

=== Finance ===

Unicredit Tower in Milan.
Banking in Italy has, as of 11 October 2008, an average assets/liabilities ratio of 12  1, while the banks's short-term liabilities are equal to 86% of the Italian GDP or 43% of the Italian national debt. This is a list of the top 10 Italian banks ranked by market capitalization.

 Rank Company Headquarter Capitalization () 
 1 UniCredit Milan 54.7 billion 
 2 Intesa Sanpaolo Turin 47.7 billion 
 3 Monte dei Paschi di Siena Siena 36.6 billion 
 4 UBI Banca Bergamo 9.8 billion 
 5 Banco Popolare Verona 9.4 billion 
 6 Banca Nazionale del Lavoro Rome 7.5 billion 
 7 Mediobanca Milan 7.0 billion 
 8 Banca Popolare dell'Emilia Romagna Modena 4.6 billion 
 9 Cariparma Parma 4.2 billion 
 10 Banca Popolare di Milano Milan 4.0 billion 

== Labor ==

Following the 2003 "Biagi law", a controversial labour reform, unemployment has been steadily decreasing, reaching 6.2% in 2007, the lowest rate since the 1970s. In the south the average unemployment rate is far higher than the national average, but, in recent years, progress was made nonetheless, with the unemployment rate falling from 23.7% in 1999 to 11.2% in 2007 for Campania, and from 24.5% to 13% for Sicily. There is a significant underground economy, especially in the south where it partially offsets the high official unemployment rate, absorbing substantial numbers of people, working for low wages and without standard social benefits and protections. Italy maintains a good self employment rate at 25.5%. http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/sites/factbook-2011-en/07/01/02/index.html?contentType=&itemId=/content/chapter/factbook-2011-59-en&containerItemId=/content/serial/18147364&accessItemIds=&mimeType=text/h 

Unions claim to represent 40% of the work force. Most Italian unions are grouped in three major confederations: the CGIL, the CISL, and the UIL, which together claim 35% of the work force. These confederations formerly were associated with important political parties (respectively the Italian Communist Party, the Christian Democracy and the Italian Socialist Party), but they have formally terminated such ties. Nowadays, the three often coordinate their positions before confronting management or lobbying the government. The three major confederations have an important consultative role on national social and economic issues.

Among their major agreements are a 4-year wage moderation agreement signed in 1993, a reform of the pension system in 1995, and an employment pact, introducing steps for labor market flexibility in economically depressed areas, in 1996. The CGIL, CISL, and UIL are affiliates of the International Trade Union Confederation. Of the three unions, CGIL is the strongest in numbers. CGIL once single-handedly organized a three-million people rally in Rome. Italy's employers are represented by Confindustria, the Italian Employers' Federation.

The average standard of living in Italy is very high. As noted by Mario B. Mignone:

In the official economy, the Italian worker is well rewarded with high wages, good benefits, and many paid holidays, but he or she cannot escape from the heavy burden of taxes. http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=Tv2R8FfFpREC&pg=PA165&lpg=PA165&dq=Italy+high-wage+economy+1980&source=bl&ots=5BPZW9pzF9&sig=bP_RMe9194vRwHUhu0RiMryxprE&hl=en&sa=X&ei=9jgcUP2SLvKY0QWzpoDIAQ&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q=Italy%20high-wage%20economy%201980&f=false 

== Wealth ==

A quarterly report prepared by the Economist Intelligence Unit on behalf of Barclays Wealth in 2007 estimated that there were 280,000-dollar millionaires in Italy. (page 7) In 2013 in Italy according to CapGemini-RBC there are 176,000 millionaires (first house not included criteria). Italy is ranked 10th in the world with this criteria. http://www.?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&frm=1&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&ved=0CC4QFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.liberoquotidiano.it%2Fnews%2F1264895%2FIn-Italia-ci-sono-176000-milionari-Voi-nel-2012-che-reddito-avete-avuto-in-euro.html&ei=hk9iUtCrM8TftAaHhYHICA&usg=AFQjCNEf4P_eEa4O4yboMGdBE6Pxn64tpg&bvm=bv.54934254,d.bGE The richest man in Italy is Michele Ferrero, who, according to Forbes, has a net worth of US$20.4 billions. Other billionaires include Giorgio Armani, Miuccia Prada, Ennio Doris, the Benetton family, the Agnelli family and Silvio Berlusconi, to name but a few. 
According to the Banca d'Italia the average net wealth per capita in 2013 was above 140,000. In 2013 Italy was ranked 10th in the world by net wealth per capita according to the Credit Suisse Global Wealth Report with $195,925 ($241,383 per adult, 13th). According to Allianz AG Global Wealth Report 2013 the net financial wealth per capita is 45,770 in Italy that is ranked 14th in the world.
Italy represents the 5th largest cumulative net wealth globally (it accounts for 4.92% of the net wealth in the world) according to the Credit Suisse Global Wealth Report 2013. The country has over 1.4 million people with a net wealth greater than $1 million and a national wealth of $11.857 trillions. http://www.?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&frm=1&source=web&cd=7&cad=rja&ved=0CFYQFjAG&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.international-adviser.com%2Fia%2Fmedia%2FMedia%2FCredit-Suisse-Global-Wealth-Databook-2013.pdf&ei=HkViUqzxBsKNtQbmxICoCA&usg=AFQjCNFfgEq184zSw7MfgKv7NxUjB2Lzog&bvm=bv.54934254,d.bGE 

== References ==

== External links ==
* Banca d'Italia (Italy's Central Bank)
* Italian National Institute of Statistic (ISTAT)
* Ministry of Economic Development
* OECD's Italy country web page
* World Bank Trade Summary Statistics Italy 2012
* Ufficio Italiano Brevetti e Marchi (Italian Patents and Trademarks Office)
* Comprehensive current and historical economic data

Italy
Italy


[[Telecommunications in Italy]]

Telephones - main lines in use: CIA World Fact Book 
20.031 million (2008)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 
88.58 million (2008)

Telephone system: 
modern, well-developed, fast; fully automated telephone, telex, and data services
domestic: 
high-capacity cable and microwave radio relay trunks
international: 
satellite earth stations - 3 Intelsat (with a total of 5 antennas - 3 for Atlantic Ocean and 2 for Indian Ocean), 1 Inmarsat (Atlantic Ocean region), and NA Eutelsat; 21 submarine cables.

Radio broadcast stations: 
AM about 100, FM about 4,600, shortwave 9 (1998)

Radios:
50.5 million (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 
358 (plus 4,728 repeaters) (1995)

Televisions:
30.5 million (1997)

Internet Hosts: 
22.152 million (2009)

Internet users: 
24.992 million (2008)

Country code (Top-level domain): .it

== References ==

 
 



[[Transport in Italy]]

Italy within the European Union 
Italy has well developed public and private transportation options. Italian rail network is extensive, especially in the north, generally eclipsing the need for an alternative such as bus or air (both of which, however, exist to some extent). While a number of private railroads exist and provide mostly commuter-type services, the national railway, Ferrovie dello Stato, also provides sophisticated high-speed rail service that joins the major cities of Italy from Naples through northern cities such as Milan and Turin. Italy has 2507 people and 12.46 km2 (World's seventh) per km of rail track. Compare List of countries by rail transport network size. 

Italy's road network is also widespread, with a total length of about 487,700 km. CIA World Factbook 2005 It comprises both an extensive motorway network (6,400 km), mostly toll roads, and national and local roads.

Because of its long seacoast, Italy also has a large number of harbors for the transportation of both goods and passengers. Italy has been a seafaring peninsula dating back to the days of the Etruscans and the Greeks.

== Railways ==
A Frecciarossa high-speed train
New Italo high-speed train of NTV, capable of 360 km/h
A station on the Milan Metro, the largest rapid transit system in Italy

Italian railway system has a length of 19394 km, of which 18071 km standard gauge and 11322 km electrified.
The narrow gauge tracks are: 
* 112 km of gauge (all electrified);
* 1211 km of gauge (of which 153 km electrified)

Most of the Italian rail network is managed and operated by Ferrovie dello Stato, a state owned company. Other railway companies, mostly owned by public entities such as Regions, operate on the Italian network, generally on regional services.

Travelers who will be using the railway often during their stay in Italy might use Rail Passes, some of them can be used also in other European countries. With these passes, options are available for the number of days travelers will be using the pass within a two-month period. There are also saver passes for adults who will always be traveling together during their trip, which can save up to 20% on the passes. Foreign travelers should purchase these passes far enough in advance to allow for shipping to a home address before traveling to Italy. When using these passes dates need to be filled in for the day they are being used before boarding the trains. High speed trains require seat reservations which can be obtained at the ticket offices. Regional trains, however, do not require seat reservations and a properly filled out rail pass will suffice as a ticket. http://www.italiarail.com/rail-passes 

===High speed trains===

High-speed rail in Italy currently consists of two lines connecting all the country's major cities. The first line connects Milan to Salerno via Bologna, Florence, Rome and Naples, the second runs from Turin to Venice via Milan, and is under construction in parts. The network is designed for a top speed of over 300 km/h.

Service is provided by Trenitalia and, since 2012, by NTV, the first private operator of high-speed trains.

===Rapid transit===
Cities with metro systems:

 City Name Lines Length (km) Stations Opening 
 Brescia Brescia Metro 1 13.7 17 2013 
 Catania Catania Metro 1 4 6 1999 
 Genoa Genoa Metro 1 7.1 8 1990 
 Milan Milan Metro 4 92 101 1964 
 Naples Naples Metro Metronapoli lines 2 15.8 19 1993 
 Rome Rome Metro 2 41.5 52 1955 
 Turin Turin Metro 1 13.2 21 2006 

Cities with commuter rail systems:
* Bari (Bari metropolitan railway service)
* Milan (Milan suburban railway service)
* Naples, 5 lines
* Palermo (Palermo metropolitan railway service)
* Rome, 8 lines (FR lines)
* Salerno (Salerno metropolitan railway service)
* Turin (Turin Metropolitan Railway Service)

=== Rail links with adjacent countries ===
The Marseille-Vintimille railway line in Ventimiglia, near the French border

Italy's main railroad passenger carrier, Trenitalia, operates trains linking Italy to France, Switzerland, Austria and Slovenia. Other companies, like Cisalpino (owned by Trenitalia and SBB), Rhtische Bahn and SNCF operate international links.
Vatican City is also linked with a railroad, occasionally used. San Marino used to have a narrow gauge rail connection with Italy, dismantled in 1944. 

===Stations===
Milano Centrale railway station, the second busiest in Italy after Roma Termini

Italy's top ten railway stations by annual passengers are:

 Station passengers per year(million) 
 Bologna Centrale 58 
 Firenze Santa Maria Novella 59 
 Genova Piazza Principe 24 
 Milano Centrale 120 
 Napoli Centrale 50 
 Roma Termini 150 
 Torino Porta Nuova 70 
 Venezia Mestre 31 
 Venezia Santa Lucia 30 
 Verona Porta Nuova 25 

Stations with darker background are also served by High-speed trains

== Roads ==
Autostrade network in Italy
Italian motorways (Autostrade) are identified by green signs
A motorway in Italy

Italy is one of the countries with the most vehicles per capita, with 690 per 1000 people in 2010. See also: List of countries by vehicles per capita Italy has a total of 487,700 km of paved roads, of which 6,700 km are motorways generally with a speed limit of 130 km/h. The speed limit in towns is usually 50 km/h and less commonly 30 km/h.

== Waterways ==
Italy has 2400 km of navigable waterways for various types of commercial traffic, although of limited overall value. 

== Ports and harbours ==
Genoa has one of the busiest seaport in Italy

 List of ports in Italy 
 * Ancona * Arbatax * Augusta * Bari * Brindisi * Cagliari * Catania * Civitavecchia * Genoa * Gioia Tauro * La Spezia * Livorno * Messina * Milazzo * Naples * Olbia * Palermo * Porto Torres * Ravenna * Salerno * Savona * Taranto * Trieste * Venice 

 Busiest ports by cargo tonnage in Italy (2008) Busiest ports by passengers in Italy (2008) 
 Port Region Thousand tons % Taranto Apulia 49,522 9.4 Genoa Liguria 46,469 8.8 Trieste Friuli-Venezia Giulia 37,195 7.1 Gioia Tauro Calabria 31,527 6.0 Ravenna Emilia-Romagna 30,075 5.7 Venice Veneto 29,920 5.7 Livorno Tuscany 28,667 5.4 Augusta Sicily 26,849 5.1 Porto Foxi Sardinia 26,407 5.0 Santa Panagia Sicily 17,305 3.3 La Spezia Liguria 17,014 3.2 Savona-Vado Liguria 16,370 3.1 Milazzo Sicily 15,405 2.9 Olbia Sardinia 12,875 2.4 Brindisi Apulia 10,767 2.0 Other 129,851 24.7 Italy 526,218 100.0 Port Region Thousand pass. % Messina Sicily 10,380 11.5 Reggio di Calabria Calabria 10,116 11.2 Capri Campania 7,169 8.0 Naples Campania 6,185 6.9 Piombino Tuscany 5,036 5.6 Portoferraio Tuscany 3,927 4.4 Olbia Sardinia 3,567 4.0 Livorno Tuscany 3,251 3.6 Civitavecchia Lazio 2,677 3.0 Genoa Liguria 2,510 2.8 La Maddalena Sardinia 2,374 2.6 Palau Sardinia 2,364 2.6 Ischia Porto Campania 2,342 2.6 Palermo Sicily 1,949 2.2 Sorrento Campania 1,887 2.1 Other 24,423 27.1 Italy 90,157 100.0 

== Airports ==

Italy is the fifth in Europe by number of passengers by air transport, with about 148 million passengers or about 10% of the European total in 2011. Most of passengers in Italy are on international flights (57%). A big share of domestic flights connect the major islands (Sardinia and Sicily) to the mainland. Domestic flights between major Italian cities as Rome and Milan still play a relevant role but are declining since the opening of the Italian high-speed rail network in recent years.

Italy has a total as of 130 airports in 2012, of which 99 have paved runways: 
*over 3,047 m: 9
*2,438 to 3,047 m: 31
*1,524 to 2,437 m: 18
*914 to 1,523 m: 29
*under 914 m: 12

Airports - with unpaved runways in 2012: 
*total: 31
*1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
*914 to 1,523 m: 11
*under 914 m: 19

=== Busiest airports===
Rome Fiumicino airport, the busiest in Italy.
This is a list of the top ten busiest airports in Italy in 2009. 

Airport Movements Passengers Freight (tons) 
 disembarked embarked total disembarked embarked total 
 Rome Fiumicino 311,679 16,150,965 16,294,531 32,445,496 64,069 72,001 136,070 
 Milan Malpensa 169,389 7,946,725 7,885,436 15,832,161 159,687 167,382 327,069 
 Milan Linate 92,884 4,160,526 4,130,569 8,291,095 7,972 8,532 16,504 
 Venice Marco Polo 67,160 3,220,072 3,216,922 6,436,994 12,511 13,005 25,516 
 Bologna Guglielmo Marconi 53,022 2,117,111 2,124,922 4,242,033 6,920 8,887 15,807 
 Naples Capodichino 52,367 2,406,886 2,426,418 4,833,304 1,935 1,142 3,077 
 Bergamo Orio al Serio 52,120 3,310,447 3,325,468 6,635,915 4,597 4,951 9,548 
 Catania-Fontanarossa 50,503 2,768,158 2,794,629 5,562,787 5,229 3,204 8,433 
 Palermo Punta Raisi 46,182 2,089,904 2,071,786 4,161,690 1,618 1,656 3,274 
 Turin Caselle 42,649 1,494,395 1,494,981 2,989,376 794 625 1,419 
 Other 333,181 15,470,588 15,507,497 30,978,085 37,396 32,991 70,387 
 Total 1,271,136 61,135,777 61,273,159 122,408,936 302,728 314,376 617,104 

==See also==

* Economy of Italy
* History of Italy
* Renewable energy in Italy
* Tourism in Italy

==References==

==External links==

 

[[Italian Armed Forces]]

The Italian Armed Forces (italian: Forze Armate Italiane) encompass the Italian Army, the Italian Navy and the Italian Air Force. A fourth branch of the armed forces, known as the Carabinieri, take on the role as the nation's military and territorial police force. The President of the Italian Republic heads the armed forces as the President of the Supreme Council of Defence. As of 2012, the total number of active military personnel is 179,155 (army, navy and air force). In addition, there were 109,499 personnel of the Carabinieri and 68,134 personnel of the Guardia di Finanza. Italy currently maintains the tenth highest military budget in the world.

==Italian Constitution==
Article 11 of the Constitution of Italy reads:

Article 52 reads:

And part of article 87 reads:

==The four branches of Italian Armed Forces==

===Esercito Italiano===

It is the Army (ground force) of the Italian Republic. The Army's history dates back to the unification of Italy in the 1850s and 1860s. It fought in colonial engagements in China, Libya (1911-1912), northern Italy against the Austro-Hungarian Empire during World War I, Abyssinia before World War II, and in World War II in Albania, Greece, north Africa, Russia and Italy itself. During the Cold War the Army prepared itself to defend against a Warsaw Pact invasion from the east. Since the end of the Cold War it has seen extensive peacekeeping service and combat in Afghanistan and Iraq. In July 29, 2004 it became a professional all-volunteer force when conscription was finally ended.

===Aeronautica Militare===

It is the air force of Italy, founded as an independent service arm on March 28, 1923, by King Vittorio Emanuele III as the Regia Aeronautica (which equates to "Royal Air Force"). After World War II, when Italy was made a republic by referendum, the Regia Aeronautica was given its current name.

===Marina Militare===

It is the Navy of Italy, created in 1946 as the Navy of the Italian Republic from the Regia Marina. In modern times, the Marina Militare, being a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO), has taken part in many coalition peacekeeping operations. The Guardia Costiera is a component of the Marina Militare.

===Carabinieri===

It is the gendarmerie and military police of Italy. At the Sea Islands Conference of the G8 in 2004, the Carabinieri were given the mandate to establish a Center of Excellence for Stability Police Units (CoESPU) to spearhead the development of training and doctrinal standards for civilian police units attached to international peacekeeping missions. G-8 Action Plan: Expanding global capability for peace support operations. Carabinieri, June 2004. 

==NATO membership and UN missions==
Alpini of the 4th Alpini Parachutist Regiment attached to ISAF.

Italy has joined in many UN and NATO operations as well as with assistance to Russia and the other CIS nations, Middle East peace process, multilateral talks, peacekeeping, and combating the illegal drug trade, human trafficking, piracy and terrorism.

Italy did take part in the 1982 Multinational Force in Lebanon along with US, French and British troops. Italy also participated in the 199091 Gulf War, but solely through the deployment of eight Panavia Tornado IDS bomber jets to Saudi Arabia; Italian Army troops were subsequently deployed to assist Kurdish refugees in northern Iraq following the conflict. 

As part of Operation Enduring Freedom, Italy contributed to the international operation in Afghanistan. Italian forces have contributed to ISAF, the NATO force in Afghanistan, and to the Provincial reconstruction team. Italy has sent 411 troops, based on one infantry company from the 2nd Alpini Regiment tasked to protect the ISAF HQ, one engineer company, one NBC platoon, one logistic unit, as well as liaison and staff elements integrated into the operation chain of command. Italian forces also command a multinational engineer task force and have deployed a platoon of Carabinieri military police.

The Italian Army did not take part in combat operations of the 2003 Iraq War, dispatching troops only when major combat operations were declared over by the U.S. President George W. Bush. Subsequently Italian troops arrived in the late summer of 2003, and began patrolling Nasiriyah and the surrounding area. Italian participation in the military operations in Iraq was concluded by the end of 2006, with full withdrawal of Italian military personnel except for a small group of about 30 soldiers engaged in providing security for the Italian embassy in Baghdad, and about 87 soldiers stationing in bases in the Persian Gulf (but not in Iraqi territory). Italy played a major role in the 2004-2011 NATO Training Mission to assist in the development of Iraqi security forces training structures and institutions.

===Operations===
Current operations of Italian Armed Forces highlighted on a map of Afro-Eurasia.
Since the second post-war the Italian armed force has become more and more engaged in international peace support operations, mainly under the auspices of the United Nations. The Italian armed forces are currently participating in 27 missions. Documento programmatico pluriennale per la Difesa per il triennio 2013-2015. Italian Ministry of Defence, April 2013. 

*
**UNMOGIP, since 1951 (India and Pakistan)
**UNTSO, since 1958 (Israel, Egypt, Syria and Lebanon)
**UNDOF, since 1974 (Golan Heights)
**UNIFIL, since 1978 (Lebanon)
**MINURSO, since 1991 (Western Sahara)
**UNFICYP, since 2005 (Cyprus)
**MINUSTAH, since 2004 (Haiti)
**UNMISS, since 2011 (South Sudan)
*
**EUFOR Althea, since 2004 (Bosnia and Herzegovina)
**EUBAM Rafah, since 2005 (GazaEgypt border)
**EUPOL Afghanistan, since 2007 (Afghanistan)
**EULEX Kosovo, since 2008 (Kosovo)
**EUMM Georgia, since 2008 (Georgia, South Ossetia and Abkhazia)
**EUNAVFOR Atalanta, since 2008 (Gulf of Aden)
**EUTM Somalia, since 2010 (Somalia)
**EUCAP Nestor, since 2012 (Indian Ocean)
**EUCAP Sahel Niger, since 2012 (Niger)
**EUTM Mali, since 2013 (Mali)
*NATO
**KFOR, since 1999 (Kosovo)
**ISAF, since 2001 (Afghanistan)
**Operation Active Endeavour, since 2001 (Mediterranean Sea and the Strait of Gibraltar)
**Operation Ocean Shield, since 2009 (Gulf of Aden)
**NATO Transition Cell  Iraq, since 2012 (Iraq)
*Multilateral missions
**MFO, since 1982 (Israel and Egypt)
**TIPH-2, since 1997 (West Bank)
**Operation Cyrene, since 2011 (Libya)
**MIADIT Somalia, since 2013 (Somalia and Djibouti)

==References==

==External links==
* Official Site of Italian Ministry of Defense
* Official Site of Italian Army
* Official Site of Italian Navy
* Official Site of Italian Air Force
* Official Site of Carabinieri

 



[[Foreign relations of Italy]]

Foreign relations of the Italian Republic are the Italian government's external relations with the outside world. Located in Southern Europe, Italy, since its unification in 1861, has been considered a major European country. Italy is a founding member of the European Union and NATO. Its main allies are France, Greece, the United States, the other NATO countries, and the European Union. Italy also maintains strong relations with Russia and the Northern African countries, especially with its ex-colony Libya, until Italy's intervention in the military intervention against the country in 2011.

As a founding member of both the European Coal and Steel Community (the European Union's predecessor), and the Union for the Mediterranean, Italy is a historic key player in the Mediterranean region, where it is a Regional Power.

==Risorgimento (Unification)==

The stages of Italian unification during 182971
The Risorgimento was the era 18301870 that saw the emergence of a national consciousness. With French help Italians achieved independence from Austria and from the Pope, and secured national unification. Martin Collier, Italian Unification 1820-71 (2003) Taylor, Struggle for Mastery pp 99-125 

The papacy secured French backing to resist unification. Pope Pius IX, fearing that giving up control of the Papal States would weaken the Church and allow the liberals to dominate conservative Catholics. 

===1871-1922===
Italian foreign policy from the late nineteenth century to 1914, was tied in with the Triple Alliance with Germany and the Austro-Hungarian Empire. Italy was especially interested in acquiring colonies in North Africa, and it finally took control of Libya. It also had an interest in East Africa, and made some acquisitions, but was badly defeated when it tried to invade Abyssinia (Ethiopia) in the 1890s. It successfully conquered Ethiopia in the 1930s, in the face of international disapproval. When the first world war broke out in 1914, Italy rejected its alliance with Germany, remain neutral for year, and then obtained secret treaties from the Allies that brought it into the war on their side. Italian military performance in the First World War was humiliating, but Italy demanded its treaty rights in acquisitions from the Austro-Hungarian empire after the war. Denis Mack Smith, Modern Italy: A Political History (1997) 

===Colonialism===
Leaders of the new nation of Italy were enthusiastic about acquiring colonies in Africa, expecting it would legitimize their status as a power and help unify the people. In North Africa Italy first turned to Tunis, under nominal Ottoman control, where many Italian farmers had settled. Weak and diplomatically isolated, Italy was helpless and angered when France assumed a protectorate over Tunis in 1881.

Italy developed its own colonial Empire. Italian colonies were Somalia and Eritrea; an attempt to occupy Ethiopia failed in the First ItaloEthiopian War of 18951896. Italy was massively defeated at the Battle of Adwa in 1896. Public opinion was angered at the national humiliation by an inept government. In 1911 the Italian people supported the seizure of what is now Libya. Giuseppe Maria Finaldi, Italian National Identity in the Scramble for Africa: Italy's African Wars in the Era of Nation-Building, 1870-1900 (2010) 

Italian diplomacy succeeded in getting permission to seize Libya, with approval coming from Germany, France, Austria, Briatain and Russia. A centerpiece of the Italo-Turkish War of 191112, came when Italian forces took control of a few coastal cities against stiff resistance by Ottoman troops as well as the local tribesmen. After the peace treaty gave Italy control it sent in Italian settlers, but suffered extensive casualties in its brutal campaign against the tribes. In 1911, Giovanni Giolitti's government sent forces to occupy Libya and declared war on the Ottoman Empire which held Libya. Italy soon conquered and annexed Tripoli and the Dodecanese Islands. Nationalists advocated Italy's domination of the Mediterranean Sea by occupying Greece as well as the Adriatic coastal region of Dalmatia. Richard Bosworth, Italy: The Least of the Great Powers: Italian Foreign Policy Before the First World War (1979) William C. Askew, Europe and Italy's Acquisition of Libya, 1911-1912 (1942) online 

===Fascism and war: 1922-45===
Benito Mussolini tried to develop an independent foreign-policy in the 1930s, but he alienated Britain and France with his invasion of Ethiopia, and became an informal partner of Nazi Germany with his support of the anti-Communist position in the Spanish Civil War, 1936-1939. Italy's joining the Axis partnership with Germany and Japan did not require it to go to war, but as France collapsed in 1940 it entered the Second World War and gained a slice of French territory. Its wartime performance in the Balkans was poor, and required assistance from Germany. Its performance against the British in North Africa was dismal, and despite large-scale German help, its army was forced to surrender in 1943. Italy was too poorly organized, and militarily too weak to play a major role in the Second World War, and when the British, the Americans, and their Allies invaded Sicily and southern Italy in 1943. Mussolini's failures became obvious and he was overthrown. Germany, however, seized the peninsula, rescued Mussolini from prison, and set him up in a puppet regime that fought alongside the Germans against the Allies. Stephen Corrado Azzi, "The Historiography of Fascist Foreign Policy," Historical Journal (1993) 36#1 pp. 187-203 in JSTOR 

===Postwar===
As the war ended, the Italian economy was in ruins but it was treated as a partner of the Allies. Italy received major financial assistance from the United States through the Marshall Plan (194851). The US also provided financial and political support that kept the large communist element at bay in Italian politics. Italy promoted European unity, joined NATO, and became an active member of the European Union. Sara Lorenzini, "The roots of a 'statesman': De Gasperi's foreign policy," Modern Italy (2009) 14#4 pp 473-484. 

In the 21st century, its economic performance has been sluggish, and the main foreign-policy issue concerns the large scale arrival of illegal immigrants from Africa and the Middle East. Elisabetta Brighi, "Europe, the USA and the 'policy of the pendulum': the importance of foreign policy paradigms in the foreign policy of Italy (1989-2005)," Journal of Southern Europe and the Balkans (2007) 9#2 pp 99-115 

==Relations by region and country==

===Europe===

 Country Formal Relations Began Notes 
 Albania 1912 See AlbaniaItaly relations The Kingdom of Italy supported Albanian Declaration of Independence in 1912.Arbresh peopleItalian protectorate over AlbaniaItalian invasion of AlbaniaAlbanian Kingdom (19391943)Italian colonists in Albania * Albania has an embassy in Rome and a Consulate General in Bari and Milan. * Italy has an embassy in Tirana and Consulates in Gjirokastr, Shkodra, Vlora. 
 Andorra Italy is represented in Andorra through its embassy in Madrid (Spain) and an honorary consulate in Andorra La Vella. 
 Austria See AustriaItaly relations Austria has an embassy in Rome, a general consulate in Milan and 10 honorary consulates (in Bari, Bologna, Florence, Genoa, Naples, Palermo, Trieste, Turin, Venice and Verona). Italy has an embassy in Vienna, a consulate in Innsbruck, and 5 honorary consulates (in Graz, Klagenfurt, Linz, Rankweil and Salzburg). 
 Belarus * Belarus has an embassy in Rome and 2 honorary consulates (in Naples and Turin). Belarussian embassy in Rome (in Italian and Russian only) * Italy has an embassy in Minsk. Italian embassy in Minsk (in Italian and Russian only) 
 Belgium * Belgium has an embassy in Rome and a general consulate in Milan. Belgian embassy in Rome (in Dutch, French and Italian only) * Italy has an embassy in Brussels, 2 general consulates (in Charleroi and Lige) and 2 consulates (in Genk and Mons). Italian embassy in Brussels Italian general consulate in Charleroi Italian general consulate in Lige (in French and Italian only) Italian consulate in Genk (in Dutch and Italian only) Italian consulate in Mons (in French and Italian only) * Both countries are full members of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, of the European Union and of NATO. * There are around 172,000 people of Italian descent living in Belgium. 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina * Italy has an embassy in Sarajevo and an honorary consulate in Banja Luka. 
 Bulgaria 1879 See BulgariaItaly relations * Bulgaria has an embassy in Rome, a general consulate in Milan and 6 honorary consulates (in Ancona, Florence, Genoa, Naples, Turin and Treviso). Bulgarian general consulate in Milan * Italy has an embassy in Sofia and an honorary consulate in Plovdiv and Stara Zagora. Bulgarian embassy in Rome Italian embassy in Sofia. 
 Croatia 1992-01-17 See CroatiaItaly relations * Croatia has an embassy in Rome, 2 general consulates (in Milan and Trieste), and 5 honorary consulates (in Bari, Florence, Montemitro, Naples, and Padua). * Italy has an embassy in Zagreb, a general consulate in Rijeka, a consulate in Split and 2 honorary consulates (in Buje and Pula). * Both countries are full members of the Council of Europe and of the Union for the Mediterranean. * There are around 19,500 people of Italian descent living in Croatia. * There are 21,360 Croats living in Italy. 
 Cyprus * Cyprus has an embassy in Rome and 5 honorary consulates (in Genova, Milano, Napoli, Perugia and Augusta). * Italy has an embassy in Nicosia and 2 honorary consulates (in Limassol and Larnaca). Italian embassy in Nicosia * Both countries are full members of the European Union, the Council of Europe and of the Union for the Mediterranean. * There are long cultural and historical ties between the two countries, as Cyprus has been part of the Roman Empire and has been a Venetian Kingdom, while there are Greek-speaking minorities in Italy. * Cyprus recognises Latins, the descendants of the Roman Catholic Venetian families that were settled in the island, as a protected minority, and grants the representation in the Parliament. * Cyprus Foreign Affairs: List of bilateral treaties with Italy 
 Czech Republic * The Czech Republic has an embassy in Rome, a general consulate in Milan, and 5 honorary consulate (in Florence, Naples, Palermo, Udine, and Venice). Czech embassy in Rome Czech general consulate in Milan * Italy has an embassy in Prague. Italian embassy in Prague * Both countries are full members of NATO and of the European Union. 
 Denmark See Denmark-Italy relations * Denmark has an embassy in Rome and 16 consulates (in Ancona, Bari, Cagliari, Florence, Genoa, La Spezia, Livorno, Messina, Milan, Naples, Palermo, Sanremo, Taormina, Torino, Trieste and Venezia). * Italy has an embassy in Copenhagen, and two honorary vice-consulates in Aalborg and Thorshavn. 
 Estonia * Italy recognised Estonia on 26 January 1921 . Italy re-recognised Estonia on 27 August 1991. * Estonia has an embassy in Rome and six honorary consulates (in Cagliari, Florence, Genoa, Milan, Naples and Turin). Estonian embassy in Rome * Italy has an embassy in Tallinn. Italian embassy in Tallinn * Both countries are full members of NATO and of the European Union. * Estonian Ministry of Foreign Affairs about the relation with Italy 
 Finland See Foreign relations of Finland * Italy recognised Finland's independence on June 27, 1919. * Italy is represented in Finland through its embassy in Helsinki and its honorary consulates in Hanko, Jyvskyl, Kotka, Kuopio, Oulu, Pori, Rovaniemi, Tampere, Turku and Vaasa. Italian Embassy in Helsinki * Finland has an embassy in Rome, two honorary consulate generals in Milan and Turin and other honorary consulates in Genoa, Bari, Cagliari, Catania, Florence, Livorno, Messina, Naples, Palermo, Rimini, Trieste and Venice. Finnish Embassy in Rome * Finnish Ministry for Foreign Affairs: relations with Italy 
 France See FranceItaly relations *Italy has embassy in Paris and consulates in Bordeaux, Lyon, Lourdes, Marseille, Metz, Nice, Toulon, Toulouse, Saint-Denis, Runion, Fort-de-France (Martinique), Kourou (French Guiana), Pointe--Pitre (Guadeloupe), Noumea (New Caledonia). 
 Germany See GermanyItaly relations * Relations were established after the Unification of Italy. * Both countries enjoy friendly relations and were members of the Axis during World War II, formed an alliance during the Cold War (West Germany), and are full members of the European Union. * Italy also has embassies in the following cities, Berlin, Frankfurt, Freiburg, Hamburg, Hanover, Munich, Nuremberg, Saarbrcken, and Stuttgart. * Germany has embassies in Rome, Milan and Naples. 
 Greece 1861 See GreeceItaly relations In modern times, both countries established diplomatic relations in 1861, immediately upon Italys unification. * Relations are excellent, due to the shared heritage and common interests of both countries. More than two millennia of shared heritage and Greco-Italian relations strengthened the bonds between the two countries. * Italy has an embassy in Athens, and 15 honorary consulates in Alexandroupoli, Kefalonia, Chania, Chios, Corfu, Corinth, Ioannina, Heraklion, Kavala, Larissa, Patras, Rhodes, Thessaloniki, Santorini, and Volos. * Greece has an embassy in Rome, 2 general consulates in Milan and Naples, a consulate in Venice, and 11 honorary consulates in Trieste (General), Turin (General), Ancona, Catania, Livorno, Bari, Bologna, Brindisi, Florence, Palermo, Perugia, and a Port Consulate in Genova. * Both countries are full members of the Council of Europe, of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and of the European Union and NATO. * There are around 180,000 Greek Orthodox or people of Greek descent living in Italy, of which the majority lives in southern Italy and Sicily. * An approximation of 200,000 Roman Catholic Italians or people of Italian descent are living in Greece with the majority of them in the Ionian Islands, western Greece and the capital Athens. 
 Holy See See Holy See  Italy relations Due to the size of the Vatican City State, embassies accredited to the Holy See are based on Italian territory. Treaties signed between Italy and the Vatican City State permit such embassages. The Embassy of Italy to the Holy See is unique amongst foreign embassages in that it is the only embassy based on its home territory. The Holy See maintains formal diplomatic relations with 176 sovereign states, the European Union, and the Order of Malta; 69 of the diplomatic missions accredited to the Holy See are situated in Rome, though those countries than have two embassies in the same city, since, by agreement between the Holy See and Italy, the same person cannot be accredited simultaneously to both. This is shown clearly by the fact that Italy recognizes the People's Republic of China, and as such, the Chinese Embassy is in Rome. However, the Vatican City State recognizes the Taiwan, and as such, Taiwan's Embassy to the Holy See is also in Rome. As Italy was the first country to recognize the Holy See as a sovereign nation, their embassy was the first one established. 
 Hungary * Hungary has an embassy in Rome, a general consulate in Milan, and 11 honorary consulates (in Bari, Bologna, Florence, Genoa, Naples, Palermo, Perugia, Trieste, Turin, Venice and Verona). Hungarian embassy in Rome (in Hungarian and Italian only) Hungarian general consulate in Milan (in Hungarian and Italian only) * Italy has an embassy in Budapest and 3 honorary consulates (in Nyregyhza, Pcs and Szeged). Italian embassy in Budapest (in Hungarian and Italian only) * Both countries are full members of NATO and of the European Union. 
 Iceland * Iceland is represented in Italy through its embassy in Paris. Icelandic embassy in Paris (also accredited to Italy) * Italy is represented in Iceland through its embassy in Oslo (Norway) and an honorary consulate in Reykjavk. Italian embassy in Oslo (also accredited to Iceland) * Both countries are full members of the Council of Europe, of NATO and of Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 
 Ireland * Ireland has an embassy in Rome and an honorary consulate in Milan. * Italy has an embassy in Dublin. and an honorary consulate in Galway. * Both countries are full members of the European Union and the Council of Europe. 
 Kosovo See ItalianKosovan relations Italy recognized Kosovo on 21 February 2008. Italy has an embassy in Pristina since 15 May 2008. \"Italy appoints Ambassador to Kosovo\" newkosovareport.com 16 May 2008 Link accessed 15/05/08 Kosovo will open an embassy in Rome. 
 Latvia 1991-08-30 * Italy never officially recognised the annexation of the Baltic states by the USSR. * Both countries renewed their diplomatic relations on August 30, 1991. * Since 1992, Italy has an embassy in Riga. Italian embassy in Riga * Latvia has an embassy in Rome and 7 honorary consulates (in Bari, Florence, Milan, Modena, Naples, Palermo and Trieste). Both countries are full members of NATO and of the European Union. Latvian embassy in Rome * Latvian Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with Italy 
 Liechtenstein * Italy is represented in Liechtenstein through its embassy in Bern (Switzerland) 
 Lithuania * Italy has an embassy in Vilnius. Italian embassy in Vilnius * Lithuania has an embassy in Rome and 6 honorary consulates (in Bari, Cagliari, Genoa, Milan, Turin and Venice). Lithuanian embassy in Rome * Both countries are full members of NATO and of the European Union. * Lithuanian Ministry o Foreign Affairs: list of bilateral treaties with Italy (in Lithuanian only) 
 Luxembourg 1902 * Italy has an embassy in Luxembourg City. Italian embassy in Luxembourg City (in French and Italian only) * Luxembourg has an embassy in Rome and 9 honorary consulates (in Florence, Genoa, Milan, Naples, Palermo, Perugia, Riccione, Turin, and Venice). Luxembourg embassy in Rome (in Italian only) * Both countries are full members of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, of the European Union and of NATO. * There are around 19,000 people of Italian descent living in Luxembourg. 
 Malta See ItalyMalta relations * Both countries established official diplomatic relations soon after Malta's independence. * Italy has an embassy in Valletta. * Malta has an embassy in Rome and 18 honorary consulates (in Bari, Bologna, Brescia, Cagliari, Catania, Genoa, L'Aquila, Livorno, Milan, Naples, Palermo, Perugia, Reggio Calabria, Savona, Syracuse, Turin, Trieste, and Venice). * Both countries are full members of the European Union and of the Union for the Mediterranean. 
 Moldova * Italy opened an Embassy in Chiinu. The actual Italian ambassador to Moldova with residence in Bucharest is Daniele Mancini. * Embassy of the Republic of Moldova in Rome * Italian Embassy in Bucharest * Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Moldova * Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
 Monaco See Italy-Monaco relations * Italy has an embassy in Monaco. * Monaco has a consulate in Ventimiglia. 
 Montenegro 2006-06-14 * Italy recognized Montenegros independence on June 14, 2006. * Montenegro has an embassy in Rome. * Both countries are full members of the Union for the Mediterranean and of Council of Europe. * Italian embassy in Podgorica 
 Netherlands * The Netherlands have an embassy in Rome, a general consulate in Milan, and 14 honorary consulates (in Ancona, Bari, Bologna, Cagliari, Catania, Florence, Genoa, Livorno, Naples, Palermo, Trieste, Turin, Venice and Verona). Dutch representations in Italy Dutch embassy in Rome (in Dutch and Italian only) Dutch general consulate in Milan(in Dutch and Italian only) * Italy has an embassy in The Hague, a general consulate in Amsterdam and an honorary consulate in Willemstad (island of Curaao). Italian embassy in The Hague (in Dutch and Italian only) Italian general consulate in Amsterdam (in Dutch and Italian only) * Both countries are full members of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, of the European Union and of NATO. * Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs about the relation with Italy (in Dutch only) 
 Norway * Italy has an embassy in Oslo and consulates in Aalesund, Bergen, Stavanger, Tromsoe and Trondheim 
 Poland 1919 See ItalyPoland relations * In 1918, Italy was the first country in Europe to recognise Polands sovereignty. * Italy has an embassy in Warsaw and 2 honorary consulates (in Gdynia and Krakw). Italian embassy in Warsaw * Poland has an embassy in Rome and 2 general consulates (in Catania and Milan). Poland embassy in Rome * Both countries are full members of the Council of Europe, of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, of NATO and of the European Union. * There are around 50,000 Poles living in Italy. * Both of the countries' largest religion is Roman Catholicism. 
 Republic of Macedonia 1991 * Italy has an embassy in Skopje 
 Portugal Italy has an embassy in Lisbon and consulates in Faro, Funchal and Oporto 
 Romania 1873-04-23 * Italy has an embassy in Bucharest, a general consulate in Timioara, and 4 honorary consulates (in Cluj-Napoca, Constana, Craiova and Piatra Neam). Italian embassy in Bucharest * Romania has an embassy in Rome, a general consulate in Milan and 3 honorary consulate (in Florence, Genoa and Treviso). Romanian embassy in Rome (in Italian and Romanian only) * Romanian general consulate in Milan * Both countries are full members of the Latin Union, of NATO and of the European Union. * There are around 750,000 to 1,000,000 people of Romanian descent living in Italy. * See also Italians of Romanian descent 
 Russia See ItalyRussia relations Russia has an embassy in Rome and consulates in Genoa, Milan and Palermo, and Italy has an embassy in Moscow, a consulate in Saint Petersburg, two consulte generals (in Ekaterinburg and Kaliningrad), and two embassy branches in (Samara and Volgograd). Both countries are full members of the Council of Europe and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe. Russia enjoys close relations with Italy. In 2006, Russia and Italy have signed a protocol of cooperation for fighting crime and defending civil liberties. There are close commercial ties between the two countries. Italy is Russia's second important commercial partner in the EU, after Germany. and its state-owned energy company, ENI, has recently signed a very important long-term contract with Gazprom, to import Russian gas into Italy. The relationship between Russia and Italy goes back a long way. Already in the 1960s, Italy's FIAT built a car-assembling plant in the Soviet city of Tolyatti (a city named after the Italian Communist Party's secretary Palmiro Togliatti). Russians have always visited Italy in great numbers. Many Russian students come to Italy each year to study arts and music. Unlike many other Western European countries, Italy has traditionally always maintained good relationships with Russia, even during the Soviet era. In particular, the Silvio Berlusconi Government (20012006) strengthened Italy's ties with Russia, due to his personal friendship with President Vladimir Putin. Cooperation extends also to the aviation sector, between Italy's Alenia and Russia's Sukhoi, who are jointly developing a new aircraft. Finally, for a long time Italy had the largest communist party in the Western world, with over 2 million members. . Italy, Russia sign 'protocol of cooperation' - Pravda.Ru 
 San Marino * Italy has an embassy in San Marino 
 Serbia 1879 * Italy has an embassy in Belgrade. Italian embassy in Belgrade (in Italian and Serbian only) * Serbia has an embassy in Rome and 2 general consulates (in Milan and Trieste). * There are around 55,000 people of Serbian descent living in Italy. * Serbian Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with Italy 
 Slovakia * Italy has an embassy in Bratislava 
 Slovenia * Italy has an embassy in Ljubljana and a consulate in Koper. 
 Spain See ItalySpain relations Both countries established diplomatic relations after the unification of Italy. Relations between Italy Spain have remained strong and affable for centuries owing to various political, cultural, and historical connections between the two nations. 
 Sweden * Italy has an embassy in Stockholm and consulates in Gteborg, Karlstag, Lule, Malm, Sundsvall and Ume. 
 Switzerland See Switzerland  Italy relations 
 Ukraine 1992 * Italy has an embassy in Kiev. Italian embassy in Kiev (in Italian and Ukrainian only) * Ukraine has an embassy in Rome, a general consulate in Milan and 4 honorary consulates (in Bari, Florence, Naples, and Treviso). Ukrainian embassy in Rome (in Italian and Ukrainian only) * Both countries are full members of the Council of Europe. There are around 120,000 people of Ukrainian descent living in Italy. 
 United Kingdom See Italy  United Kingdom relations Although enemies during World War II, the United Kingdom and Italy have generally enjoyed a warm and friendly relationship throughout history. Both states embrace membership of the European Union, NATO, OSCE and the G8 Embassy of Italy in London: Political Cooperation Between 4 and 5 million British tourists visit Italy every year, while 1 million Italian tourists visit the UK. Italy Country Profile, Foreign and Commonwealth Office There are about 19,000 British nationals living in Italy, and 150,000 Italians living in the UK. Bilateral Relations British Embassy, Italy 

===Americas===

 Country Formal Relations Began Notes 
 Argentina 1837 See List of diplomatic missions of Argentina 
 Canada 1929 * Canada has an embassy in Rome, and 2 consulates (in Naples and Padova). Canadian embassy in Rome * Italy has an embassy in Ottawa, 3 consulates-general (in Montreal, Toronto and Vancouver). Italian embassy in Ottawa Italian general consulates in Toronto Italian general consulates in Vancouver * Both countries are full members of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, the G8, and NATO. There are around 1,500,000 people of Italian descent living in Canada. * Canadian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Trade about the relation with Italy 
 Chile 1864 See ChileItaly relations 
 Colombia 1847 *Colombia has an embassy in Rome and a consulate-general in Milan. http://italia.embajada.gov.co/en *Italy has an embassy, with a military attach, in Bogot and three honorary consulates in Barranquilla, Cali, and Cartagena. http://www.ambbogota.esteri.it/Ambasciata_Bogota http://www.ambbogota.esteri.it/Ambasciata_Bogota/Menu/Ambasciata/La_rete_consolare/ 
 Mexico 1874 See ItalyMexico relations * Relations were established in 1874 after the unification of Italy. Diplomatic relations were severed during World War II when Mexico declared war on the axis powers. Relations were re-established in 1946. * Mexico has an embassy in Rome and a consulate-general in Milan. * Italy has an embassy in Mexico City. * Both countries are members of the Latin Union, OECD and the G20. * There are an estimated 300,000 Mexicans of Italian descent living in Mexico today. 
 Paraguay 1867 * Italy has an embassy in Asuncion. Italian embassy in Asuncion * Paraguay has an embassy in Rome. Paraguay embassy in Rome (in Spanish only) * Both countries are full members of the Latin Union. 
 Peru 1874-12-23 * Italy and Peru have a long and very rich history of cultural and political connections. * Italy has an embassy in Lima and 5 honorary consulates (in Arequipa, Cusco, Iquitos, Tacna and Trujillo). Italian embassy in Lima (in Italian and Spanish only) * Peru has an embassy in Rome, 6 general consulates (in Florence, Genoa, Milan, Naples, Trieste and Turin). Peruvian embassy in Rome (in Italian and Spanish only) Peruvian general consulate in Milan (in Italian and Spanish only) Peruvian general consulate in Milan (in Italian and Spanish only) * Both countries are full members of the Latin Union. * There are between 500,000 and 900,000 people of Italian descent living in Peru. * Peruvian Ministry of Foreign Relations about the relation with Italy (in Spanish only) 
 United States 186104-11 See ItalyUnited States relations The United States enjoy a peculiar relation with Italy, as the latter, defeated in WWII, has been a secret battlefield of the Cold War. Italy and the US are NATO allies and cooperate in the United Nations, in various regional organizations, and bilaterally. Italy has worked closely with the United States and with other nations on such issues as NATO and UN operations as well as with assistance to Russia and the New Independent States; the Middle East peace process; multilateral talks. Under longstanding bilateral agreements flowing from NATO membership, Italy hosts important U.S. military forces at Vicenza and Livorno (army); Aviano (air force); and Sigonella, Gaeta, and Naples- home port for the U.S. Navy Sixth Fleet. The United States still has about 16,000 military personnel stationed in Italy. The NATO War College is situated at Cecchignola, near Rome. Also, investigations continue about the killing of Italian Military Intelligence service officer Nicola Calipari by United States troops during the liberation of Giuliana Sgrena and about the abduction and torture of terrorism suspect Abu Omar by CIA agents. 
 Uruguay 1861 * Italy has an embassy in Montevideo and 4 honorary consulates (in Colonia, Maldonado, Melo and Paysand). Italian embassy in Montevideo (in Italian and Spanish only) * Uruguay has an embassy in Rome, a general consulate in Milan and 4 honorary consulates (in Bologna, Genoa, Livorno and Venice). * Both countries are full members of the Latin Union. * There are around 1,500,000 people of Italian descent living in Uruguay. 

===Asia and Africa===

 Country Formal Relations Began Notes 
 Egypt See EgyptItaly relations Relations between both countries were established during the period of the Roman Empire. However in World War II, relations were strained as Italy invaded Egypt. However after the war, relations were re-established and are close. Egypt has representations in Rome and Milan, while Italy has representations in Cairo and Alexandria, also the two nations are members of the Union for the Mediterranean. 
 Iran See IranItaly relations Iran-Italy trade stood at $US 2.7 Billion in 2001 and 3.852 Billion Euros in 2003. In 2005, Italy was the third largest trading partner of Iran with 7.5% of all exports to Iran. Italy was the top trading partner of Iran in the European Union in early 2006. Italy remains top trading partner of Iran in EU Commercial exchanges hit 6 billion euros in 2008. Iran-daily.com Although Italy harbors a large population of members of the MKO as do many European Union states, Italy officially considers the group a terrorist organization. 
 Iraq See IraqItaly relations Iraq has an embassy in Rome and Italy has an embassy in Baghdad and a consulate-general in Basra. 
 Israel 1948 See IsraelItaly relations * Italy has an embassy in Tel Aviv, two general consulates in West Jerusalem and East Jerusalem Italian general consulates in West Jerusalem and East Jerusalem and 4 honorary consulates (in Beersheba, Eilat, Haifa and Nazareth). Italian embassy in Tel Aviv * Israel has an embassy in Rome. Israeli embassy in Rome (in Italian only) * Both countries are full members of the Union for the Mediterranean. * See also Italian Jews 
 Kenya 1963 * Relations were formally established after Kenya gained its independence from British rule. * Italy has an embassy in Nairobi and 2 counsulates in Malindi and Mombasa. * Kenya has an embassy in Rome. 
 Lebanon See ItalyLebanon relations * Both countries are members of the Union for the Mediterranean. * Lebanon opened an legation in 1946, which was transformed into an embassy in 1955. Lebanese Embassy in Italy * Both countries signed a Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and Navigation in 1949. * Rome supported the reconstruction of Lebanon after the Taef Agreement. * See also Italian Lebanese 
 Libya 1947, 2011 See ItalyLibya relations * Between 1911 and 1947, Libya was an Italian colony. * Italy has an embassy in Tripoli and a general consulate in Benghazi (closed since 2006). Italian embassy in Tripoli * Libya has an embassy in Rome and 2 general consulates (in Milan and Palermo). * See also History of Libya as Italian Colony, ItalyLibya relations * On 4 April 2011, Foreign Minister Franco Frattini stated that Italy has decided to recognize the National Transitional Council in the eastern Libyan city of Benghazi as its \"only legitimate interlocutor\" in Libya. 
 Somalia See ItalySomalia relations * Relations date from the period of the Roman Empire, centuries before the establishment of Italian Somaliland. * Italy recognizes and supports the Federal Government of Somalia. * Somalia has an embassy in Rome. * Italy is scheduled to re-open its embassy in Mogadishu. 
 South Africa 1929 * Italy has an embassy in Pretoria, a consulate in Johannesburg, 2 consulates (in Cape Town and Durban) and 2 honorary consulates (in East London and Port Elizabeth). Italian embassy in Pretoria Italian consulate in Cape Town * South Africa has an embassy in Rome, a general consulate in Milan and 7 honorary consulates (in Bari, Bologna, Florence, Genoa, Naples, Trieste and Venice). South African embassy in Rome * There are around 35,000 people of Italian descent living in South Africa. * South African Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with Italy 
 Tunisia 1957 * Italy has an embassy in Tunis and 3 honorary consulates (in Bizerte, Sfax and Sousse). Italian embassy in Tunis (in French and Italian only) * Tunisia has an embassy in Rome, a general consulate in Palermo, 3 consulates (in Genoa, Milan and Naples) and 2 honorary consulates (in Bari and Novara). * Both countries are full members of the Union for the Mediterranean. * There was an important Italian community living in Tunisia before the independence. * Tunisian Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with Italy (in French only) 
 Turkey 1856 * Italy has an embassy in Ankara, a general consulate in Istanbul, a consulate zmir and 3 honorary consulates in Bursa, Antalya and skenderun. Italian embassy in Ankara * Turkey has an embassy in Rome and a general consulate in Milan. Turkish embassy in Rome * Both countries are full members of NATO and the Union for the Mediterranean. * In 2006, Turkey and Italy celebrated the 150th anniversary of the initiation of diplomatic relations. * Turkey is a prime destination for Italian tourists * Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with Italy 

===Asia and Oceania===

 Country Formal Relations Began Notes 
 Afghanistan ~1919 * Afghanistan has an embassy in Rome, Embassy of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan in Italy which was established as a legation in 1921, and was upgraded to embassy in 1960. Embassy history, Embassy of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan in Italy Italy has an embassy in Kabul. Embassy of Italy in Kabul *Italy was among the first nations to recognise Afghanistan's sovereignty, following the 1919 recognition by the Soviet Union. Amin Saikal, Ravan Farhadi, Kirill Nourzhanov. Modern Afghanistan: a history of struggle and survival. I.B.Tauris, 2006. ISBN 1-84511-316-0, ISBN 978-1-84511-316-2. Pg 64 *Following Germany's 1935 closening with Afghanistan, Italy also established close relations. Afghanistan resisted calls from Moscow and London to expel the Italian and German diplomatic corps for most of World War II. Tom Lansford. A bitter harvest: US foreign policy and Afghanistan. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd., 2003 ISBN 0-7546-3615-1, ISBN 978-0-7546-3615-1. Pg 2 *Italy has served as a place of exile for two former Afghan kings, Amanullah Khan (deposed 1929) and Mohammed Zahir Shah (deposed 1973). 
 Armenia * Armenia has an embassy in Rome. Armenian embassy in Rome * Italy has an embassy in Yerevan and an honorary consulate in Gyumri. Italian embassy in Yerevan * Italy has recognized the Armenian Genocide in 2000. * There are around 2,500 people of Armenian descent living in Italy. 
 Australia See AustraliaItaly relations * Australia has an embassy in Rome and a general consulate in Milan. Australian embassy in Rome * Italy has an embassy in Canberra, 2 general consulates (in Melbourne and Sydney) and 3 consulates (in Adelaide, Brisbane and Perth). Italian embassy in Canberra Italian general consulate in Sydney Italian general consulate in Perth * There are around 850,000 people of Italian descent living in Australia (see Italian Australian) * Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade about the relation with Italy 
 Azerbaijan See AzerbaijanItaly relations * Azerbaijan has an embassy in Rome. Azerbaijani embassy in Italy * Italy has an embassy in Baku. Italian embassy in Azerbaijan 
 Georgia See GeorgiaItaly relations * Georgia has an embassy in Rome. Georgian embassy in Rome * Italy has an embassy in Tbilissi. Italian embassy in Tbilissi *Georgian Ministry of Foreign Affairs about the relation with Italy 
 India See Foreign relations of India#Italy 
 Indonesia 1952 See IndonesiaItaly relations * Both nations have shown strong desire to improve their relations, especially in intercultural understanding and trade. * Indonesia recognizes Italy's strategic location and important role in the middle of Mediterranean region, while Italy has favoured relations with Indonesia, and sees Indonesia as the leader in Southeast Asia. * The relations between two countries not only important to bridge the two regional communities; European Union and ASEAN, but also vital as intercultural and interfaith dialog. * Indonesia has an embassy in Rome, that also accredited to Malta, Cyprus, San Marino, while Italy has an embassy in Jakarta. 
 Japan 1866 * Both countries allied with Germany during World War Two, and also allied during the Cold War with the United States. * Italy has an embassy in Tokyo, a general consulate in Osaka and 3 honorary consulates (in Hiroshima, Nagoya and Okinawa). Italian embassy in Tokyo (in Italian and Japanese only) Italian general consulate in Osaka * Japan has an embassy in Rome, a general consulate in Milan. Japanese embassy in Rome (in Italian and Japanese only) Japanese general consulate in Milan (in Italian and Japanese only) * Japanese Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with Italy 
 Malaysia See ItalyMalaysia relations * Italy has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur. * Malaysia has an embassy in Rome. 
 New Zealand * Italy has an embassy in Wellington and 3 honorary consulates (in Auckland, Christchurch and Dunedin). Italian embassy in Wellington * New Zealand has an embassy in Rome. New Zealand embassy in Rome * New Zealand had a large force in Italy during WW2, and confronted the Yugoslav army in Trieste, thus liberating the city. * New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade about relations with Italy 
 Pakistan * Pakistan and Italy enjoy close relationship in all fields. Both countries formally have friendly foreign relations. Pakistantimes.net There are over 100,000 Pakistanis living in Italy, mainly living in Milan and Brescia. Idea.int * Pakistan has an embassy in Rome and a Consulate-General in Milan for representation * Italy maintains an embassy in Islamabad, a Consulate-General in Karachi and an honorary consulate in Lahore. 
 People's Republic of China 1970 See People's Republic of China  Italy relations In 2005, Italy and the People's Republic of China have celebrated the 35th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between the two nations. However, China's massive exports of textile and footwear into Italy are said to be a rising concern to Italy's economy and productivity. People's Daily Online - China-Italy relations experiencing \"powerful acceleration\": Fini 
 Philippines 1947 See ItalyPhilippines relations *Italy and the Philippines bilateral and diplomatic relations is established on 1947. A Treaty of Friendship which was signed in Rome and ratified on December 1948. Italy has an embassy in Manila and the Philippines has an embassy in Rome. 
 South Korea 1956-11-24 See Italy  South Korea relations * During the Korean War, Italy sent medical staff to help South Korea. * Italy has an embassy in Seoul. * South Korea has an embassy in Rome. 
 Thailand 1870 * Italy has an embassy in Bangkok and 3 honorary consulates (in Chiang Mai, Ko Samui and Phuket). Italian embassy in Bangkok * Thailand has an embassy in Rome. Thai embassy in Rome 
 Vietnam 1973-03-23 * Italy has an embassy in Hanoi and a general consulate in Ho Chi Minh City. Italian embassy in Hanoi * Vietnam has an embassy in Rome. * Vietnamese Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with Italy 

==See also==
* Diplomatic history of World War II#Italy
* International relations of the Great Powers (18141919)

*List of diplomatic missions in Italy
*List of diplomatic missions of Italy
*Treaty of Osimo
*Treaty of Rapallo
*Visa requirements for Italian citizens

==References==

==Further reading==
* Azzi, Stephen Corrado. "The Historiography of Fascist Foreign Policy," Historical Journal (1993) 36#1 pp. 187203 in JSTOR
* Bosworth, Richard. Italy: The Least of the Great Powers: Italian Foreign Policy Before the First World War (1979) 
* Bosworth, Richard. Mussolini (2002) excerpt and text search
* Burgwyn, H. James. Italian Foreign Policy in the Interwar Period, 1918-1940 (1997) excerpt and text search
* Cassels, Alan. Italian Foreign Policy, 1918-1945: A Guide to Research and Research Materials (1997)
* Chabod, Federico. Italian Foreign Policy (1996) excerpt and text search
* Faherty, Douglas M. Italian Foreign Policy: Trends for the Twenty-First Century (2012) excerpt
* Gooch, John. Mussolini and his Generals: The Armed Forces and Fascist Foreign Policy, 1922-1940 (2007) excerpt and text search
* Lowe, C. J. and F. Marzari. Italian Foreign Policy, 1870-1940 (2001) 
* Smith, Denis Mack. Modern Italy: A Political History (1997)
* Taylor, A.J.P. The Struggle for Mastery in Europe 18481918 (1954), covers all European diplomacy

 

[[Italian language]]

Italian ( or lingua italiana) is a Romance language spoken mainly in Europe: Italy, Switzerland, San Marino, Vatican City, as a second language in Malta, Slovenia and Croatia, by minorities in Eritrea, France, Libya, Monaco, Montenegro, and Somalia, Ethnologue report for language code:ita (Italy)  Gordon, Raymond G., Jr. (ed.), 2005. Ethnologue: Languages of the World, Fifteenth edition. Dallas, Tex.: SIL International. Online version and by expatriate communities in the Americas and Australia. Many speakers are native bilinguals of both standardised Italian and other regional languages. Languages of Italy - Ethnologue - Languages of the World - Copyright 2010 SIL International. 

According to the Bologna statistics of the European Union, Italian is spoken as a native language by 59 million people in the EU (13% of the EU population), mainly in Italy, and as a second language by 14 million (3%). Including the Italian speakers in non-EU European countries (such as Switzerland and Albania) and on other continents, the total number of speakers is around 85 million. Italian language University of Leicester 

In Switzerland, Italian is one of four official languages; it is studied and learned in all the confederation schools and spoken, as a native language, in the Swiss cantons of Ticino and Grigioni and by the Italian immigrants that are present in large numbers in German- and French-speaking cantons. It is also the official language of San Marino, as well as the primary language of the Vatican City. Legge sulle fonti del diritto of 7 June 1929, laws and regulations are published in the Italian-language Supplemento per le leggi e disposizioni dello Stato della Citt del Vaticano attached to the Acta Apostolicae Sedis. It is co-official in Slovenian Istria and in Istria County in Croatia. The Italian language adopted by the state after the unification of Italy is based on Tuscan, which beforehand was a language spoken mostly by the upper class of Florentine society. Modern Italian The Italian Language Retrieved 2010-05-16 Its development was also influenced by other Italian languages and by the Germanic languages of the post-Roman invaders.

Italian is descended from Latin. Unlike most other Romance languages, Italian retains Latin's contrast between short and long consonants. As in most Romance languages, stress is distinctive. Among the Romance languages, Italian is the closest to Latin in terms of vocabulary. 

==History==

===Origins===
The standard Italian language has a poetic and literary origin in the twelfth century, and the modern standard of the language was largely shaped by relatively recent events. However, Italian as a language used in the Italian Peninsula has a longer history. In fact the earliest surviving texts that can definitely be called Italian (or more accurately, vernacular, as distinct from its predecessor Vulgar Latin) are legal formulae from the Province of Benevento that date from 960963. What would come to be thought of as Italian was first formalized in the early fourteenth century through the works of Tuscan writer Dante Alighieri, written in his native Florentine. Dante's epic poems, known collectively as the Commedia, to which another Tuscan poet Giovanni Boccaccio later affixed the title Divina, were read throughout Italy and his written dialect became the "canonical standard" that all educated Italians could understand. Dante is still credited with standardizing the Italian language, and thus the dialect of Florence became the basis for what would become the official language of Italy.

Italian often was an official language of the various Italian states predating unification, slowly usurping Latin, even when ruled by foreign powers (such as the Spanish in the Kingdom of Naples, or the Austrians in the Kingdom of Lombardy-Venetia), even though the masses spoke primarily vernacular languages and dialects. Italian was also one of the many recognised languages in the Austro-Hungarian Empire.

Italy has always had a distinctive dialect for each city, because the cities, until recently, were thought of as city-states. Those dialects now have considerable variety. As Tuscan-derived Italian came to be used throughout Italy, features of local speech were naturally adopted, producing various versions of Regional Italian. The most characteristic differences, for instance, between Roman Italian and Milanese Italian are the gemination of initial consonants and the pronunciation of stressed "e", and of "s" in some cases: e.g. va bene "all right": is pronounced by a Roman (and by any standard-speaker), by a Milanese (and by any speaker whose native dialect lies to the north of La SpeziaRimini Line); a casa "at home" is for Roman and standard, for Milanese and generally northern.

In contrast to the Northern Italian language, southern Italian dialects and languages were largely untouched by the Franco-Occitan influences introduced to Italy, mainly by bards from France, during the Middle Ages but, after the Norman conquest of southern Italy, Sicily became the first Italian land to adopt Occitan lyric moods (and words) in poetry. Even in the case of Northern Italian language, however, scholars are careful not to overstate the effects of outsiders on the natural indigenous developments of the languages.

The economic might and relatively advanced development of Tuscany at the time (Late Middle Ages) gave its dialect weight, though the Venetian language remained widespread in medieval Italian commercial life, and Ligurian (or Genoese) remained in use in maritime trade alongside the Mediterranean. The increasing political and cultural relevance of Florence during the periods of the rise of Medici's bank, Humanism, and the Renaissance made its dialect, or rather a refined version of it, a standard in the arts.

===Renaissance===

Starting with the Renaissance Italian became the language used in the courts of every state in the peninsula. The rediscovery of Dante's De vulgari eloquentia and a renewed interest in linguistics in the sixteenth century, sparked a debate that raged throughout Italy concerning the criteria that should govern the establishment of a modern Italian literary and spoken language. Scholars divided into three factions:

* The purists, headed by Venetian Pietro Bembo (who, in his Gli Asolani, claimed the language might be based only on the great literary classics, such as Petrarch and some part of Boccaccio). The purists thought the Divine Comedy not dignified enough, because it used elements from non-lyric registers of the language.

*Niccol Machiavelli and other Florentines preferred the version spoken by ordinary people in their own times.

* The courtiers, like Baldassare Castiglione and Gian Giorgio Trissino, insisted that each local vernacular contribute to the new standard.

A fourth faction claimed the best Italian was the one that the papal court adopted, which was a mix of Florentine and the dialect of Rome. Eventually, Bembo's ideas prevailed, and the foundation of the Accademia della Crusca in Florence (15821583), the official legislative body of the Italian language led to publication of Agnolo Monosini's Latin tome Floris italicae linguae libri novem in 1604 followed by the first Italian dictionary in 1612.

===Modern era===
An important event that helped the diffusion of Italian was the conquest and occupation of Italy by Napoleon in the early nineteenth century (who was himself of Italian-Corsican descent). This conquest propelled the unification of Italy some decades after, and pushed the Italian language into a lingua franca used not only among clerks, nobility and functionaries in the Italian courts but also in the bourgeoisie.

===Contemporary times===
Italian literature's first modern novel, I Promessi Sposi (The Betrothed), by Alessandro Manzoni, further defined the standard by "rinsing" his Milanese "in the waters of the Arno" (Florence's river), as he states in the Preface to his 1840 edition.

After unification a huge number of civil servants and soldiers recruited from all over the country introduced many more words and idioms from their home languages ("ciao" is derived from Venetian word "s-ciao" (slave), "panettone" comes from Lombard word "panatton" etc.). Only 2.5% of Italys population could speak the Italian standardized language properly when the nation unified in 1861. 

==Classification==

Italian is a Romance language; it derives diachronically from Latin. It is part of the Italic branch of the Indo-European language family. Italian is related most closely to the other two Italo-Dalmatian languages, Sicilian and the extinct Dalmatian.

Unlike most other Romance languages, Italian retains Latin's contrast between short and long consonants. As in most Romance languages, stress is distinctive. In particular, among the Romance languages, Italian is the closest to Latin in terms of vocabulary. Lexical similarity is 90% with French, 88% with Catalan, 85% with Sardinian, 82% with Spanish and Portuguese, 78% with Rhaeto-Romance, and 77% with Romanian. 

==Geographic distribution==
Knowledge of Italian according to EU statistics
The geographic distribution of the Italian language in the world: large Italian-speaking communities are shown in green; light blue indicates areas where the Italian language was used officially during the Italian colonial period.
Use of the Italian language in Europe
Use of the Italian language in Europe and former use in Africa

===Europe===
Italian is the official language of Italy and San Marino and is spoken fluently by the majority of the countries' populations. Italian is official, together with French, German and Romansch in Switzerland, with most of the 0.5 million speakers concentrated in the south of the country, in the cantons of Ticino and southern Graubnden. Italian is the third most spoken language in Switzerland (after German and French), and its use has modestly declined since the 1970s. Italian is also used in administration and official documents in Vatican City. The Vatican City State appendix to the Acta Apostolicae Sedis is entirely in Italian. 

Italian is widely spoken in Malta, where nearly two-thirds of the population can speak it fluently, making it the most spoken non-official language in Europe in 2005. Italian served as Malta's official language until 1934, while it is also recognized as an official language in Istria County, Croatia and Slovenian Istria, where there are significant and historic Italian populations.

Italian is also spoken by a minority in Monaco and France (especially in the southeast of the country and Corsica). Small Italian-speaking minorities can also be found in Albania and Montenegro.

===Africa===
Due to heavy Italian influence during the Italian colonial period, Italian is still widely understood in the countries of Libya and Eritrea. Although it was the primary language since colonial rule, Italian greatly declined under the rule of Muammar Gaddafi, who expelled the Italian Libyan population and made Arabic the sole official language of the country. www.iht: news/italy Nevertheless, Italian remains an important language in the education and economic sectors in Libya. In Eritrea, Italian is a principal language in commerce and the capital city Asmara still has an Italian-language school. Italian was also introduced to Somalia through colonialism and was the sole official language of administration and education during the colonial period but declined after government, educational and economic infrastructure was destroyed in the Somali Civil War. Italian remains spoken as a second language by the elderly and the educated and is also used in the new Federal Government of Somalia. According to article 7 of The Transitional Federal Charter of the Somali Republic: The official languages of the Somali Republic shall be Somali (Maay and Maxaatiri) and Arabic. The second languages of the Transitional Federal Government shall be English and Italian. Diana Briton Putman, Mohamood Cabdi Noor, The Somalis: their history and culture, (Center for Applied Linguistics: 1993), p. 15.: "Somalis speak Somali. Many people also speak Arabic, and educated Somalis usually speak either English or Italian as well. Swahili may also be spoken in coastal areas near Kenya." 

Italian was also used in administration in Ethiopia when the country was briefly occupied by Italy from 1936 to 1941.

===Immigrant communities===
Although over 17 million Americans are of Italian descent, only a little over one million people in the United States speak Italian at home. Nevertheless, an Italian language media market does exist in the country. Capricorn Agency, http://netcapricorn.com/newsletter/italian_ethnic_market.html 

In Canada, Italian is the second most spoken non-official language when Chinese languages are not combined, with over 660,000 speakers (or about 2.1% of the population) according to the 2006 Census. 

In Australia, Italian is the second most spoken foreign language after the Chinese languages, with 1.4% of the population speaking it as their home language. http://www.censusdata.abs.gov.au/census_services/getproduct/census/2011/quickstat/0 

Italian immigrants to South America have also brought a presence of the language to the continent. Italian is the second most spoken language in Argentina after the official language of Spanish, with 1.5 million speaking it natively, and Italian has also heavily influenced the dialect of Spanish spoken in Argentina and Uruguay, Rioplatense Spanish. Ethnologue Small Italian-speaking minorities on the continent are also found in Uruguay, Venezuela and Brazil.

===Education===
Italian is widely taught in many schools around the world, but rarely as the first foreign language; in fact, Italian is considered the fourth- or fifth-most frequently taught foreign language in the world. 

According to the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, every year there are more than 200,000 foreign students that are learning the Italian language; they are distributed in the 90 Institutes of Italian Culture around the world, in the 179 Italian schools abroad, and in the 111 Italian sections belonging to foreign schools. Dati del Ministero degli Affari Esteri 

In the United States, Italian is the fourth most taught foreign language after Spanish, French and German, in that order (or the fifth if American Sign Language is considered). Language-learning trends in the United States VistaWide Retrieved 2010-05-16 In central-east Europe Italian is first in Montenegro, second in Austria, Croatia, Slovenia, and Ukraine after English, and third in Hungary, Romania and Russia after English and German. But throughout the world, Italian is the fifth most taught foreign language, after English, French, German, and Spanish. 

In the European Union statistics, Italian is spoken as a native language by 13% of the EU population, or 65 million people, mainly in Italy. In the EU, it is spoken as a second language by 3% of the EU population, or 14 million people. In addition, among EU states, the Italian language is most likely to be learned as a second language in Malta by 61% of the population, as well as in Slovenia by 15% of the population, in Croatia by 14% of the population, Austria by 11% of the population, Romania by 8% of the population, and in France and Greece by 6% of the population. Italian is also one of the national languages of Switzerland, which is not a part of the European Union. A language of Italy Ethnologue Retrieved 2010-06-05 The Italian language is well-known and studied in Albania, another non-EU member, due to its historical ties and geographical proximity to Italy.

===Influence and derived languages===

From the late nineteenth to the mid-twentieth century, thousands of Italians settled in Argentina, Uruguay, southern Brazil, and Venezuela, where they formed a strong physical and cultural presence.

In some cases, colonies were established where variants of regional languages of Italy were used, and some continue to use this regional language. Examples are Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil, where Talian is used, and the town of Chipilo near Puebla, Mexico; each continues to use a derived form of Venetian dating back to the nineteenth century. Another example is Cocoliche, an ItalianSpanish pidgin once spoken in Argentina and especially in Buenos Aires, and Lunfardo.

Rioplatense Spanish, and particularly the speech of the city of Buenos Aires, has intonation patterns that resemble those of Italian languages, because Argentina has had a continuous large influx of Italian settlers since the second half of the nineteenth century: initially primarily from northern Italy; then, since the beginning of the twentieth century, mostly from southern Italy.

===Lingua franca===

Starting in late medieval times, Italian language variants replaced Latin to become the primary commercial language in much of Europe and the Mediterranean Sea (especially the Tuscan and Venetian variants). These variants were consolidated during the Renaissance with the strength of Italian and the rise of humanism in the arts.

During the Renaissance, Italy held artistic sway over the rest of Europe. All educated European gentlemen were expected to make the Grand Tour, visiting Italy to see its great historical monuments and works of art. It thus became expected that educated Europeans should learn at least some Italian; the English poet John Milton, for instance, wrote some of his early poetry in Italian. In England, Italian became the second most common modern language to be learned, after French (though the classical languages, Latin and Greek, came first). However, by the late eighteenth century, Italian tended to be replaced by German as the second modern language in the curriculum. Yet Italian loanwords continue to be used in most other European languages in matters of art and music.

Within the Catholic church, Italian is known by a large part of the ecclesiastical hierarchy, and is used in substitution for Latin in some official documents. The presence of Italian as the primary language in the Vatican City indicates use, not only within the Holy See, but also throughout the world where an episcopal seat is present. It continues to be used in music and opera. Other examples where Italian is sometimes used as a means of communication are in some sports (sometimes in football and motorsports) and in the design and fashion industries.

==Dialects==

Linguistic map of Italy
Throughout Italy, regional variations of Standard Italian, called Regional Italian, are spoken. In Italy, almost all Romance languages spoken as the vernacularother than standard Italian and distantly-related, non-Romance languages spoken in border regions or among immigrant communitiesare often imprecisely called "Italian dialects", even though they are quite different, with some belong to different branches of the Romance language family. The only exceptions to this are Sardinian, Ladin, and Friulan, which the law recognises as official regional languages. The Corsican language is also related to Italian.

Regional differences can be recognized by various factors: the openness of vowels, the length of the consonants, and influence of the local language (for example, in informal situations the contraction ann replaces andare in the area of Rome for the infinitive "to go"; and nare is what Venetians say for the infinitive "to go").

==Phonology==

+Consonant phonemes 
 Bilabial Labio-dental Dental/Alveolar Post-alveolar Palatal Velar 
 Nasal 
 Stop style=\"border-right: 0;\" style=\"border-right: 0;\" style=\"border-right: 0;\" 
 Affricate style=\"border-right: 0;\" style=\"border-right: 0;\" 
 Fricative style=\"border-right: 0;\" style=\"border-right: 0;\" style=\"border-right: 0;\" 
 Approximant 
 Lateral 
 Trill 

Notes:
*Between two vowels, or between a vowel and an approximant or liquid ( or ), consonants can be either single or geminated. Geminated consonants shorten the preceding vowel (or block phonetic lengthening) and the first geminated element is unreleased. For example, (first one means "fate, destiny" and the second means "fact"). However, are always geminated word-internally. Similarly, nasals, liquids, and sibilants are pronounced slightly longer before medial consonant clusters. 
* is the only consonant that cannot be geminated.
* are denti-alveolar, while are alveolar. 
*The trill is sometimes reduced to a single vibration when not geminated, but it is not a flap *.
*Nasals assimilate to the point of articulation of whatever consonant they precede. For example, is realized as .
*The distinction between and is neutralized before consonants and at the beginning of words: the former is used before voiceless consonants and before vowels at the beginning of words; the latter is used before voiced consonants (meaning is an allophone of before voiced consonants). The two are only contrasted between two vowels within a word. According to Canepari, Luciano Canepari, A Handbook of Pronunciation, chapter 3: Italian. though, the traditional standard has been replaced by a modern neutral pronunciation which always prefers when intervocalic, except when the intervocalic s is the initial sound of a word or a morpheme, if the compound is still felt as such: for example, presento http://www.dizionario.rai.it/poplemma.aspx?lid=30356&r=69940 ('I foresee', with pre meaning 'before' and sento meaning 'I see') vs presento http://www.dizionario.rai.it/poplemma.aspx?lid=30351&r=13567 ('I present'). There are many words in which dictionaries now indicate that both pronunciations with and with are acceptable. The two phonemes have merged in many regional varieties of Italian, either into (Northern-Central) or (Southern-Central). Geminate can be pronounced as single .

Italian has a typical Romance-language seven-vowel system, consisting of , as well as 23 consonants. Compared with most other Romance languages, Italian phonology is conservative, preserving many words nearly unchanged from Vulgar Latin. Some examples:
*Italian quattordici "fourteen" < Latin (cf. Spanish catorce, French quatorze , Catalan and Portuguese catorze)
*Italian settimana "week" < Latin (cf. Romanian sptmn, Spanish and Portuguese semana, French semaine , Catalan setmana)
*Italian medesimo "same" < Vulgar Latin * (cf. Spanish mismo, Portuguese mesmo, French mme , Catalan mateix; note that Italian usually uses the shorter stesso)
*Italian guadagnare "to win, earn, gain" < Vulgar Latin * vita "life" (cf. Romanian via, Spanish vida , French vie), > piede "foot" (cf. Spanish pie, French pied ).
*Preservation of doubled consonants, e.g. > anno "year" (cf. Spanish ao , French an ).
*Preservation of all Proto-Romance final vowels, e.g. > pace "peace" (cf. Romania pace, Spanish paz, French paix ), > otto "eight" (cf. Romanian opt Spanish ocho, French huit ), > feci "I did" (cf. Spanish hice, French fis ).
*Preservation of intertonic vowels (those between the stressed syllable and either the beginning or ending syllable). This accounts for some of the most noticeable differences, as in the forms quattordici and settimana given above.
*Lack of various consonant "deformations", e.g. > Italo-Western > foglia "leaf" (cf. Romanian foaie folie, Spanish hoja , French feuille ; but note Portuguese folha ).

Compared with most other Romance languages, Italian has a large number of inconsistent outcomes, where the same underlying sound produces different results in different words, e.g. > lasciare and lassare, > cacciare and cazzare, > sdrucciolare and druzzolare, > regina and reina, > and , > and . This is thought to reflect the several-hundred-year period during which Italian developed as a literary language divorced from any native-speaking population, with an origin in 12th/13th-century Tuscan but with many words borrowed from languages farther to the north, with different sound outcomes. (The La SpeziaRimini Line, the most important isogloss in the entire Romance-language area, passes only about 20 miles to the north of Florence.)

Some other features that distinguish Italian from the Western Romance languages:
*Latin becomes rather than .
*Latin becomes rather than or : > otto "eight" (cf. Spanish ocho, French huit).
*Vulgar Latin becomes cchi rather than : > occhio "eye" (cf. Romanian ochi, Portuguese olho , French oeil < ).
*Final is not preserved, and vowel changes rather than are used to mark the plural: amico, amici "male friend(s)", amica, amiche "female friend(s)" (cf. Romanian amic, amici,amic,amice, Spanish amigo(s) "male friend(s)", amiga(s) "female friends");  tre, sei "three, six" (cf. Romanian trei, ase, Spanish tres, seis).

Standard Italian also differs in some respects from most nearby Italian languages:
*Perhaps most noticeable is the total lack of metaphony, a feature characterizing nearly every other Italian language.
*No simplification of original , (which often became elsewhere).

==Writing system==

The Italian alphabet has only 21 letters. The letters are excluded, though they appear in loanwords such as jeans, whisky and taxi. The letter has become common in standard Italian with the prefix extra-, although (e)stra- is traditionally used (but the word "extra" alone, used as a noun or adjective, is written with ). The letter originated as an archaic orthographic variant of . It appears in the first name Jacopo and in some Italian place-names, such as Bajardo, Bojano, Joppolo, Jerzu, Jesolo, Jesi, Ajaccio, among numerous others. It also appears in Mar Jonio, an alternative spelling of Mar Ionio (the Ionian Sea). The letter may appear in dialectal words, but its use is discouraged in contemporary standard Italian. The foreign letters can be substituted with phonetically equivalent native Italian letters and digraphs: or for ; or for (including in the standard prefix kilo-); , or for ; , , , or for ; and or for .

* The acute accent is used over to indicate a stressed front close-mid vowel, as in perch "why, because". In dictionaries, it is also used over to indicate a stressed back close-mid vowel (azine). The grave accent is used over to indicate a front open-mid vowel, as in t "tea". The grave accent is used over any vowel to indicate word-final stress, as in giovent "youth". Unlike , a stressed final is always a back open-mid vowel (andr), making unnecessary outside of dictionaries. Most of the time, the penultimate syllable is stressed. But if the stressed vowel is the final letter of the word, the accent is mandatory, otherwise it is not (unlike in Spanish) and virtually always omitted. Exceptions are typically either in dictionaries, where all stressed vowels are commonly marked if they are either in a syllable other than the penultimate, or are an e or an o. Alternatively, accents could be included to disambiguate words that differ only by stress, as for prncipi "princes" and princpi "principles", or "ncora" "anchor" and "ancra" "still yet". For monosyllabic words, the rule is different: when two identical monosyllabic words with different meanings exist, the accent is compulsory on one and forbidden on the other (example:  "is", e "and"). Rare, polysyllabic words can have doubtful stress. Istanbul can be accented on the first (stanbul) or second syllable (Istnbul). The U.S. state name Florida is pronounced in Italian as in Spanish with stress on the second syllable (Florda). Because of an Italian word with the same spelling but different stress (flrida "flourishing") and because of the English pronunciation, most Italians pronounce Florida with stress on the first syllable. Dictionaries give the latter as an alternative pronunciation. Dizionario d'ortografia e di pronunzia 

* The letter distinguishes ho, hai, ha, hanno (present indicative of avere "to have") from o ("or"), ai ("to the"), a ("to"), anno ("year"). In the spoken language, the letter is always silent. The in ho additionally marks the contrasting open pronunciation of the . The letter is also used in combinations with other letters. No phoneme exists in Italian. In nativised foreign words, the is silent. For example, hotel and hovercraft are pronounced and respectively. (Where existed in Latin, it either disappeared or, in a few cases before a back vowel, changed to : traggo "I pull"  Lat. .)
* The letters and can symbolize voiced or voiceless consonants. symbolizes or depending on context, with few minimal pairs. For example: zanzara "mosquito" and nazione "nation". symbolizes word-initially before a vowel, when clustered with a voiceless consonant (), and when doubled; it symbolizes when between vowels and when clustered with voiced consonants. Intervocalic varies regionally between and .
* The letters and vary in pronunciation between plosives and affricates depending on following vowels. The letter symbolizes when word-final and before the back vowels . It symbolizes as in chair before the front vowels . The letter symbolizes when word-final and before the back vowels . It symbolizes as in gem before the front vowels . Other Romance languages and, to an extent, English have similar variations for . Compare hard and soft C, hard and soft G. (See also palatalization.)
* The digraphs and indicate or preserve hardness ( and ) before . The digraphs and indicate or preserve softness ( and ) before . For example:

:
 Before back vowel (A, O, U) Before front vowel (I, E) 
 Plosive C caramella candy CH china India ink 
 G gallo rooster GH ghiro edible dormouse 
 Affricate CI ciaramella shawm C Cina China 
 GI giallo yellow G giro round, tour 

:Note: is silent in the digraphs (digraph)|], (digraph)|]; and is silent in the digraphs and before unless the is stressed. For example, it is silent in ciao and cielo , but it is pronounced in farmacia and farmacie .

Italian has geminate, or double, consonants, which are distinguished by length and intensity. Length is distinctive for all consonants except for , , , , , which are always geminate, and , which is always single.
Geminate plosives and affricates are realised as lengthened closures. Geminate fricatives, nasals, and are realized as lengthened continuants. There is only one vibrant phoneme but the actual pronunciation depends on context and regional accent. Generally one can find a flap consonant in unstressed position whereas is more common in stressed syllables, but there may be exceptions. Especially people from the Northern part of Italy (Parma, Aosta Valley, South Tyrol) may pronounce as , , or . 

Of special interest to the linguistic study of Italian is the gorgia toscana, or "Tuscan Throat", the weakening or lenition of certain intervocalic consonants in the Tuscan language.

The voiced postalveolar fricative is only present in loanwords: for example, garage .

===Assimilation===

Italian phonotactics do not usually permit verbs and polysyllabic nouns to end with consonants, excepting poetry and song, so foreign words may receive extra terminal vowel sounds.

==Grammar==

Italian grammar is typical of the grammar of Romance languages in general. Cases exist for pronouns (nominative, oblique, accusative, dative), but not for nouns. There are two genders (masculine and feminine). Nouns, adjectives, and articles inflect for gender and number (singular and plural). Adjectives are sometimes placed before their noun and sometimes after. Subject nouns generally come before the verb. Subjective pronouns are usually dropped, their presence implied by verbal inflections. Noun objects come after the verb, as do pronoun objects after imperative verbs and infinitives, but otherwise pronoun objects come before the verb. There are numerous contractions of prepositions with subsequent articles. There are numerous productive suffixes for diminutive, augmentative, pejorative, attenuating etc., which are also used to create neologisms.

There are three regular sets of verbal conjugations, and various verbs are irregularly conjugated. Within each of these sets of conjugations, there are four simple (one-word) verbal conjugations by person/number in the indicative mood (present tense; past tense with imperfective aspect, past tense with perfective aspect, and future tense), two simple conjugations in the subjunctive mood (present tense and past tense), one simple conjugation in the conditional mood, and one simple conjugation in the imperative mood. Corresponding to each of the simple conjugations, there is a compound conjugation involving a simple conjugation of "to be" or "to have" followed by a past participle.

==Examples==

===Conversation===

 English (inglese) Italian (italiano) Pronunciation 
 Yes S (listen) 
 No No (listen) 
 Of course! Certo! / Certamente! / Naturalmente 
 Hello! Ciao! (informal) / Salve! (general) (listen) 
 Cheers! Salute! 
 How are you? Come stai? (informal) / Come sta? (formal) / Come state? (plural) / Come va? (general) ; 
 Good morning! Buongiorno! (= Good day!) 
 Good evening! Buonasera 
 Good night! Buona notte! (for a good night sleeping) / Buona serata! (for a good night awake) 
 Have a nice day! Buona giornata! (formal) 
 Enjoy the meal! Buon appetito 
 Goodbye! Arrivederci (general) / Arrivederla (formal) / Ciao! (informal) (listen) 
 Good luck!  Thank you! Buona fortuna!  Grazie! (general) 
 I love you Ti amo (between lovers only) / Ti voglio bene (in the sense of \"I am fond of you\", between lovers, friends, relatives etc.) ; 
 Welcome Benvenuto/-i (for male/males or mixed) / Benvenuta/-e (for female/females) / in... 
 Please Per piacere / Per favore / Per cortesia (listen) 
 Thank you! Grazie! (general) / Ti ringrazio! (informal) / La ringrazio! (formal) / Vi ringrazio! (plural) (listen) 
 You are welcome! Prego! 
 Excuse me / I am sorry Mi dispiace (only \"I am sorry\") / Scusa(mi) (informal) / Mi scusi (formal) / Scusatemi (plural) / Sono desolato (\"I am sorry\", if male) / Sono desolata (\"I am sorry\", if female) (listen) ; ; 
 Who? Chi? 
 What? Che cosa? / Cosa? / Che? 
 When? Quando? 
 Where? Dove? 
 How? Come? 
 Why / Because perch 
 Again di nuovo / ancora ; 
 How much? / How many? Quanto? / Quanta? / Quanti? / Quante? 
 What is your name? Come ti chiami? (informal) / Qual  il suo nome? (formal) 
 My name is ... Mi chiamo ... 
 This is ... Questo  ... (masculine) / Questa  ... (feminine) 
 Yes, I understand. S, capisco. / Ho capito. 
 I do not understand. Non capisco. / Non ho capito. (listen) 
 Do you speak English? Parli inglese? (informal) / Parla inglese? (formal) / Parlate inglese? (plural) (listen) 
 I do not understand Italian. Non capisco l'italiano. 
 Help me Aiutami! (informal) / Mi aiuti! (formal) / Aiutatemi! (plural) / Aiuto! (general) 
 You are right/wrong! (Tu) hai ragione/torto! (informal) / (Lei) ha ragione/torto! (formal) / (Voi) avete ragione/torto! (plural) 
 What time is it? Che ora ? / Che ore sono? 
 Where is the bathroom? Dov' il bagno? (listen) 
 How much is it? Quanto costa? 
 The bill, please. Il conto, per favore. 
 The study of Italian sharpens the mind. Lo studio dell'italiano aguzza l'ingegno. 

===Numbers===

 English Italian IPA 
 One uno 
 Two due 
 Three tre 
 Four quattro 
 Five cinque 
 Six si 
 Seven stte 
 Eight tto 
 Nine nve 
 Ten dici 

 English Italian IPA 
 Eleven ndici 
 Twelve ddici 
 Thirteen trdici 
 Fourteen quattrdici 
 Fifteen qundici 
 Sixteen sedici 
 Seventeen diciassette 
 Eighteen diciotto 
 Nineteen diciannove 
 Twenty venti 

 English Italian IPA 
 Twenty-one ventuno 
 Twenty-two ventidue 
 Twenty-three ventitr 
 Twenty-four ventiquattro 
 Twenty-five venticinque 
 Twenty-six ventisei 
 Twenty-seven ventisette 
 Twenty-eight ventotto 
 Twenty-nine ventinove 
 Thirty trenta 

 English Italian 
 one hundred cento 
 one thousand mille 
 two thousand duemila 
 two thousand thirteen {2013} duemilatredici 

===Days of the week===

 
 English Italian IPA 
 Monday luned 
 Tuesday marted 
 Wednesday mercoled 
 Thursday gioved 
 Friday venerd 
 Saturday sabato 
 Sunday domenica 

==Sample texts==
There is a recording of Dante's Divine Comedy read by Lino Pertile available at http://etcweb.princeton.edu/dante/pdp/

==See also==

* Languages of Italy
* Accademia della Crusca
* CELI
* CILS (Qualification)
* Enciclopedia Italiana
* Guide to phonetic transliteration of Italian
* Italian alphabet
* Italian dialects
* Italian exonyms
* Italian grammar
* Italian honorifics
* The Italian Language Foundation (in the United States)
* Italian language in Slovenia
* Italian literature
* Italian musical terms
* Italian phonology
* Italian profanity
* Italian Sign Language
* Italian Studies
* Italian Wikipedia
* Italian-language international radio stations
* List of languages of Italy
* Lessico etimologico italiano
* Sicilian School
* Veronese Riddle
* Languages of the Vatican City

==References and notes==

==Bibliography==
*
* M. Vitale, Studi di Storia della Lingua Italiana, LED Edizioni Universitarie, Milano, 1992, ISBN 88-7916-015-X
* S. Morgana, Capitoli di Storia Linguistica Italiana, LED Edizioni Universitarie, Milano, 2003, ISBN 88-7916-211-X
* J. Kinder, CLIC: Cultura e Lingua d'Italia in CD-ROM / Culture and Language of Italy on CD-ROM, Interlinea, Novara, 2008, ISBN 978-88-8212-637-7

==External links==

*Swadesh list in English and Italian
*Italian proverbs
* Learn Italian - Molto Bene
*"Learn Italian," BBC
* Online English-Italian Translation
* USA Foreign Service Institute Italian basic course
* Map of speaking Italian communities in the world, italofonia.org 

 



[[Ice-T]]

Tracy Lauren Marrow (born February 16, 1958), better known by his stage name Ice-T, is an American rapper, singer and actor. He began his career as a rapper in the 1980s and was signed to Sire Records in 1987, when he released his debut album Rhyme Pays, the first hip-hop album to carry an explicit content sticker. The next year, he founded the record label Rhyme $yndicate Records (named after his collective of fellow hip-hop artists called the 'Rhyme $yndicate') and released another album, Power.

He co-founded the metal band Body Count, which he introduced in his 1991 album . Body Count released its self-titled debut album in 1992. Ice-T encountered controversy over his track "Cop Killer", which was perceived to glamorize killing police officers. Ice-T asked to be released from his contract with Warner Bros. Records, and his next solo album, Home Invasion, was released later in February 1993 through Priority Records. Body Count's next album was released in 1994, and Ice-T released two more albums in the late 1990s. Since 2000, he has portrayed NYPD Detective Odafin Tutuola on the NBC police drama .

==Early life==
Tracy Lauren Marrow, son of Solomon and Alice Marrow, was born in Newark, New Jersey. Solomon was an African American, and Alice was Creole. For decades, Solomon worked as a conveyor belt mechanic at the Rapistan Conveyor Company. As a child, his family moved to upscale Summit, New Jersey. The first time race played a major part in Tracy's life was at the age of 7, when he became aware of the racism leveled by his white friends toward children, and that he escaped similar treatment because they thought that Marrow was white because of his lighter skin. Relating this incident to his mother, she told him "Honey, people are stupid"; her advice and this incident taught Marrow to control the way the negativity of others affected him. 

His mother died of a heart attack when he was in third grade. Solomon raised Tracy while he was a single father for four years, with help from a housekeeper. Tracy's first experience with an illegal activity occurred after a bicycle that Solomon "bought" him for Christmas was stolen. After Tracy told his father, Solomon shrugged, "Well, then, you ain't got no bike." Tracy stole parts from bicycles and assembled "three or four weird-looking, brightly painted bikes" from the parts; his father either did not notice or never acknowledged this. When Tracy was 12 years old, Solomon died of a heart attack. For many years, AllMusic.com has stated that his parents "died in an auto accident", but Ice-T has stated that it was actually he who had been in a brutal auto accident and that was decades later. 

Following his father's death, Tracy lived with a nearby aunt briefly, and was sent to live with his other aunt and her husband in View Park-Windsor Hills, an upper middle-class black neighborhood by South Los Angeles. While his cousin Earl was preparing to leave for college, Tracy shared a room with him. Earl was a fan of rock music and listened to only the local rock stations; sharing a room with him spurred Tracy's interest in heavy metal music. 

===Gangs, criminal life and the Army===
Tracy moved to the Crenshaw district of Los Angeles when he was in the 8th grade. He attended Palms Junior High, which was predominately made up of white students, and included black students bused in from South Central. He attended Crenshaw High School, which was almost entirely made up of black students. 

Marrow stood out from most of his friends because he did not drink alcohol, smoke tobacco, or use drugs. During high school, gangs began to intensify in the Los Angeles school system. Students who belonged to the Bloods and Crips gangs attended Crenshaw, and fought in the school's halls. Tracy, while never an actual gang member, was more affiliated with the Crips, and began reading the novels of Iceberg Slim, which he memorized and recited to his friends, who enjoyed hearing the excerpts and told him, "Yo, kick some more of that by Ice, T," and the handle stuck. Marrow and other Crips wrote and performed "Crip Rhymes", long before the advent of hip hop and recorded rapping. 

His music career started with the band of the singing group The Precious Few of Crenshaw High School. Tracy and his group opened the show, dancing to a live band. The singers were Thomas Barnes, Ronald Robinson and Lapekas Mayfield.

At the age of 17, Tracy received the Social Security death-benefit money for the death of his father to rent an apartment for $90 a month. Marrow sold cannabis and stole car stereos for money, but he was not making enough money to support his girlfriend and daughter, leading him to join the United States Army for the financial benefits; he served for four years in the 25th Infantry Division. Marrow was in a group that was jailed for the theft of an infantry rug. While awaiting trial, he received a $2,500 bonus check. He then decided to escape from the jail and desert his Army duties, yet he returned a month later after the rug had been returned. He received an Article 15 punishment and subsequently completed Advanced Infantry Training. 

Marrow became interested in hip hop music while serving in the Army. During this period, he heard Sugar Hill Gang's newly released single "Rapper's Delight," which inspired him to perform his own raps over the instrumentals of this and other early hip-hop records. The music, however, did not fit his lyrics or form of delivery, which ultimately led Marrow to develop his own personalized skills as a rapper. 

As a squad leader at Schofield Barracks, in Hawaii Marrow met a pimp named Mac, where prostitution was not a heavily prosecuted crime. Because Mac admired that Marrow could quote Iceberg Slim, he taught Marrow how to pimp. Marrow was also able to purchase stereo equipment cheaply in Hawaii, including two Technics turntables, a mixer, and large speakers. Once equipped, he then began to learn turntablism and rapping. 

Towards the end of his time in the Army, Marrow learned from his commanding officer that he could receive an Honorable discharge because he was a single father, so he left four months ahead of schedule. 

During an episode of the Adam Carolla Podcast that aired on June 6, 2012, Marrow claimed that after being discharged from the Army, he began a career as a bank robber. Using combat skills allegedly acquired in Ranger School, Marrow claimed he and some associates began conducting take-over bank robberies, "...like the film Heat." Marrow then elaborated, explaining, "Only punks go for the drawer, we gotta go for the safe." Although Marrow may have been using some artistic license in describing his bank robbing exploits, he also stated he was glad the United States justice system has a statute of limitations, which had likely expired when Marrow admitted to his involvement in multiple Class 1 Felonies in the early- to mid-1970s. 

==Music career==

===Early career===
After leaving the Army, Marrow wanted to stay away from gang life and violence and instead make a name for himself as a disc jockey. As a tribute to Iceberg Slim, Marrow adopted the stage name Ice-T. While performing as a DJ at parties, he received more attention as a rapper, which led Marrow to pursue a career as a rapper. After breaking up with his girlfriend Caitlin Boyd, he returned to a life of crime and robbed jewelry stores with his high school friends. Marrow's raps later described how he and his friends pretended to be customers to gain access before smashing the display glass with baby sledgehammers. 

One of Marrow's friends, Sean E. Sean, was arrested for possession of not only cannabis, which Sean sold, but also material stolen by Marrow. Sean took the blame and served two years in prison. Marrow stated that he owed a gratitude to Sean because his prison time allowed Marrow to pursue a career as a rapper. Concurrently, Marrow wound up in a car accident and was hospitalized as a John Doe because he did not carry any form of identification due to his criminal activities. After being discharged from the hospital, he decided to abandon the criminal lifestyle and pursue a professional career rapping. Two weeks after being released from the hospital, he won an open mic competition judged by Kurtis Blow. 

===Professional career===
Ice-T with Body Count performing in 2006.
In 1982, Marrow met producer William Strong from Saturn Records, who recorded his first single, "Cold Wind Madness", also known as "The Coldest Rap", which became an underground success, becoming popular even though radio stations did not play it due to the song's hardcore lyrics. Marrow appeared as a featured rapper on "Reckless", a single by DJ Chris "The Glove" Taylor, and recorded the songs "You Don't Quit" and "Dog'n the Wax" with Unknown DJ, who provided a sound for the songs. 

Marrow received further inspiration as an artist from Schoolly D's gangsta rap single "P.S.K. What Does It Mean?", which Marrow heard in a club. Marrow enjoyed the single's sound and delivery, as well as its vague references to gang life, although the real life gang, Park Side Killers, was not named in the song. 

Marrow decided to adopt Schoolly D's style, and wrote the lyrics to his first gangsta rap song, "6 in the Mornin'", in his Hollywood apartment, and created a minimal beat with a Roland TR-808. Marrow compared the sound of the song, which was recorded as a B-Side on the single "Dog'n The Wax", to that of the Beastie Boys. The single was released in 1986, and Marrow learned that "6 in the Mornin'" was more popular in clubs than its A-side, leading Marrow to rap about Los Angeles gang life, which Marrow described more explicitly than any previous rapper. He intentionally did not represent any particular gang, and wore a mixture of red and blue clothing and shoes to avoid antagonizing gang-affiliated listeners, who debated his true affiliation. 

Ice-T finally landed a deal with a major label Sire Records. When label founder and president Seymour Stein heard his demo, he said, "He sounds like Bob Dylan." Coleman, Brian. Check The Technique: Liner Notes for Hip-Hop Junkies. New York: Villiard/Random House, 2007. pp. 238. Shortly after, he released his debut album Rhyme Pays in 1987 supported by DJ Evil E, DJ Aladdin and producer Afrika Islam, who helped create the mainly party-oriented sound. The record wound up being certified gold by the RIAA. That same year, he recorded the title theme song for Dennis Hopper's Colors, a film about inner-city gang life in Los Angeles. His next album Power was released in 1988, under his own label Rhyme Syndicate, and it was a more assured and impressive record, earning him strong reviews and his second gold record. Released in 1989, The Iceberg/Freedom of Speech... Just Watch What You Say established his popularity by matching excellent abrasive music with narrative and commentative lyrics. 

In 1991, he released his album O.G. Original Gangster, which is regarded as one of the albums that defined gangsta rap. On OG, he introduced his heavy metal band Body Count in a track of the same name. Ice-T toured with Body Count on the first annual Lollapalooza concert tour in 1991, gaining him appeal among middle-class teenagers and fans of alternative music genres. The album Body Count was released in March 1992. For his appearance on the heavily collaborative track "Back on the Block", a composition by jazz musician Quincy Jones that "attempt to bring together black musical styles from jazz to soul to funk to rap", Ice-T won a Grammy Award for the Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group, an award shared by others who worked on the track including Jones and fellow jazz musician Ray Charles. 

Controversy later surrounded Body Count over its song "Cop Killer". The rock song was intended to speak from the viewpoint of a criminal getting revenge on racist, brutal cops. Ice-T's rock song infuriated government officials, the National Rifle Association and various police advocacy groups. Consequently, Time Warner Music refused to release Ice-T's upcoming album Home Invasion because of the controversy surrounding "Cop Killer". Ice-T suggested that the furor over the song was an overreaction, telling journalist Chuck Philips "...they've done movies about nurse killers and teacher killers and student killers. Arnold Schwarzenegger blew away dozens of cops as the Terminator. But I don't hear anybody complaining about that." In the same interview, Ice-T suggested to Philips that the misunderstanding of Cop Killer, the misclassification of it as a rap song (not a rock song), and the attempts to censor it had racial overtones: "The Supreme Court says it's OK for a white man to burn a cross in public. But nobody wants a black man to write a record about a cop killer." 

When Ice split amicably with Sire/Warner Bros. Records after a dispute over the artwork of the album Home Invasion, he reactivated Rhyme Syndicate and formed a deal with Priority Records for distribution. Priority released Home Invasion in the spring of 1993. The album peaked at #9 on Billboard magazine's Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums and at #14 on the Billboard 200, spawning several singles including "Gotta Lotta Love", "I Ain't New To This" and "99 Problems"  which would later inspire Jay-Z to record a version with new lyrics in 2003. 

Ice-T had also collaborated with certain other heavy metal bands during this time period. For the film Judgment Night, he did a duet with Slayer on the track "Disorder". In 1995, Ice-T made a guest performance on Forbidden by Black Sabbath. Another album of his, VI - Return of the Real, was released in 1996, followed by The Seventh Deadly Sin in 1999. 

His first rap album since 1999, Gangsta Rap, was released on October 31, 2006. The album's cover, which "shows lying on his back in bed with his ravishing wife's ample posterior in full view and one of her legs coyly draped over his private parts," was considered to be too suggestive for most retailers, many of which were reluctant to stock the album. Some reviews of the album were unenthusiastic, as many had hoped for a return to the political raps of Ice-T's most successful albums.

Ice-T appears in the film Gift. One of the last scenes includes Ice-T and Body Count playing with Jane's Addiction in a version of the Sly and the Family Stone song "Don't Call Me Nigger, Whitey."

Besides fronting his own band and rap projects, Ice-T has also collaborated with other hard rock and metal bands, such as Icepick, Motrhead, Slayer, Pro-Pain, and Six Feet Under. He has also covered songs by hardcore punk bands such as The Exploited, Jello Biafra, and Black Flag. Ice-T made an appearance at Insane Clown Posse's Gathering of the Juggalos (2008 edition). Ice-T was also a judge for the 7th annual Independent Music Awards to support independent artists. His 2012 film features a who's who of underground and mainstream rappers. 

In November 2011, Ice-T announced via Twitter that he was in the process of collecting beats for his next LP which was expected sometime during 2012, but as of July 2013, the album has not been released.

==Acting career==
Ice-T's first film appearances were in the motion pictures, Breakin' (1984), and its sequel, (1985). These films were released before Ice-T released his first LP, although he appears on the soundtrack to Breakin. He has since stated he considers the films and his own performance in them to be "wack". The Ice Opinion, page 96, St Martin's Press, New York, 1994 

In 1991, he embarked on a serious acting career, portraying police detective Scotty Appleton in Mario Van Peebles' feature film New Jack City, gang leader Odessa (alongside Denzel Washington and John Lithgow) in Ricochet (1991), gang leader King James in Trespass (1992), followed by a notable lead role performance in Surviving the Game (1994), in addition to many supporting roles, such as J-Bone in Johnny Mnemonic (1995), and the marsupial mutant T-Saint in Tank Girl (1995). Marrow was also interviewed in the Brent Owens documentary Pimps Up, Ho's Down, in which he claims to have had an extensive pimping background before getting into rap. He is quoted as saying "once you max something out, it ain't no fun no more. I couldn't really get no farther." He goes on to explain his pimping experience gave him the ability to get into new businesses. "I can't act, I really can't act, I ain't no rapper, it's all game. I'm just working these niggas." Later he raps at the Players Ball.

In 1993, Marrow along with other rappers and the three Yo! MTV Raps hosts Ed Lover, Doctor Dre and Fab 5 Freddy starred in the comedy Who's the Man?, directed by Ted Demme. In this movie, Marrow is a drug dealer who gets really frustrated when someone calls him by his real name, "Chauncey," rather than his street name, "Nighttrain."

Ice-T with Christopher Meloni shooting Law & Order: SVU on Broome Street in SoHo, New York City (October 10, 2008)
In 1995, Marrow had a recurring role as vengeful drug dealer Danny Cort on the television series New York Undercover, co-created by Dick Wolf. His work on the series earned him the 1996 NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series. In 1997, Marrow co-created the short-lived series Players, produced by Wolf. This was followed by a role as pimp Seymour "Kingston" Stockton in (1998). These collaborations led Wolf to add Marrow to the cast of Law & Order: Special Victims Unit. Since 2000 he has portrayed Odafin "Fin" Tutuola, a former undercover narcotics officer transferred to the Special Victims Unit. In 2002, the NAACP awarded Marrow with a second Image Award, again for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series, for his work on Law & Order: SVU.

Around 1995, Marrow co-presented a UK-produced magazine television series on black culture, Baadasss TV. 

In 1997, Marrow had a pay-per-view special titled Ice-T's Extreme Babes which appeared on Action PPV, formerly owned by BET networks. 

In 1999, Marrow starred in the HBO movie Stealth Fighter as a United States Naval Aviator who fakes his own death, steals a F-117 stealth fighter, and threatens to destroy United States military bases. He also acted in the movie Sonic Impact, released the same year.

Ice-T made an appearance on the comedy television series Chappelle's Show as himself presenting the award for "Player Hater of the Year" at the "Player-Haters Ball", a parody of his own appearance at the Players Ball. He was dubbed the "Original Player Hater."

Beyond Tough, a 2002 documentary series, aired on Discovery Channel about the world's most dangerous and intense professions, such as alligator wrestlers and Indy 500 pit crews, was hosted by Marrow. 

In 2007, Marrow appeared as a celebrity guest star on the MTV sketch comedy show Short Circuitz. Also in late 2007 Marrow appeared in the short-music film Hands of Hatred, which can be found online.

Ice-T at the 2009 Tribeca Film Festival for the premiere of Burning Down the House
Ice-T was interviewed for the Cannibal Corpse retrospective documentary of Torment: The First 20 Years|Centuries of Torment], as well as appearing in Chris Rock's 2009 documentary Good Hair, in which he reminisced about going to school in hair curlers. 

===Voice acting===
Ice-T voiced of characters in Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas#Madd Dogg|Madd Dogg] in the video game , as well as Agent Cain in . He also appears as himself in and fighting video games.

He also voiced the character Aaron Griffin in the video game Gears of War 3. 

He was the voice of Jackie A in Tommy and the Cool Mule. 

==Other ventures==
===Podcasting===
On December 27, 2013, Ice-T announced that we was entering podcasting in a deal with the Paragon Collective. Ice-T is the largest celebrity and first major member of the hip-hop community to enter the field. Ice-T co-hosts the Ice-T: Final Level podcast with his longtime friend and manager, Mick Benzo (known as Zulu Beatz on Sirius XM). They discuss relevant issues, movies, video games, and do a behind the scenes of Law Order: SVU segment with featured guests from the entertainment world. The show will release new episodes bi-weekly. Guests have included Jim Norton. Ice-T released his first episode on January 7th to many accolades. The show is available on www.icetfinallevel.com, Stitcher, Soundcloud, and iTunes. 

===Reality television===
On October 20, 2006, Ice-T's Rap School aired and was a reality television show on VH1. It was a spin-off of the British reality show Gene Simmons' Rock School, which also aired on VH1. In Rap School, rapper/actor Ice-T teaches eight teens from York Preparatory School in New York called the "York Prep Crew" ("Y.P. Crew" for short). Each week, Ice-T gives them assignments and they compete for an imitation gold chain with a microphone on it. On the season finale on November 17, 2006, the group performed as an opening act for Public Enemy.

On June 12, 2011, E! reality show Ice Loves Coco debuted. The show is mostly about his relationship with his wife of ten years, Nicole "Coco" Austin. 

==Style and influence==
Marrow cites writer Iceberg Slim and rapper Schoolly D as influences, with Iceberg Slim's novels guiding his skills as a lyricist. Marrow's favorite heavy rock acts are Edgar Winter, Led Zeppelin and Black Sabbath. Marrow's hip hop albums helped shape the gangsta rap style, with music journalist tracing works of artists such as Tupac Shakur, Notorious B.I.G., Eminem and N.W.A to "6 in the Mornin'". 

His love of rock music led Marrow to use electric guitar in the instrumentation of his hip hop albums in order to provide his songs with edge and power, and to make his raps harder; he used the fusion of rock and hip hop of Rick Rubin-produced acts like Beastie Boys, Run-DMC and LL Cool J, which featured rock samples in their songs. His work with Body Count, whose 1992 debut album Marrow described as a "rock album with a rap mentality", is described as paving the way for the success of rap rock fusions by bands like Kid Rock and Limp Bizkit; however, Marrow states that the band's style does not fuse the two genres, and is solely a rock band. He is also a fan of the British singer Phil Collins; Collins claimed he was "incredibly flattered" when he learned this. 

==Personal life==
Ice-T and wife Coco attend the Billboard-Children Uniting Nations After-Party
In 1976, Marrow's girlfriend Adrienne gave birth to their daughter, LeTesha, and they attended high school while raising the child. LeTesha later gave her parents two grandchildren. Later in 1984, while filming Breakin', Marrow met Darlene Ortiz, who had been at the club in which the film was being shot, and the two began a relationship; Ortiz was featured on the covers of Rhyme Pays and Power. Marrow and Ortiz had a son, Ice Tracy Marrow, in 1992. On December 31, 2001, Marrow married swimsuit model Nicole "Coco Marie" Austin. In celebration of their 10th wedding anniversary, the couple renewed their wedding vows on June 4, 2011. They own a condominium in North Bergen, New Jersey, Fusfeld, Adam (January 20, 2012). "NBA veteran suffers big loss on NJ condo sale". The Real Deal. Maher, Adam (September 28, 2011). "Ice-T reports for jury duty at courthouse in Jersey City, but doesnt get picked". NJ.com. and built a home in Edgewater, New Jersey that was completed at the end of 2012. Katz, Joelle (October 31, 2012). "Real Estate Notes: Matthew Modine Buys Venice House, Michael Strahan Sells in Hermosa Beach". The Hollywood Reporter. [http://www.bergen.com/people/Inked_Out_NJ_Edgewater_residents_Ice__CoCo_come_out_to_support_the_expo.html ] 

==Activism==
During the popularity of Public Enemy, Ice-T was closely associated with the band and his recordings of the time showed a similar political viewpoint. He was referred to as "The Soldier of the Highest Degree" in the booklet for Fear of a Black Planet and mentioned on the track Leave this off your fu. He also collaborated with fellow anti-censorship campaigner Jello Biafra on his album The Iceberg/Freedom Of Speech... Just Watch What You Say!.

On June 5, 2008, Ice-T jokingly stated that he would be voting for John McCain in the 2008 American elections. Ice-T also speculated that his past affiliation with Body Count could hurt Barack Obama's chances if he endorsed him, so he'd choose instead to ruin John McCain's campaign by saying he supported him. [http://www.theinsider.com/news/944138_ice_t_backs_up_john_mccain ] 

==Feuds==
===LL Cool J===
Ice-T had a non-publicized feud with LL Cool J in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Apparently, this was instigated by LL's claim to be "the baddest rapper in the history of rap itself". Ice-T recorded disses against LL on his 1988 album Power. On the album was the track, "I'm Your Pusher", in which a rap music addict declines to buy an LL Cool J record. The album also contains the posse rap track, "The Syndicate", which took aim at LL's lyrical ability, claiming that rapping about oneself so frequently was a "first grade topic". The song also mocked the song's hook "I'm Bad", which identified it as an LL diss specifically. In the book Check the Technique: Linear Notes for the Hip-Hop Junkies, Ice-T said that the song "Girls L.G.B.N.A.F." was also intended as a diss to LL Cool J, by making a crude song to contrast with the love songs that LL was making at the time. Brian Coleman, Check the Technique: Linear Notes for the Hip-Hop Junkies, page 247, Villard Books, New York, 2007 

On LL's response, To da Break of Dawn in 1990, he dissed Kool Moe Dee (Whose feud with LL was far more publicized) as well as MC Hammer. He then devoted the third verse of the song to dissing Ice-T, mocking his rap ability ("take your rhymes around the corner to rap rehab"), his background ("before you rapped, you was a downtown car thief"), and his style ("a brother with a perm deserves to get burned"). He also suggested that the success of Power was due to the appearance of Ice-T's girlfriend Darlene on the album cover. Ice-T appeared to have ignored the insults and he had also defended LL Cool J after his arrest in the song "Freedom of Speech". 

In August 2012, Ice-T said that the rivalry was "never serious" and that he needed a nemesis to create "an exciting dispute". 

===Soulja Boy Tell 'Em===
In June 2008, on DJ Cisco's Urban Legend mixtape, Ice-T criticized DeAndre Cortez "Soulja Boy Tell 'Em" Way for "killing hip hop" and his song "Crank That" for being "garbage" compared to the works of other hip-hop artists such as Rakim, Das EFX, Big Daddy Kane and Ice Cube. One of the comments in the exchange was when Ice-T told Way to "eat a dick". The two then traded numerous videos back and forth over the Internet. These videos included a cartoon and video of Ice-T dancing on Way's behalf and an apology, but reiteration of his feelings that Way's music "sucks", on Ice-T's behalf. Rapper Kanye West defended Way by arguing that the younger artist created a new, original work for hip hop, thus keeping the authentic meaning of the music, even though it is not creative or talented. 

==Discography==

Studio albums
*1987: Rhyme Pays
*1988: Power
*1989: The Iceberg/Freedom of Speech...Just Watch What You Say
*1991: O.G. Original Gangster
*1993: Home Invasion
*1996: 
*1999: The Seventh Deadly Sin
*2006: Gangsta Rap

Collaboration albums
*1983: Breaking And Entering (with The Radio Crew)
*1988: Rhyme Syndicate Comin' Through (with Rhyme $yndicate)
*1992: Body Count (with Body Count)
*1994: Born Dead (with Body Count)
*1995: Murder Squad Nationwide (with South Central Cartel)
*1997: Violent Demise: The Last Days (with Body Count)
*1997: $port Ya Vest In Tha West (with DJ Aladdin & Tha West Coast Rydaz)
*2000: Pimp to Eat (with Analog Brothers)
*2000: WWF Aggression (performed Godfather's theme "Pimpin' Ain't easy")
*2004: Repossession (with SMG)
*2006: Murder 4 Hire (with Body Count)
*2008: Urban Legends (with Black Ice)
*2014: Manslaughter (with Body Count)

==Awards and nominations==
Grammy Awards

 Year Nominated work Award Result 
 1991 Back on the Block Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group 
 1992 \"New Jack Hustler (Nino's Theme)\" Best Rap Solo Performance 

MTV Video Music Awards

 Year Nominated work Award Result 
 1989 \"Colors\" Best Rap Video 
 1989 \"Colors\" Best Video from a Film 
 1991 \"New Jack Hustler (Nino's Theme)\" Best Rap Video 

==Filmography==

 Year Film Role Notes 
 1984 Breakin' Rap Talker 
 1985 Radiotron Rapper 
 Rappin' Himself 
 1991 New Jack City Scotty Appleton Nominated: MTV Movie Award for Best Breakthrough Performance 
 Ricochet Odessa 
 1992 Why Colors? 
 Trespass King James 
 1993 CB4 Himself 
 Who's the Man? Nighttrain/Chauncey 
 Gift Himself Video 
 1994 Surviving the Game Jack Mason First leading role 
 1995 Tank Girl T-Saint 
 Johnny Mnemonic J-Bone 
 1996 Frankenpenis Direct-to-video 
 1997 Below Utopia Jim 
 Rhyme & Reason (film) Himself Documentary 
 Mean Guns Vincent Moon 
 The Deli Phil The Meat Man 
 1998 Crazy Six Raul 
 Pimps Up, Ho's Down Himself Documentary 
 1999 Sonic Impact Agent Taja 
 The Wrecking Crew Menace 
 The Heist C-Note 
 Frezno Smooth DJ Superfly 
 Judgment Day Matthew Reese Video 
 Urban Menace Narrator 
 Stealth Fighter Owen Turner Also executive producer 
 Final Voyage Josef 
 Jacob Two Two Meets the Hooded Fang Justice Rough, The Judge 
 Corrupt Corrupt 
 2000 Gangland Officer Dunn 
 Leprechaun in the Hood Mack Daddy Video 
 Luck of the Draw Macneilly 
 The Alternate Agent Williams 
 2001 Kept Jack Mosler 
 Stranded Jeffries Johnathan 
 Crime Partners 2000 King Fischer 
 3000 Miles to Graceland Hamilton 
 Point Doom Ringman 
 Deadly Rhapsody Wilson 
 'R Xmas The Kidnapper 
 Guardian Max 
 Tara Grady 
 Ticker Terrorist Commander 
 Out Kold Goldie 
 Ablaze Albert Denning 
 Air Rage Matt Marshall Video 
 2002 On the Edge Slim Jim 
 2004 Lexie Rasheed Video 
 Up In Harlem Ice T 
 2005 Tracks Officer Brian Clark 
 2006 Copy That Ice T 
 2007 Apartment 309 Detective Shearod 
 2008 A Family Underground Himself Direct-to-DVD Documentary 
 2009 Good Hair Himself Documentary 
 Tommy and the Cool Mule Jackie A (voice) 
 2010 Santorini Blue Dr. Lewis 
 The Other Guys Narrator Uncredited 
 2012 Himself Actor, Director, Producer 
 2013 Narrator 

===Television===

 Year Film Role Notes 
 1983 Fame One of the 'Enforcers' Episode: \"Break Dance\" 
 1985 The Merv Griffin Show Himself Interview and live performance 
 1989 Yo! MTV Raps Himself 3 interviews 
 The Arsenio Hall Show Himself Interview and live performance 
 1990 Slammin' Rap Video Magazine Himself Interview 
 1991 The Arsenio Hall Show Himself Interview and live performance 
 1992 The Arsenio Hall Show Himself Interview and live performance 
 1995 New York Undercover Danny Up/Danny Cort Episode: \"CAT\"Episode: \"Catman Comes Back\"Episode: \"The Finals\" (as Danny Cort) 
 c. 1995 Baadasss TV Co-host Two series each of 6 episodes. 
 1996 Swift Justice Earl Borgese Episode: \"Takin' Back the Street\" 
 MADtv Host Season 2 episode 2 
 1997 Taanzi Ebony, Baby]\" 
 1997 Space Ghost Coast to Coast Himself Episode: Needledrop 
 199798 Players Isaac 'Ice' Gregory Main Cast 
 1998 Welcome to Paradox Revell Episode: \"The Winner\" 
 Exiled Seymour 'Kingston' Stockton television film 
 1999 L.A. Heat Cage Episode: \"Rap Sheet\" 
 Batman Beyond Ramrod Splicers]\" 
 V.I.P The Prophet Episode: \"Val the Hard Way\"Episode: \"Val Goes To Town\" 
 2000 The Disciples The Sensei Television film 
 PhatClips Himself Interview 
 2000present Detective Odafin \"Fin\" Tutuola Replaced Monique Jeffries starting with Season 2, Main Cast 
 2002 Beyond Tough Himself Host 
 2005 Law & Order Detective Odafin \"Fin\" Tutuola Design]\"). 
 2006 Ice-T's Rap School Himself Real show 
 2007 Belzer Vizion Himself Interview 
 2008 The Jace Hall Show Himself Episode: \"Blizzard's World of Warcraft Feat. Ice T. & Coco\" 
 2009 I Get That a Lot Himself TV special 
 2010 All Star Mr. & Mrs. Himself with his wife Coco Final round 
 2010 The Jace Hall Show Himself 3 episodes 
 201113 Ice Loves Coco Himself Reality Show 
 2011 30 Rock Detective Odafin \"Fin\" Tutuola Episode: Qu Sorpresa! 
 2012 Live! with Kelly Himself Interview 
 2014 Chicago PD Detective Odafin \"Fin\" Tutuola Episode: \"Conventions\" 

===Video games===

 Year Video game Role Notes 
 2000 Agent Nathaniel Cain Voice 
 2002 Himself Voice 
 2004 Def Jam Fight for NY Himself Voice 
 Madd Dogg] Voice 
 2006 Pedestrians Voice 
 2011 Gears of War 3 Griffin Voice 

==Books==
* The Ice Opinion: Who Gives a Fuck?, with Heidi Siegmund, St. Martin's Press, 1994
* Ice: A Memoir of Gangster Life and Redemption-from South Central to Hollywood, with Douglas Century, One World/Ballantine, 2011
* Kings of Vice, with Mal Radcliff, Forge Books, 2011
* Mirror Image, with Jorge Hinojosa, Forge Books 2013

==References==

==Further reading==
* 
* Video: Ice-T interview with Adam Horovitz
* Conspiracy Worldwide Radio Ice T interview (December 2009)
* 

==External links==

* 
* 
* 
* 



[[Iron Age]]

The Iron Age is the period generally occurring after the Bronze Age, marked by the prevalent use of iron.

The early period of the age is characterized by the widespread use of iron or steel. The adoption of these materials coincided with other changes in society, including differing agricultural practices, religious beliefs and artistic styles. The Iron Age as an archaeological term indicates the condition as to civilization and culture of a people using iron as the material for their cutting tools and weapons. The Iron Age is the third principal period of the three-age system created by Christian Thomsen (17881865) for classifying ancient societies and prehistoric stages of progress. C. J. Thomsen and Jens Jacob Asmussen Worsaae first applied the system to artifacts. 

In historical archaeology, the ancient literature of the Iron Age includes the earliest texts preserved in manuscript tradition. Sanskrit literature and Chinese literature flourished in the Iron Age. Other texts include the Avestan Gathas, the Indian Vedas and the oldest parts of the Hebrew Bible. The principal feature that distinguishes the Iron Age from the preceding ages is the introduction of alphabetic characters, and the consequent development of written language which enabled literature and historic record. 

 ImageSize = width:444 height:55 PlotArea = left:15 right:15 bottom:20 top:10 AlignBars = justify Colors = id:time value:rgb(0.7,0.7,1) # id:period value:rgb(1,0.7,0.5) # id:age value:rgb(1,0.4,0.4) # id:era value:rgb(1,0.85,0.5) # id:eon value:rgb(1,0.85,0.7) # id:filler value:gray(0.8) # background bar id:black value:black Period = from:-9300 till:2013 TimeAxis = orientation:horizontal ScaleMajor = unit:year increment:1000 start:-9300 ScaleMinor = unit:year increment:100 start:-9300 PlotData = align:center textcolor:black fontsize:10 mark:(line,black) width:15 shift:(0,-5) bar: color:filler from:-9300 till:-3250 shift:(0,7) text:Stone Age from:-9300 till:-3250 shift:(0,-7) text:(Neolithic) from: -3250 till: -1200 text:Bronze Age bar: color:age from: -1200 till: 600 text:Iron Age :Dates are approximate, consult particular article for details 

The beginning of the Iron Age in Europe and adjacent areas is characterized by certain forms of implements, weapons, personal ornaments, and pottery, and also by systems of decorative design, which are altogether different from those of the preceding age of bronze. The work of blacksmiths this is what is usually meant by just "smith" developing implements and weaponsare hammered into shape, and, as a consequence, gradually departed from the stereotyped forms of their predecessors in the Bronze Age, of which objects were cast, and the system of decoration, which in the Bronze Age consisted chiefly of a repetition of rectilinear patterns, gave way to a system of curvilinear and flowing designs. The term "Iron Age" has low chronological value, because it did not begin simultaneously across the entire world. Chisholm, H. (1910). The Encyclopdia Britannica. New York: The Encyclopdia Britannica Co. The dates and context vary depending on the region, and the sequence of ages is not necessarily true for every part of the earth's surface. There are areas, such as the islands of the South Pacific, the interior of Africa, and parts of North and South America, where peoples have passed directly from the use of stone to the use of iron without an intervening age of bronze. The Junior Encyclopdia Britannica: A reference library of general knowledge. (1897). Chicago: E.G. Melvin. 

==Chronology==
Around 3000 BC, iron was a scarce and precious metal in the Near East. The earliest known iron artifacts are nine small beads, dated to 3200 BC, from burials in Gerzeh, northern Egypt, that were made from meteoritic iron, and shaped by careful hammering. Rehren T, et al, "5,000 years old Egyptian iron beads made from hammered meteoritic iron", Journal of Archaeological Science 2013 text Iron's qualities, in contrast to those of bronze, were not understood. Between 1200 BC and 1000 BC, diffusion in the understanding of iron metallurgy and use of iron objects was fast and far-flung. In the history of ferrous metallurgy, iron smelting  the extraction of usable metal from oxidized iron ores  is more difficult than tin and copper smelting. These other metals and their alloys can be cold-worked, or melted in simple pottery kilns and cast in molds; but smelted iron requires hot-working and can be melted only in specially designed furnaces. It is therefore not surprising that humans only mastered iron smelting after several millennia of bronze metallurgy.

In 2005, metallurgical analysis by Hideo Akanuma of iron fragments found at Kaman-Kalehyk in 1994 and dating to c. 1800 BC revealed that some of these fragments were in fact composed of carbon steel; these currently form the world's earliest known evidence for steel manufacture. 

Modern archaeological evidence identifies the start of iron production as taking place in Anatolia around 1200 BC, though some contemporary archaeological evidence points to earlier dates.

Lack of archaeological evidence of iron production made it seem unlikely that it had begun earlier elsewhere, and the Iron Age was seen as a case of simple diffusion of a new and superior technology from an invention point in the Near East to other regions. It is now known that meteoric iron, or iron-nickel alloy, was used by various ancient peoples thousands of years before the Iron Age. Such iron, being in its native metallic state, required no smelting of ores. Archaeomineralogy, p. 164, George Robert Rapp, Springer, 2002 Understanding materials science, p. 125, Rolf E. Hummel, Springer, 2004 By the Middle Bronze Age, increasing numbers of smelted iron objects (distinguishable from meteoric iron by the lack of nickel in the product) appeared in the Middle East, Southeast Asia, and South Asia.

Iron in its natural form is barely harder than bronze, and is not useful for tools unless combined with carbon to make steel. The percentage of carbon determines important characteristics of the final product: the more carbon, the harder the steel. The systematic production and use of iron implements in Anatolia began around 2000 BC. Ironware piece unearthed from Turkey found to be oldest steel in The Hindu, Thursday, March 26, 2009 Recent archaeological research in the Ganges Valley, India showed early iron working by 1800 BC. However, this metal was expensive, perhaps because of the complications of steel-making. It is attested in both documents and archaeology as a material for precious items such as jewellery.

Anthony Snodgrass A.M.Snodgrass (1966), "Arms and Armour of the Greeks". (Thames & Hudson, London) A. M. Snodgrass (1971), "The Dark Age of Greece" (Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh). suggests that a shortage of tin, as a part of the Bronze Age Collapse and trade disruptions in the Mediterranean around 1300 BC, forced metalworkers to seek an alternative to bronze. As evidence, many bronze implements were recycled into weapons during this time. More widespread use of iron led to improved steel-making technology at lower cost. Thus, even when tin became available again, iron was cheaper, stronger, and lighter, and forged iron implements superseded cast bronze tools permanently. Theodore Wertime and J. D. Muhly, eds. The Coming of the Age of Iron (New Haven, 1979). 

Recent archaeological work has modified not only the above chronology, but also the causes of the transition from bronze to iron. New dates from India suggest that iron was being worked there as early as 1800 BC, and African sites are turning up dates as early as 1200 BC, Duncan E. Miller and N.J. Van Der Merwe, 'Early Metal Working in Sub Saharan Africa' Journal of African History 35 (1994) 136; Minze Stuiver and N.J. Van Der Merwe, 'Radiocarbon Chronology of the Iron Age in Sub-Saharan Africa' Current Anthropology 1968. How Old is the Iron Age in Sub-Saharan Africa?  by Roderick J. McIntosh, Archaeological Institute of America (1999) Iron in Sub-Saharan Africa  by Stanley B. Alpern (2005) confounding the idea that there was a simple discovery and diffusion model. Increasingly, the Iron Age in Europe is being seen as a part of the Bronze Age collapse in the ancient Near East, in ancient India (with the post-Rigvedic Vedic civilization), ancient Iran, and ancient Greece (with the Greek Dark Ages). In other regions of Europe, the Iron Age began in the 8th century BC in Central Europe and the 6th century BC in Northern Europe. The Near Eastern Iron Age is divided into two subsections, Iron I and Iron II. Iron I (12001000 BC) illustrates both continuity and discontinuity with the previous Late Bronze Age. There is no definitive cultural break between the 13th and 12th century BC throughout the entire region, although certain new features in the hill country, Transjordan, and coastal region may suggest the appearance of the Aramaean and Sea People groups. There is evidence, however, that shows strong continuity with Bronze Age culture, although as one moves later into Iron I the culture begins to diverge more significantly from that of the late 2nd millennium.

==History==

ImageSize = width:800 height:60
PlotArea = width:720 height:35 left:65 bottom:20
AlignBars = justify

Colors =
 id:time value:rgb(0.7,0.7,1) #
 id:period value:rgb(1,0.7,0.5) #
 id:age value:rgb(0.95,0.85,0.5) #
 id:era value:rgb(1,0.85,0.5) #
 id:eon value:rgb(1,0.12,1) #
 id:filler value:gray(0.8) # background bar
 id:black value:black

Period = from:-1400 till:600
TimeAxis = orientation:horizontal
ScaleMajor = unit:year increment:500 start:-1200
ScaleMinor = unit:year increment:100 start:-1200

PlotData =
 align:center textcolor:black fontsize:8 mark:(line,black) width:15 shift:(0,-5)

 bar:Timeframe color:period
 from: -1300 till: 500 text:Classic Iron Age
 bar:Timeframe color:filler
 from: -1400 till: -1300 shift:(7,-2) text:Bronze Age
 from: 500 till: 600 text:Middle Ages
 bar:Divisions color:age
 from: -1300 till: -475 text:Early Iron Age
 from: -475 till: 250 text:Middle Iron Age
 from: 250 till: 500 text:Late Iron Age

During the Iron Age, the best tools and weapons were made from steel, particularly alloys which were produced with a carbon content between approximately 0.30% and 1.2% by weight. Alloys with less carbon than this, such as wrought iron, cannot be heat treated to a significant degree and will consequently be of low hardness, while a higher carbon content creates an extremely hard but brittle material that cannot be annealed, tempered, or otherwise softened. Steel weapons and tools were nearly the same weight as those of bronze, but stronger. However, steel was difficult to produce with the methods available, and alloys that were easier to make, such as wrought iron, were more common in lower-priced goods. Many techniques have been used to create steel; Mediterranean ones differ dramatically from African ones, for example. Sometimes the final product is all steel, sometimes techniques like case hardening or forge welding were used to make cutting edges stronger.

===Near East===
Southwest Asia / Middle East

In Chaldaea and Assyria, the initial use of iron reaches far back, to perhaps 3000 BC. One of the earliest smelted iron artifacts known was a dagger with an iron blade found in a Hattic tomb in Anatolia, dating from 2500 BC. Richard Cowen () The Age of Iron Chapter 5 in a series of essays on Geology, History, and People prepares for a course of the University of California at Davis. Online version. The widespread use of iron weapons which replaced bronze weapons rapidly disseminated throughout the Near East (North Africa, southwest Asia) by the beginning of the 1st millennium BC.

 :;Finds of Iron 
 :Early examples and distribution of non-precious metal finds. Alex Webb, \"Metalworking in Ancient Greece\" Date Crete Aegean Greece Cyprus Total Anatolia Grand total 13001200 BC 5 2 9 0 16 33 49 12001100 BC 1 2 8 26 37 N.A. 37 11001000 BC 13 3 31 33 80 N.A. 80 1000900 BC 37+ 30 115 29 211 N.A. 211 Total Bronze Age 5 2 9 0 16 33 49 Total Iron Age 51 35 163 88 328 N.A. 328 

 

====Near East timeline====

ImageSize = width:800 height:50
PlotArea = width:720 height:25 left:65 bottom:20
AlignBars = justify

Colors =
 id:time value:rgb(0.7,0.7,1) #
 id:period value:rgb(1,0.7,0.5) #
 id:age value:rgb(0.95,0.85,0.5) #
 id:era value:rgb(1,0.85,0.5) #
 id:eon value:rgb(1,0.85,0.7) #
 id:filler value:gray(0.8) # background bar
 id:black value:black

Period = from:-1300 till:500
TimeAxis = orientation:horizontal
ScaleMajor = unit:year increment:500 start:-1300
ScaleMinor = unit:year increment:100 start:-1300

PlotData =
 align:center textcolor:black fontsize:8 mark:(line,black) width:15 shift:(0,-5)

 bar:NEast color:age
 from: -1300 till: -600 shift:(0,5) text:Ancient Near East
 from: -1300 till: -1000 text:Iron Age I
 from: -1000 till: -600 text:Iron Age II
 bar:NEast color:filler
 from: -600 till: -300 text:Achaemenid
 from: -300 till: -50 text:Seleucid Empire
 from: -50 till: 224 text:Parthian Empire
 from: 224 till: 500 text:Sassanid Empire

:::Dates are approximate, consult particular article for details
::: Prehistoric (or Proto-historic) Iron Age Historic Iron Age

====Ancient Near East====

The Iron Age in the Ancient Near East is believed to have begun with the discovery of iron smelting and smithing techniques in Anatolia or the Caucasus and Balkans in the late 2nd millennium BC (c. 1300 BC). Jane C. Waldbaum, From Bronze to Iron: The Transition from the Bronze Age to the Iron Age in the Eastern Mediterranean (Studies in Mediterranean Archaeology, vol. LIV, 1978). However, this theory has been challenged by the emergence of those placing the transition in price and availability issues rather than the development of technology on its own. The earliest bloomery smelting of iron is found at Tell Hammeh, Jordan around 930 BC (C14 dating).

The development of iron smelting was once attributed to the Hittites of Anatolia during the Late Bronze Age. It was believed that they maintained a monopoly on ironworking, and that their empire had been based on that advantage. Muhly, James D. 'Metalworking/Mining in the Levant' pp. 174-183 in Near Eastern Archaeology ed. Suzanne Richard (2003), pp. 179-180. Accordingly, the invading Sea Peoples were responsible for spreading the knowledge through that region. This theory is no longer held in the common current thought of the majority of scholarship, since there is no archaeological evidence of the alleged Hittite monopoly. While there are some iron objects from Bronze Age Anatolia, the number is comparable to iron objects found in Egypt and other places of the same time period; and only a small number of these objects are weapons. Waldbaum, Jane C. From Bronze to Iron. Gteburg: Paul Astms Frlag (1978): 56-8. As part of the Late Bronze Age-Early Iron Age, the Bronze Age collapse saw the slow, comparatively continuous spread of iron-working technology in the region. The Ugaritic script was in use during this time, around 1300 BC. Ugarit was one of the centres of the literate world.

Assyro-Babylonian literature, written in the Akkadian language, of Mesopotamia (Assyria and Babylonia) continues into the Iron Age up until the 6th centuries BC. The oldest Phoenician alphabet inscription is the Ahiram epitaph, engraved on the sarcophagus of King Ahiram from circa 1200 BC. Coulmas, Florian, Writing Systems of the World, Blackwell Publishers Ltd, Oxford, 1989. p. 141. It has become conventional to refer to the alphabetic script as "Proto-Canaanite" until the mid-11th century BC, when it is first attested on inscribed bronze arrowheads, and as "Phoenician" only after 1050 BC. Markoe, Glenn E., Phoenicians. University of California Press. p. 111 ISBN 0-520-22613-5 The Paleo-Hebrew alphabet is identical to the Phoenician alphabet and dates to the 10th century BC.

===Europe===

In Europe, the use of iron covers the last years of the prehistoric period and the early years of the historic period. The regional Iron Age may be defined as including the last stages of the prehistoric period and the first of the proto-historic periods. Iron working was introduced to Europe in the late 11th century BC, Riederer, Josef; Wartke, Ralf-B.: "Iron", Cancik, Hubert; Schneider, Helmuth (eds.): Brill's New Pauly, Brill 2009 probably from the Caucasus, and slowly spread northwards and westwards over the succeeding 500 years. The widespread use of the technology of iron was implemented in Europe simultaneously with Asia. John Collis, "The European Iron Age" (1989) 

The Iron Age in Europe is characterized by an elaboration of designs in weapons, implements, and utensils. These are no longer cast but hammered into shape, and decoration is elaborate curvilinear rather than simple rectilinear; the forms and character of the ornamentation of the northern European weapons resembles in some respects Roman arms, while in other respects they are peculiar and evidently representative of northern art. The dead were buried in an extended position, whereas in the preceding Bronze Age cremation had been the rule.

===Asia===
The widespread use of the technology of iron was implemented in Asia simultaneously with Europe. In China, the use of iron reaches far back, to perhaps 4000 years BC. 

====Central Asia====
The Iron Age in Central Asia began when iron objects appear among the Indo-European Saka in present-day Xinjiang between the 10th century BC and the 7th century BC, such as those found at the cemetery site of Chawuhukou. Mark E. Hall, "Towards an absolute chronology for the Iron Age of Inner Asia," Antiquity 71.274 , 863-74. 

====North Asia====
The Pazyryk culture is an Iron Age archaeological culture (ca. 6th to 3rd centuries BC) identified by excavated artifacts and mummified humans found in the Siberian permafrost in the Altay Mountains.

====South Asia====
Archaeology in Thailand at sites Ban Don Ta Phet and Khao Sam Kaeo yielding metallic, stone, and glass artifacts stylistically associated with the Indian subcontinent suggest Indianization of Southeast Asia beginning in the fourth to second centuries B.C.E. during the late Iron Age. 
=====South Asia timeline=====

ImageSize = width:800 height:50
PlotArea = width:720 height:25 left:65 bottom:20
AlignBars = justify

Colors =
 id:time value:rgb(0.7,0.7,1) #
 id:period value:rgb(1,0.7,0.5) #
 id:age value:rgb(0.95,0.85,0.5) #
 id:era value:rgb(1,0.85,0.5) #
 id:eon value:rgb(1,0.85,0.7) #
 id:filler value:gray(0.8) # background bar
 id:black value:black

Period = from:-1300 till:500
TimeAxis = orientation:horizontal
ScaleMajor = unit:year increment:500 start:-1300
ScaleMinor = unit:year increment:100 start:-1300

PlotData =
 align:center textcolor:black fontsize:8 mark:(line,black) width:15 shift:(0,-5)

 bar:India color:age
 from: -1200 till: -525 text:PGW culture
 from: -525 till: -200 text:NBPW culture
 from: -1200 till: -200 shift:(0,5) text:Iron Age India
 from: -200 till: 1 text:Indo-Greeks
 bar:India color:filler
 from: 1 till: 500 text:Middle kingdoms of India

:::Dates are approximate, consult particular article for details
::: Prehistoric (or Proto-historic) Iron Age Historic Iron Age

=====Indian subcontinent=====

The history of metallurgy in the Indian subcontinent began during the 2nd millennium BC. Archaeological sites in India, such as Malhar, Dadupur, Raja Nala Ka Tila and Lahuradewa in present day Uttar Pradesh show iron implements in the period 1800 BC  1200 BC. The origins of Iron Working in India: New evidence from the Central Ganga plain and the Eastern Vindhyas by Rakesh Tewari (Director, U.P. State Archaeological Department) Archaeological excavations in Hyderabad show an Iron Age burial site. Rakesh Tewari Director of Archaeology, (Uttar Pradesh) believes that around the beginning of the Indian Iron Age (13th century BC), iron smelting was widely practiced in India. Such use suggests that the date of the technology's inception may be around the 16th century BC. 

Epic India is traditionally placed around early 10th century BC and later on from the Sanskrit epics of Sanskrit literature. Composed between approximately 1500 BC and 600 BC of pre-classical Sanskrit, the Vedic literature forms four Vedas (the Rig, Yajur, Sma and Atharva). The main period of Vedic literary activity is the 9th to 7th centuries when the various schools of thought compiled and memorized their respective corpora. Following this, the scholarship around 500 to 100 BC organized knowledge into Sutra treatises.

The beginning of the 1st millennium BC saw extensive developments in iron metallurgy in India. Technological advancement and mastery of iron metallurgy was achieved during this period of peaceful settlements. One iron working centre in east India has been dated to the first millennium BC. Early Antiquity By I. M. Drakonoff. Published 1991. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-14465-8. pg 372 In Southern India (present day Mysore) iron appeared as early as 12th to 11th centuries BC; these developments were too early for any significant close contact with the northwest of the country. The Indian Upanishads mention metallurgy. Upanisads By Patrick Olivelle. Published 1998. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-283576-9. pg xxix and the Indian Mauryan period saw advances in metallurgy. The New Cambridge History of India By J. F. Richards, Gordon Johnson, Christopher Alan Bayly. Published 2005. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-36424-8. pg 64 As early as 300 BC, certainly by 200 AD, high quality steel was produced in southern India, by what would later be called the crucible technique. In this system, high-purity wrought iron, charcoal, and glass were mixed in crucible and heated until the iron melted and absorbed the carbon. Juleff, G. (1996), "An ancient wind powered iron smelting technology in Sri Lanka", Nature, 379 (3): 6063. 

======India timeline======

ImageSize = width:800 height:125
PlotArea = width:720 height:100 left:65 bottom:20
AlignBars = justify

Colors =
 id:time value:rgb(0.7,0.7,1) #
 id:period value:rgb(1,0.7,0.5) #
 id:age value:rgb(0.95,0.85,0.5) #
 id:era value:rgb(1,0.85,0.5) #
 id:eon value:rgb(1,0.85,0.7) #
 id:filler value:gray(0.8) # background bar
 id:black value:black

Period = from:-1300 till:500
TimeAxis = orientation:horizontal
ScaleMajor = unit:year increment:500 start:-1300
ScaleMinor = unit:year increment:100 start:-1300

PlotData =
 align:center textcolor:black fontsize:8 mark:(line,black) width:15 shift:(0,-5)

 bar:India color:era
 from: -1200 till: -272 text:Iron Age India
 bar:Maha color:era
 from: -700 till: -300 text:Maha Janapadas
 bar:Magadha color:era
 from: -684 till: -424 text:Magadha Empire
 bar:Nanda color:era
 from: -424 till: -321 text:Nanda Empire
 bar:Maurya color:era
 from: -321 till: -272 text:Maurya Empire

:::Dates are approximate, consult particular article for details
::: Prehistoric (or Proto-historic) Iron Age Historic Iron Age

=====Sri Lanka=====
The protohistoric Early Iron Age in Sri Lanka lasted from 1000 to 600 BC. Radiocarbon evidence has been collected from Anuradhapura and Aligala shelter in Sigiriya. Lahiru Weligamage (2002) The Ancient Sri Lanka Deraniyagala, Siran, The Prehistory of Sri Lanka; an ecological perspective. (revised ed.), Colombo: Archaeological Survey Department of Sri Lanka, 1992: 709-29 Karunaratne and Adikari 1994, Excavations at Aligala prehistoric site. In: Bandaranayake and Mogren (1994). Further studies in the settlement archaeology of the Sigiriya-Dambulla region. Sri Lanka, University of Kelaniya: Postgraduate Institute of Archaeolog :58 Mogren 1994. Objectives, methods, constraints and perspectives. In: Bandaranayake and Mogren (1994) Further studies in the settlement archaeology of the Sigiriya-Dambulla region. Sri Lanka, University of Kelaniya: Postgraduate Institute of Archaeolog: 39. The Anuradhapura settlement is recorded to extend 10 hectares by 800 BC and grew to 50 hectares by 700 - 600 BC to become a town. F. R. Allchin 1989. City and state formation in Early Historic South Asia. South Asian Studies 5:1-16: 3 The skeletal remains of an Early Iron Age chief was excavated in Anaikoddai, Jaffna. The name 'Ko Veta' is engraved in Brahmi script on a seal buried with the skeleton and is assigned by the excavators to the 3rd century BC. Ko, meaning "King" in Tamil, is comparable to such names as Ko Atan and Ko Putivira occurring in contemporary Brahmi inscriptions in south India. Indrapala, K. The Evolution of an ethnic identity: The Tamils of Sri Lanka, pp. 324 It is also speculated that Early Iron Age sites may exist in Kandarodai, Matota, Pilapitiya and Tissamaharama. Deraniyagala, Siran, The Prehistory of Sri Lanka; an ecological perspective. (revised ed.), Colombo: Archaeological Survey Department of Sri Lanka, 1992: 730-2, 735 

====East Asia====

=====East Asia timeline=====

ImageSize = width:800 height:80
PlotArea = width:720 height:55 left:65 bottom:20
AlignBars = justify

Colors =
 id:time value:rgb(0.7,0.7,1) #
 id:period value:rgb(1,0.7,0.5) #
 id:age value:rgb(0.95,0.85,0.5) #
 id:era value:rgb(1,0.85,0.5) #
 id:eon value:rgb(1,0.85,0.7) #
 id:filler value:gray(0.8) # background bar
 id:black value:black

Period = from:-1300 till:500
TimeAxis = orientation:horizontal
ScaleMajor = unit:year increment:500 start:-1300
ScaleMinor = unit:year increment:100 start:-1300

PlotData =
 align:center textcolor:black fontsize:8 mark:(line,black) width:15 shift:(0,-5)

 bar:China color:era
 from: -771 till: -465 text:Spring and Autumn
 from: -465 till: -221 text:Warring States
 from: -771 till: -221 shift:(0,5) text:Iron Age China
 from: -221 till: 500 shift:(0,4) text:Imperial China
 bar:China color:filler
 from: -221 till: 500 shift:(0,-7) text:(Early period)
 bar: Japan color:age
 from: -300 till: 300 text:Yayoi
 from: 300 till: 500 text:Kofun
 bar: Korea color:era
 from: -500 till: -108 text:Late Gojoseon
 bar:Korea color:filler
 from: -108 till: -18 shift:(0,4) text:ProtoKingdoms
 from: -18 till: 500 text:Three Kingdoms

:::Dates are approximate, consult particular article for details
::: Prehistoric (or Proto-historic) Iron Age Historic Iron Age

=====China=====

In China, Chinese bronze inscriptions are found around 1200 BC. The development of iron metallurgy was transpired by the 9th century BC. Derevianki, A. P. 1973. Rannyi zheleznyi vek Priamuria David N. Keightley. The Origins of Chinese civilization. Page 226. The large seal script is identified with a group of characters from a book entitled Sh Zho Pin (ca. 800 BC). Iron metallurgy reached the Yangzi Valley toward the end of the 6th century BC. Higham, Charles. 1996. The Bronze Age of Southeast Asia The few objects were found at Changsha and Nanjing. The mortuary evidence suggests that the initial use of iron in Lingnan belongs to the mid-to-late Warring States period (from about 350 BC). Important non-precious husi style metal finds include Iron tools found at the Tomb at Ku-wei ts'un of the fourth century BC. Encyclopedia of World Art: Landscape in art to Micronesian cultures. McGraw-Hill. 1964. 

The techniques used in Lingnan are a combination of bivalve moulds of distinct southern tradition and the incorporation of piece mould technology from the Zhongyuan. The products of the combination of these two periods are bells, vessels, weapons and ornaments and the sophisticated cast.

An Iron Age culture of the Tibetan Plateau has tentatively been associated with the Zhang Zhung culture described in early Tibetan writings.

=====Korea=====

Silla chest and neck armour from National Museum of Korea.
Iron objects were introduced to the Korean peninsula through trade with chiefdoms and state-level societies in the Yellow Sea area in the 4th century BC, just at the end of the Warring States Period but before the Western Han Dynasty began. Kim, Do-heon. 2002. Samhan Sigi Jujocheolbu-eui Yutong Yangsang-e Daehan Geomto Study of the Distribution Patterns of Cast Iron Axes in the Samhan Period. Yongnam Kogohak Archaeological Review 31:129. Taylor, Sarah. 1989. The Introduction and Development of Iron Production in Korea. World Archaeology 20(3):422431. Yoon proposes that iron was first introduced to chiefdoms located along North Korean river valleys that flow into the Yellow Sea such as the Cheongcheon and Taedong Rivers. Yoon, Dong-suk. 1989. Early Iron Metallurgy in Korea. Archaeological Review from Cambridge 8(1):9299. Iron production quickly followed in the 2nd century BC, and iron implements came to be used by farmers by the 1st century in southern Korea. The earliest known cast-iron axes in southern Korea are found in the Geum River basin. The time that iron production begins is the same time that complex chiefdoms of Proto-historic Korea emerged. The complex chiefdoms were the precursors of early states such as Silla, Baekje, Goguryeo, and Gaya Barnes, Gina L. 2001. State Formation in Korea: Historical and Archaeological Perspectives. Curzon, London. Iron ingots were an important mortuary item and indicated the wealth or prestige of the deceased in this period. Lee, Sung-joo. 1998. Silla  Gaya Sahoe-eui Giwon-gwa Seongjang Rise and Growth of Silla and Gaya Society. Hakyeon Munhwasa, Seoul. 

=====Japan=====

Iron items, such as tools, weapons, and decorative objects, are postulated to have entered Japan during the late Yayoi period (c. 300 BC to 300 AD) Prehistoric Archaeological Periods in Japan, Charles T. Keally or the succeeding Kofun period (c. 250 AD to 538 AD), most likely through contacts with the Korean Peninsula and China.

Distinguishing characteristics of the Yayoi period include the appearance of new pottery styles and the start of intensive rice agriculture in paddy fields. Yayoi culture flourished in a geographic area from southern Kysh to northern Honsh. The Kofun and the subsequent Asuka periods are sometimes referred to collectively as the Yamato period; The word kofun is Japanese for the type of burial mounds dating from that era.

===Africa===
In Africa, where there was no continent-wide universal Bronze Age, the use of iron succeeded immediately the use of stone. Metallurgy was characterized by the absence of a Bronze Age, and the transition from "stone to steel" in tool substances. Sub-Saharan Africa has produced very early instances of carbon steel found to be in production around 2000 years ago in northwest Tanzania, based on complex preheating principles. Nubia was one of the relatively few places in Africa to have a sustained Bronze Age along with Egypt and much of the rest of North Africa. The Meroitic script was developed in the Napatan Period (c. 700300 BC).

====Africa timeline====

ImageSize = width:800 height:65
PlotArea = width:720 height:40 left:65 bottom:20
AlignBars = justify

Colors =
 id:time value:rgb(0.7,0.7,1) #
 id:period value:rgb(1,0.7,0.5) #
 id:age value:rgb(0.95,0.85,0.5) #
 id:era value:rgb(1,0.85,0.5) #
 id:eon value:rgb(1,0.85,0.7) #
 id:filler value:gray(0.8) # background bar
 id:black value:black

Period = from:-1300 till:500
TimeAxis = orientation:horizontal
ScaleMajor = unit:year increment:500 start:-1300
ScaleMinor = unit:year increment:100 start:-1300

PlotData =
 align:center textcolor:black fontsize:8 mark:(line,black) width:15 shift:(0,-5)

 bar:N.Africa color:age
 from: -1292 till: -1070 text:Ramesside
 from: -1070 till: -700 text:Ancient Egypt
 from: -700 till: 1 text:Kingdom of Kush
 bar:N.Africa color:Filler
 from: 1 till: 500 text:Aksumite Empire
 bar:Africa color:era
 from: -1000 till: 500 shift:(-50,5) text:African Iron Age
 from: -1000 till: -500 shift:(-50,5) text:Sub-Saharan Africa
 from: -1000 till: -500 text:Nok
 from: -1000 till: 500 text:Bantu expansion

:::Dates are approximate, consult particular article for details
::: Prehistoric (or Proto-historic) Iron Age Historic Iron Age

====Ancient Egypt====
In the Black Pyramid of Abusir, dating before 2000 BC, Gaston Maspero found some pieces of iron. In the funeral text of Pepi I, the metal is mentioned. A sword bearing the name of pharaoh Merneptah as well as a battle axe with an iron blade and gold-decorated bronze shaft were both found in the excavation of Ugarit. Richard Cowen, 'The Age of Iron Chapter 5 in a series of essays on Geology, History, and People prepares for a course of the University of California at Davis. Online version 

Iron metal is singularly scarce in collections of Egyptian antiquities. Bronze remained the primary material there until the conquest by Assyria. The explanation of this would seem to lie in the fact that the relics are in most cases the paraphernalia of tombs, the funeral vessels and vases, and iron being considered an impure metal by the ancient Egyptians it was never used in their manufacture of these or for any religious purposes. It was attributed to Seth, the spirit of evil who according to Egyptian tradition governed the central deserts of Africa. 

====Sub-Saharan====

Iron Age finds in East and Southern Africa, corresponding to the early 1st millennium Bantu expansion.
Very early copper and bronze working sites in Niger, West Africa may date to as early as 1500 BC. There is also evidence of iron metallurgy in Termit, Niger from around this period. Iron in Africa: Revising the History, UNESCO Aux origines de la mtallurgie du fer en Afrique, Une anciennet mconnue: Afrique de l'Ouest et Afrique centrale. In Central Africa, iron working may have been practiced as early as the 3rd millennium BC. Heather Pringle, Seeking Africa's first Iron Men. Science 323:200-202. 2009. It was once believed that iron and copper working in Sub-Saharan Africa spread in conjunction with the Bantu expansion, from the Cameroon region to the African Great Lakes in the 3rd century BC, reaching the Cape around 400 AD. 

Sub-Saharan Africa has produced very early instances of carbon steel found to be in production around 2,000 years ago in northwest Tanzania, based on complex preheating principles. These discoveries, according to Schmidt and Avery (archaeologists credited with the discovery) are significant for the history of metallurgy. Peter Schmidt, Donald H. Avery. Complex Iron Smelting and Prehistoric Culture in Tanzania, Science 22 September 1978: Vol. 201. no. 4361, pp. 1085 - 1089 

At the end of the Iron Age, Nubia became a major manufacturer and exporter of iron. This was after being expelled from Egypt by Assyrians, who used iron weapons. Collins, Rober O. and Burns, James M. The History of Sub-Saharan Africa. New York:Cambridge University Press, p. 37. ISBN 978-0-521-68708-9. 

==Gallery==

 Iron Age Examples 
 File:Dun Carloway.jpg|Dun Carloway broch, Lewis, Scotland File:Ironageroof.jpg|A replica Iron Age thatched roof, Butser Ancient Farm, Hampshire, England File:Celtic-roundhouse-1994.jpg|Iron Age roundhouse File:Celtic-roundhouseinternal-1995.jpg|Iron Age roundhouse File:Celtic-roundhouseinternal-1999.jpg|Iron Age roundhouse File:Broborg Knivsta kommun 8448.jpg|Broborg Knivsta, prehistoric castle 

==See also==
;General:Fogou
;Lists: List of archaeological periods, List of archaeological sites
;Metallurgy: Blast furnace, Roman metallurgy
;Other: Synoptic table of the principal old world prehistoric cultures

==Further reading==
* Waldbaum, Jane C. From Bronze to Iron. Gteburg: Paul Astms Frlag (1978): 56-8

==References==

==External links==
;General
* A site with a focus on Iron Age Britain from resourcesforhistory.com

;Publications
* Andre Gunder Frank and William R. Thompson, Early Iron Age economic expansion and contraction revisited. American Institute of Archaeology, San Francisco, Ca., January, 2004.

;News
* Mass burial suggests massacre at Iron Age hill fort. Archaeologists have found evidence of a massacre linked to Iron Age warfare at a hill fort in Derbyshire. BBC. 17 April 2011

 


[[EFnet]]

EFnet or Eris-Free network is a major IRC network, with more than 35,000 users. It is the modern-day descendant of the original IRC network.

== History ==
There were 53 EFnet servers in the world as of October 2009.

Initially, most IRC servers formed a single IRC network, to which new servers could join without restriction, but this was soon abused by people who set up servers to sabotage other users, channels, or servers. Restriction grew and, in August 1990, eris.berkeley.edu was the last server indiscriminately allowing other servers to join it. 

A group of operators, with the support of Jarkko Oikarinen, introduced a new "Q-line" into their server configurations, to "quarantine" themselves away from eris by disconnecting from any subset of the IRC network as soon as they saw eris there. http://my.pages.de/pub/net/irc/history/ 

For a few days, the entire IRC network suffered frequent netsplits, but eventually the majority of servers added the Q-line and effectively created a new separate IRC net called EFnet (Eris-Free Network); the remaining servers which stayed connected to eris (and thus were no longer able to connect to EFnet servers) were called A-net (Anarchy Network). A-net soon vanished, leaving EFnet as the only IRC network.

Continuing problems with performance and abuse eventually led to the rise of another major IRC network, Undernet, which split off in October 1992.

In July 1996, disagreement on policy caused EFnet to break in two: the slightly larger European half (including Australia and Japan) formed IRCnet, while the American servers continued as EFnet. This was known as The Great Split. 

In July 2001, after a string of DDoS attacks a service called CHANFIX (originally JUPES) was created, which is designed to give back ops to channels which have lost ops or been taken over.

In 2007, various EFnet servers began implementing SSL. 

February 2009 saw the introduction of a new CHANFIX module called OPME, a mechanism for EFnet Admins to use to restore ops in an opless channel. It provides a much cleaner alternative to masskill, which was unnecessarily invasive and disruptive to the network.

Later in 2009, some major IRC servers were delinked: irc.vel.net, irc.dks.ca, irc.pte.hu, EFnet's only UK server efnet.demon.co.uk, and EFnet's only UK hub hub.uk, which were sponsored by Demon Internet.

In September 2010, the two western regions of the network (United States and Canada) merged into the North American region. While the North American and European regions are technically independent of each other, today many issues within EFnet are handled at a global level. 

In the last few years EFnet has lost a growing number of its original servers .

== Characteristics ==
Efnet's server structure as of October 2009 (green = Europe, blue = USA, Red = Canada)

EFnet has large variations in rules and policy between different servers as well as the two major regions (EU and NA). Both have their own policy structure, and each region votes on their own server applications. However, central policies are voted upon by the server admin community which is archived for referencing. EFnet voting site 

Due to EFnet's nature, it has gained recognition over the years for warez, hackers, and DoS attacks. 

EFnet has always been known for its lack of IRC services that other IRC networks support (such as NickServ and ChanServ, although it had a NickServ until April 8, 1994 (full text) ). Instead, the CHANFIX service was introduced to fix "opless" channels.

Most servers on EFnet run ircd-ratbox with one running ircd-hybrid. 

EFnet's channel operators are generally free to run their channels however they see fit without the intervention of IRCops. IRCops are primarily there to handle network and server related issues, and rarely get involved with channel-level issues. 

== References ==

== External links ==

* 
* 



[[Undernet]]

The Undernet is the fourth largest publicly monitored Internet Relay Chat (IRC) network, c. 2011, with about 12 client servers serving 60,000 users in 11,000 channels at any given time. "Details of IRC Network Undernet". irc.netsplit.de. "Undernet IRC Network". undernet.org. 

IRC clients can connect to Undernet via the global round robin irc.undernet.org, the region-specific round robins us.undernet.org and eu.undernet.org, or a specific server from the server list. Undernet server list. undernet.org 

==History==
Undernet was established in October 1992 by Danny Mitchell, Donald Lambert, and Laurent Demally as an experimental network running a modified version of the EFnet irc2.7 IRCd software, created in an attempt to make it less bandwidth-consumptive and less chaotic, as netsplits and takeovers were starting to plague EFnet. The Undernet IRC daemon became known as "ircu". Undernet was formed at a time when many small IRC networks were being started and subsequently disappearing; however, it managed to grow into one of the largest and oldest IRC networks despite some initial in-fighting and setbacks. For a period in 1994, Undernet was wracked by an ongoing series of flame wars. Again in 2001, it was threatened by automated heavy spamming of its users for potential commercial gain. Undernet survived these periods relatively intact and its popularity continues to the present day.

It is notable as being the first network to utilize timestamping, originally made by Carlo Wood, in the IRC server protocol as a means to curb abuse.

==Services==
Undernet uses GNUworld to provide X, its channel service bot. Channel service. undernet.org X operates on a username basis; a username is independent from a nickname, which cannot be registered on Undernet. 

As Undernet limits channel registration to "established channels" or channels with an active userbase, Undernet introduced a version of ChanFix (under the nickname C) designed to work like EFNet's CHANFIX. Its use is to protect unregistered channels. ChanFix tracks channel op usage by username basis and restores ops if channels become opless or are taken over. Chanfix. chanfix.info. 

Undernet also runs an open proxy scanner. proxyscanner This scans users currently connecting to the network for open WinGate, SOCKS version 4/5, and HTTP proxy servers. IP addresses hosting open proxy servers are automatically G-lined from the network. These changes were put in place after the 2001 Denial-of-service attacks almost destroyed the network and left Undernet without the registered channel service bot for months. In 2010, Undernet also started to g-line Tor exit nodes, instead of assigning those users a cloak like e.g. Quakenet.

==References==

==External links==

* 
* Washington Post coverage
* 



[[DALnet]]

DALnet is an Internet Relay Chat (IRC) network that is populated by a stable population of around 14,000 users in about 7,000 channels, with 33 servers making up the network. Network statistics over the last two weeks 

DALnet is accessible by connecting with an IRC client to an active DALnet server on ports 6660 through 6669, and 7000. SSL users can connect on port 6697 as well. The generic round-robin address is irc.dal.net.
DALnet on macintosh through irssi
==History==
DALnet was founded in July 1994 by members of the EFnet #startrek channel. This new network was known as "dal's net", after the nickname used by the administrator of the first IRC server on the network, "dalvenjah", taken from the dragon "Dalvenjah Foxfire", in a fantasy novel by Thorarinn Gunnarsson. The network was soon renamed from dal's net to DALnet. 

In contrast to other IRC networks of the time, in 1995 DALnet implemented "services", a system that enforced IRC nickname and channel registrations. Traditionally, on IRC, anybody can own a channel or a nickname; if no one is using it, it can be used by anyone who chooses to do so. On DALnet, however, this was no longer the case. This servicewhich many users saw as a way of firmly establishing their online identitieswas a significant factor in DALnet's popularity and afforded the network a distinctive reputation among IRCers. While attempts to implement a similar system had been made before and other networks have since developed registration services of their own, at the time DALnet's successful decision to allow and enforce nickname and channel registration was considered to be unique and even controversial, as it went against established practice.

From 25 users in July 1994, the number of users grew to 1,000 by November 1995, 5,000 by June 1996, 10,000 by December 1996, 50,000 by October 1999, 100,000 in November 2001, and peaked around 142,000 in April 2002. DALnet History - Growth Chart At that point DALnet was one of the four biggest IRC networks. The user count then slowly reduced again until the DDoS attack (see below) at which point it plummeted and never really recovered. The number of servers grew from 2&ndash;4 when started, peaking at 44 in April 2002.

The network operation was severely disrupted in late 2002 and early 2003 due to distributed denial of service attacks. Added to the DDoS issues was the fact that the owner of twisted.dal.net (the world's largest single IRC server, hosting more than 50,000 clients most of the time) delinked his servers (for personal reasons). The End Of DALnet? The other servers on the network could not absorb the extra client load, leading to users' complete inability to connect to DALnet. The network was first crushed by attacks, and then by its own userbase. About 60% of DALnet's population moved to other IRC networks due to these extended connectivity issues.

It was around this time that DALnet closed many of their channels that were dedicated to serving content such as MP3 files and movies. File transfers were still allowed but not on a large scale. This raised suspicion as to whether DALnet was being targeted by the RIAA, although this was not true, but a precautionary measure.

In 2003, DALnet put up their first anycast servers under the name "The IX Concept", and made irc.dal.net resolve to the anycast IP. Peering - IX Since then, most new client servers linked are anycast. DALnet Servers 

==References==

==External links==

* DALnet website
* DALnet documentation
* DALnet history
* DALnet Help channel for virus help
* Turkish DALnet portal
* Impact of the DDoS attacks on DALnet



[[BitchX]]

BitchX ANSI splash screen (one of several in rotation).
BitchX is a free IRC client ("If you're already using Linux, then you have your choice of several (IRC) clients. BitchX is a popular one.") and has been considered to be the most popular ircII-based IRC client. The initial implementation, written by "Trench" and "HappyCrappy", was a script for the IrcII chat client. It was converted to a program in its own right by panasync (Colten Edwards). BitchX 1.1 final was released in 2004. It is written in C, and is a console application. GTK+ toolkit support has been dropped. It works on all Unix-like operating systems, and is distributed under a BSD license. It is originally based on ircII-EPIC and eventually it was merged into the EPIC IRC client. It supports IPv6, multiple servers and SSL and UTF-8 partially. 

BitchX has frequently been noted to be a popular IRC client for Unix-like systems. Review:BitchX (Amiga), IRCreviews.org, Retrieved 2009-09-29 ("BitchX is favoured by many more experienced IRC users") A Day in the Life of #Apache, OSDir.com (March 25, 2005), Retrieved 2009-09-29 ("XChat, mIRC, and bitchx are several popular clients") How to use IRC guide, Overclockersclub.com (Dec. 4, 2006), Retrieved 2009-09-29 ("There are many different clients available, some of the more popular ones include BitchX, XChat, Trillian, BeserIRC, Klient ....") What about P2P on *nix?, Broadbandreports.com (Sept. 13, 2002), Retrieved 2009-09-29 ("There are several IRC clients for Linux. Among the best are X-Chat and BitchX.") BitchX Configuration Guide, Linuxhelp.net (last updated Sept. 19, 2003), Retrieved 2009-09-29 ("BitchX is one of the most popular IRC Client available today for *nix systems.") 

Development of BitchX was on hiatus for several years but is now resuming from a new GitHub project page. The latest official release is version 1.2, and development for the 1.3 future release has begun. 

BitchX does not support Unicode. BitchX 1.2 Wiki 

== Security ==
It was known that early versions of BitchX were vulnerable to a denial-of-service attack in that they could be caused to crash by passing specially-crafted strings as arguments to certain IRC commands. This was before format string attacks became a well-known class of vulnerability. 

The previous version of BitchX, released in 2004, has security problems allowing remote IRC servers to execute arbitrary code on the client's machine (CVE-2007-3360, CVE-2007-4584).

On April 26, 2009, Slackware removed BitchX from its distribution, citing the numerous unresolved security issues. 

However these vulnerabilities were fixed in the sources for the 1.2 release. 

== See also ==

*Comparison of Internet Relay Chat clients
* Internet Relay Chat
* Internet Relay Chat Client
* ircII

==References==

==External links==
* BitchX website
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 



[[MIRC]]

mIRC is an Internet Relay Chat (IRC) client for Windows, created in 1995 and developed by Khaled Mardam-Bey. Although it is a fully functional chat utility, its integrated scripting language makes it extensible and versatile. 

mIRC has been described as "one of the most popular IRC clients available for Windows." It has been downloaded over 38 million times from CNET's Download.com service. In 2003, Nielsen/NetRatings ranked mIRC among the top ten most popular Internet applications. 

==History==
Khaled Mardam-Bey states that he decided to create mIRC because he felt the first IRC clients for Windows lacked some basic IRC features. He then continued developing it due to the challenge and the fact that people appreciated his work. The author states that its subsequent popularity allowed him to make a living out of mIRC. mIRC is shareware and requires payment for registration after the 30-day evaluation period. 

The developer states that version 5.91 is the final one to support 16-bit Windows; 6.35 is the last to support Windows 95, NT 4.0, 98, and ME. The current version supports Windows 2000 and later. 

==Main features==
mIRC has a number of distinguishing features. One is its scripting language which is further developed with each version. The scripting language can be used to make minor changes to the program like custom commands (aliases), but can also be used to completely alter the behavior and appearance of mIRC. Another claimed feature is mIRC's file sharing abilities, via the DCC protocol, featuring a built in file server. 

Starting with mIRC 7.1, released on July 30, 2010, Unicode and IPv6 are supported.

===mIRC scripting===
 
mIRC's abilities and behaviors can be altered and extended using the embedded mIRC scripting language. mIRC includes its own GUI scripting editor, with help that has been described as "extremely detailed". 

mIRC scripting is not limited to IRC related events and commands. There is also support for COM objects, calling DLLs, sockets and dialog boxes, among other things. This allows the client to be used in a variety of ways beyond chatting, for example as an IRC bot, a media player, a web HTML parser or for other entertainment purposes such as mIRC games.

Due to the level of access the language has to a user's computer, for example, being able to rename and delete files, a number of abusive scripts have been made. One example of abuse was that executed with the $decode identifier which decodes a given encoded string. The issue was reported in August 2001, and five months later, users were reported as still falling prey, tricked into executing commands on their systems which result in "handing control of mIRC over to somebody else". Lo, Joseph, ed. (January 4, 2002). "IRC News Jan 04 02 Happy 2002 - //$decode trojan keeps going and going... ". and "Aug 30 01 mIRC $decode() exploit." IRChelp.org. This led to changes being made in mIRC version 6.17: according to the author, $decode is now disabled by default, and various other features which can be considered dangerous are now lockable. 

==Military use==
mIRC is part of the communication infrastructure of the US military, which includes controlling unmanned airstrikes from the DGS-4 in Ramstein Air Base. 

==References==

==Further reading==

*
*
*
*

==External links==
*



[[XChat]]

XChat is a popular Internet Relay Chat (IRC) client. It is available for Unix-like systems, Microsoft Windows (with additional features), Mac OS X (X-Chat Aqua), and for other X Window System-based systems (Fink project). It has a choice of a tabbed document interface or tree interface, support for multiple servers and is highly configurable. Both command line and graphical versions are available. The main code is licensed under the GNU General Public License, but the official Windows version is shareware, and uses the GTK+ toolkit for its interface. 

==Features==
XChat is a full-featured IRC client with a GUI surrounding the basic chat window. It includes all basic functionality found in most other IRC clients, including nick completion, connecting to multiple servers, IRC Hacks, p. 90. secure connections, IRC Hacks, p. 93. CTCP, DCC file transfers and chats, and a plugin system for various programming languages (including at least C or C++, Perl, Python, Tcl, Ruby, Xchat-Ruby Plugin Website. ruby.sourceforge.net Lua, xchat Lua plugin. ankh-morp.org. CLISP, D, and DMDScript xcdscript home page. ludost.net. ). Plugins allow extending the features and customization of the functionality of XChat.

XChat runs on the following operating systems: GNU/Linux, FreeBSD, NetBSD, OpenBSD, Solaris, AIX, IRIX, Mac OS X, Windows 98/ME/NT/2000/XP and others. Support for 98/ME was dropped from the official Windows build. XChat Forum - Support for Windows 98/ME dropped. forum.xchat.org. 
XChat is included with GNU/Linux distributions such as PCLinuxOS. Arnote, Paul (September 2009). "Internet Relay Chat: The Forgotten Chat Frontier". PCLinuxOS Magazine. 

The default view for the client window is referred to as "tree view", but can be configured for a tabbed interface for multiple simultaneous. Tabs change color as text arrives, other users enter or leave channels, or address the user's nickname. The interface can display clickable operator ("op") commands and others, and be customized for fonts, event sounds, and timestamping and logging. XChat implements all standard IRC commands, such as /NICK and /JOIN, as well as DCC chatting (/CHAT), which allows chat to continue if the IRC server is disconnected. 

==Shareware controversy==

===License change===
As of August 23, 2004, the official Windows build of XChat has become shareware and must be purchased after a 30-day trial period. Previous (freeware) builds for Windows have been removed from the official site. However X-Chat is still open-source and licensed under GPL, so there are a few free non-official builds. The author stated that the shareware fee is required due to the excessive amount of time it takes to make it compile under Windows. XChat for Windows. xchat.org. "Q. Why can't XChat for Windows be free? A. Building XChat for Windows is a difficult process, it requires quite some skill and expertise to accomplish. It takes time, and is by no means automated. " 

===Unofficial builds===
Unofficial Windows builds of XChat are made available by contributors, most of whom maintain binaries of the latest release, yet may release more often with builds based on SVN. Build Lineup. xchatdata.net. See the Derivative Software section for a list.

==Reception==
Xchat has been described as popular, IRC Hacks, p. 3 buildable for a variety of platforms. IRC Hacks: 100 Industrial-Strength Tips & Tools goes into depth explaining its setup, configuration, and advanced features under Unix IRC Hacks, p. 3 and Mac OS X. IRC Hacks, p. 11. 
A review at Softonic of the official shareware version 2.8.9 called it a "good looking and easy to use IRC client", and appreciated the UI layout, which color codes nicknames, and left-justifies conversational text, but gave the software a grade of 6/10. 

In a review in IRCReviews.org of the "Silverex" contributed Windows build, Allan Preston wrote, "Overall, XChat is a very capable, solid, and robust client, but it is not an mIRC copy. You can alter almost every aspect of it, either by altering the config files, or by scripting. I would recommend XChat to any Windows user who is looking for a free alternative to mIRC, or to users who are bored with mIRCs limitations." 

==See also==

* Comparison of IRC clients

==References==

==External links==

* 
* #xchat on freenode
* #xchat on EFnet
* Toxin XChat Themes Installer

===Derivative software===
* Silverex's Windows build based on XChat 2.8.6
* XChat Aqua or XChat Azure for Mac OS X
* XChat Gnome
* lurc, an IRC client based on XChat 1.0
* HexChat, adds various features, with python (2 & 3) and perl scripting support (formerly XChat-WDK)



[[Internet Relay Chat takeover]]

An IRC channel takeover is an acquisition of IRC channel operator status by someone other than the channel's owner. It has largely been eliminated due to the increased use of services on IRC networks.

==Riding the split==
The most common variety of channel takeover uses disconnections caused by a netsplit; this is called riding the split. After such mass disconnections, a channel may be left without users, allowing the first rejoining user to recreate the channel and gain operator status. When the servers merge, any pre-existing operators retain their status, allowing the new user to kick out the original operators and take over the channel.

A simple prevention mechanism involves timestamping (abbreviated to TS), or checking the creation dates of the channels being merged. This was first implemented by Undernet (ircu) and is now common in many IRC servers. If both channels were created at the same time, all user statuses are retained when the two are combined; if one is newer than the other, special statuses are removed from those in the newer channel.

Additionally, a newer protection involving timestamping is used when a server splits away from the main network (when it no longer detects that IRC services are available), it disallows anyone creating a channel to be given operator privileges.

==Nick collision==
Another popular form of channel takeover abuses nickname collision protection, which keeps two users from having the same nickname at once. A user on one side of a netsplit takes the nickname of a target on the other side of the split; when the servers reconnect, the nicks collide and both users are kicked from the server. The attacker then reconnects or switches nicks in a second client while the target reconnects, and proceeds to jupe (or block) the target's nickname for a period of time.

User timestamping is often used to detect these kinds of attacks in a fashion similar to channel timestamping, with the user who selected that nickname later being kicked from the server. Another protection method, called nickhold, disallows the use of recently split nicknames. This causes fewer kicks, but causes more inconvenience to users. For this reason, timestamping is generally more common. Some servers, such as ircd-ratbox, do both. IRC services and bots can also protect against such attacks by requiring that a password be supplied to use a certain nick. Users who do not provide a password are killed after a certain amount of time.

==Other methods==
Other methods can be used to take over a channel, though they are unrelated to flaws in IRC itself; for example, cracking the computers of channel operators, compromising channel bot shell accounts, or obtaining services passwords through social engineering.

===Smurfing===
According to Hypermedia Seduction for Terrorist Recruiting (2007), exploiting ICMP ping responses from broadcast addresses at multiple hosts sharing an Internet address, and forging the ping packet's return address to match a target machine's address, a single malformed packet sent to the "smurf amplifier" will be echoed to the target machine. This has been used to take over IRC servers. Ganor, Boaz; von Knop, Katharina; Duarte, Carlos A. M. (2007). Hypermedia seduction for terrorist recruiting. IOS Press. ISBN 978-1-58603-761-1 

==References==

Takeover, Internet Relay Chat

[[Irssi]]

Irssi ( (audio)) is an IRC client program for Linux, FreeBSD, Microsoft Windows, and Mac OS X. It was originally written by Timo Sirainen, and released under the terms of the GNU General Public License in January 1999. Manual. irssi.org. 

==Features==
Irssi is written in the C programming language and in normal operation uses a text-mode user interface. 

According to the developers, Irssi was written from scratch, not based on ircII (like BitchX and epic). This freed the developers from having to deal with the constraints of an existing codebase, allowing them to maintain tighter control over issues such as security and customization. Numerous modules and Perl scripts have been made available for Irssi to customise how it looks and operates. Plugins are available which add encryption SILC encryption plugin. penguin-breeder.org FiSH encryption plugin. Secure.la. and protocols such as ICQ and XMPP. ICQ plugin sourcecode. berlios.de. Didier, Colin Jabber/Xmpp plugin. cybione.org. 

Irssi may be configured by using its user interface or by manually editing its configuration files, which use a syntax resembling Perl data structures. 

==Distributions==
Irssi was written primarily to run on Unix-like operating systems, and binaries and packages are available for Gentoo Linux, Debian, Slackware, SUSE (openSUSE), Frugalware, Fedora, FreeBSD, OpenBSD, Solaris, and Arch Linux. 

Irssi builds and runs on Microsoft Windows under Cygwin, and in 2006, an official Windows standalone build became available. 

Several versions are available for the Unix-based Mac OS X, including a text-mode version using Homebrew, MacPorts, and Fink, and two graphical versions, IrssiX, and MacIrssi. Downloads. irssi.org. The Cocoa client Colloquy was previously based on Irssi, Smykil, Jeff (August 21, 2005). "In the Loop with Tim Hatcher". Ars Technica but it now uses its own IRC core implementation. Hatcher, Tim (February 11, 2006). "Changeset 3129: Remove Irssi from the project". Colloquy.info. 

== See also ==

* Comparison of Internet Relay Chat clients
* Shell account

==References==

==External links==
* 
* irssi on Google+
* 
* MacIrssi's home page
* Irssix home page
* #irssi on freenode



[[Infinitesimal calculus]]

#Redirect Calculus

[[Intellectual property]]

Intellectual property (IP) rights are the legally recognized exclusive rights to creations of the mind. Intellectual Property Licensing: Forms and Analysis, by Richard Raysman, Edward A. Pisacreta and Kenneth A. Adler. Law Journal Press, 19982008. ISBN 973-58852-086-9 Under intellectual property law, owners are granted certain exclusive rights to a variety of intangible assets, such as musical, literary, and artistic works; discoveries and inventions; and words, phrases, symbols, and designs. Common types of intellectual property rights include copyright, trademarks, patents, industrial design rights, trade dress, and in some jurisdictions trade secrets.

Although many of the legal principles governing intellectual property rights have evolved over centuries, it was not until the 19th century that the term intellectual property began to be used, and not until the late 20th century that it became commonplace in the majority of the world. "property as a common descriptor of the field probably traces to the foundation of the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) by the United Nations." in Mark A. Lemley, Property, Intellectual Property, and Free Riding, Texas Law Review, 2005, Vol. 83:1031, page 1033, footnote 4. The British Statute of Anne (1710) and the Statute of Monopolies (1624) are now seen as the origins of copyright and patent law respectively. 

==History==

The Statute of Anne came into force in 1710
Modern usage of the term intellectual property goes back at least as far as 1867 with the founding of the North German Confederation whose constitution granted legislative power over the protection of intellectual property (Schutz des geistigen Eigentums) to the confederation. 'Article 4 No. 6 of the Constitution of 1867 (German)' Hastings Law Journal, Vol. 52, p. 1255, 2001 When the administrative secretariats established by the Paris Convention (1883) and the Berne Convention (1886) merged in 1893, they located in Berne, and also adopted the term intellectual property in their new combined title, the United International Bureaux for the Protection of Intellectual Property.

The organization subsequently relocated to Geneva in 1960, and was succeeded in 1967 with the establishment of the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) by treaty as an agency of the United Nations. According to Lemley, it was only at this point that the term really began to be used in the United States (which had not been a party to the Berne Convention), and it did not enter popular usage until passage of the Bayh-Dole Act in 1980. Mark A. Lemley, "Property, Intellectual Property, and Free Riding" (Abstract); see Table 1: 45. 

"The history of patents does not begin with inventions, but rather with royal grants by Queen Elizabeth I (15581603) for monopoly privileges... Approximately 200 years after the end of Elizabeth's reign, however, a patent represents a legal obtained by an inventor providing for exclusive control over the production and sale of his mechanical or scientific invention... the evolution of patents from royal prerogative to common-law doctrine." Mossoff, A. 'Rethinking the Development of Patents: An Intellectual History, 15501800,' Hastings Law Journal, Vol. 52, p. 1255, 2001 

The term intellectual property can be found used in an October 1845 Massachusetts Circuit Court ruling in the patent case Davoll et al. v. Brown., in which Justice Charles L. Woodbury wrote that "only in this way can we protect intellectual property, the labors of the mind, productions and interests are as much a man's own...as the wheat he cultivates, or the flocks he rears." 1 Woodb. & M. 53, 3 West.L.J. 151, 7 F.Cas. 197, No. 3662, 2 Robb.Pat.Cas. 303, Merw.Pat.Inv. 414 The statement that "discoveries are...property" goes back earlier. Section 1 of the French law of 1791 stated, "All new discoveries are the property of the author; to assure the inventor the property and temporary enjoyment of his discovery, there shall be delivered to him a patent for five, ten or fifteen years." A Brief History of the Patent Law of the United States In Europe, French author A. Nion mentioned proprit intellectuelle in his Droits civils des auteurs, artistes et inventeurs, published in 1846.

Until recently, the purpose of intellectual property law was to give as little protection possible in order to encourage innovation. Historically, therefore, they were granted only when they were necessary to encourage invention, limited in time and scope. "Property, Intellectual Property, and Free Riding", Mark A. Lemley, Texas Law Review 2007 

The concept's origins can potentially be traced back further. Jewish law includes several considerations whose effects are similar to those of modern intellectual property laws, though the notion of intellectual creations as property does not seem to exist  notably the principle of Hasagat Ge'vul (unfair encroachment) was used to justify limited-term publisher (but not author) copyright in the 16th century. Jewish Law and Copyright In 500 BCE, the government of the Greek state of Sybaris offered one year's patent "to all who should discover any new refinement in luxury". Charles Anthon, A Classical Dictionary: Containing an Account of the Principal Proper Names Mentioned in Ancient Authors, and Intended to Elucidate All the Important Points Connected with the Geography, History, Biography, Mythology, and Fine Arts of the Greek and Romans. Together with an Account of Coins, Weights, and Measures, with Tabular Values of the Same 1273 (Harper & Brothers 1841). 

==Types==
Common types of intellectual property rights include patents, copyright, industrial design rights, trademarks, trade dress, and in some jurisdictions trade secrets. There are also more specialized varieties of sui generis exclusive rights, such as circuit design rights (called mask work rights in U.S. law, protected under the Integrated Circuit Topography Act in Canadian law, and in European Union law by Directive 87/54/EEC of 16 December 1986 on the legal protection of topographies of semiconductor products), plant breeders' rights, plant variety rights, industrial design rights, supplementary protection certificates for pharmaceutical products and database rights (in European law).

===Patents===

A patent grants an inventor the right to exclude others from making, using, selling, offering to sell, and importing an invention for a limited period of time, in exchange for the public disclosure of the invention. An invention is a solution to a specific technological problem, which may be a product or a process. WIPO Intellectual Property Handbook: Policy, Law and Use. Chapter 2: Fields of Intellectual Property Protection WIPO 2008 

===Copyright===

A copyright gives the creator of an original work exclusive rights to it, usually for a limited time. Copyright may apply to a wide range of creative, intellectual, or artistic forms, or "works". Copyright does not cover ideas and information themselves, only the form or manner in which they are expressed. 

===Industrial design rights===

An industrial design right protects the visual design of objects that are not purely utilitarian. An industrial design consists of the creation of a shape, configuration or composition of pattern or color, or combination of pattern and color in three-dimensional form containing aesthetic value. An industrial design can be a two- or three-dimensional pattern used to produce a product, industrial commodity or handicraft.

===Trademarks===

A trademark is a recognizable sign, design or expression which distinguishes products or services of a particular trader from the similar products or services of other traders. 

===Trade dress===

Trade dress is a legal term of art that generally refers to characteristics of the visual appearance of a product or its packaging (or even the design of a building) that signify the source of the product to consumers. 

===Trade secrets===

A trade secret is a formula, practice, process, design, instrument, pattern, or compilation of information which is not generally known or reasonably ascertainable, by which a business can obtain an economic advantage over competitors or customers. In the United States, trade secret law is primarily handled at the state level under the Uniform Trade Secrets Act, which most states have adopted, and a federal law, the Economic Espionage Act of 1996 (), which makes the theft or misappropriation of a trade secret a federal crime. This law contains two provisions criminalizing two sorts of activity. The first, , criminalizes the theft of trade secrets to benefit foreign powers. The second, , criminalizes their theft for commercial or economic purposes. (The statutory penalties are different for the two offenses.) Trade secret law varies from country to country. 

==Objectives==
The stated objective of most intellectual property law (with the exception of trademarks) is to "Promote progress." U.S. Const., art. 1, sec. 8, cl. 8. By exchanging limited exclusive rights for disclosure of inventions and creative works, society and the patentee/copyright owner mutually benefit, and an incentive is created for inventors and authors to create and disclose their work. Some commentators have noted that the objective of intellectual property legislators and those who support its implementation appears to be "absolute protection". "If some intellectual property is desirable because it encourages innovation, they reason, more is better. The thinking is that creators will not have sufficient incentive to invent unless they are legally entitled to capture the full social value of their inventions". http://heinonline.org/HOL/Page?handle=hein.journals/tlr83&div=30&g_sent=1&collection=journals This absolute protection or full value view treats intellectual property as another type of "real" property, typically adopting its law and rhetoric. Other recent developments in intellectual property law, such as the America Invents Act, stress international harmonization.

===Financial incentive===
These exclusive rights allow owners of intellectual property to benefit from the property they have created, providing a financial incentive for the creation of an investment in intellectual property, and, in case of patents, pay associated research and development costs. Prudential Reasons for IPR Reform, University of Melbourne, Doris Schroeder and Peter Singer, May 2009 Some commentators, such as David Levine and Michele Boldrin, dispute this justification. 

In 2013 the United States Patent & Trademark Office claimed that the worth of intellectual property to the U.S. economy is more than US$5 trillion and creates employment for an estimated 18 million American people. The value of intellectual property is considered similarly high in other developed nations, such as those in the European Union. In the UK, IP has become a recognised asset class for use in pension-led funding and other types of business finance. However, in 2013, the UK Intellectual Property Office stated: There are millions of intangible business assets whose value is either not being leveraged at all, or only being leveraged inadvertently. 

===Economic growth===
The WIPO treaty and several related international agreements are premised on the notion that the protection of intellectual property rights is essential to maintaining economic growth. The WIPO Intellectual Property Handbook gives two reasons for intellectual property laws:
One is to give statutory expression to the moral and economic rights of creators in their creations and the rights of the public in access to those creations. The second is to promote, as a deliberate act of Government policy, creativity and the dissemination and application of its results and to encourage fair trading which would contribute to economic and social development. http://www.wipo.int/export/sites/www/about-ip/en/iprm/pdf/ch1.pdf p. 3. 

The Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement (ACTA) states that "effective enforcement of intellectual property rights is critical to sustaining economic growth across all industries and globally". http://www.international.gc.ca/trade-agreements-accords-commerciaux/assets/pdfs/acta-crc_apr15-2011_eng.pdf 

Economists estimate that two-thirds of the value of large businesses in the United States can be traced to intangible assets. Sonecon.com "IP-intensive industries" are estimated to generate 72 percent more value added (price minus material cost) per employee than "non-IP-intensive industries". Economic Effects of Intellectual Property-Intensive Manufacturing in the United States, Robert Shapiro and Nam Pham, July 2007 (archived on archive.org). 

A joint research project of the WIPO and the United Nations University measuring the impact of IP systems on six Asian countries found "a positive correlation between the strengthening of the IP system and subsequent economic growth." Measuring the Economic Impact of IP Systems, WIPO, 2007. 

Economists have also shown that IP can be a disincentive to innovation when that innovation is drastic. IP makes excludable non-rival intellectual products that were previously non-excludable. This creates economic inefficiency as long as the monopoly is held. A disincentive to direct resources toward innovation can occur when monopoly profits are less than the overall welfare improvement to society. This situation can be seen as a market failure, and an issue of appropriability. Greenhalgh, C. & Rogers M., (2010). The Nature and Role of Intellectual Property. Innovation, Intellectual Property, and Economic Growth. New Jersey: Princeton University Press. (p. 3234). 

===Morality===
According to Article 27 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, "everyone has the right to the protection of the moral and material interests resulting from any scientific, literary or artistic production of which he is the author". Although the relationship between intellectual property and human rights is a complex one, there are moral arguments for intellectual property.

The arguments that justify intellectual property fall into three major categories. Personality theorists believe intellectual property is an extension of an individual. Utilitarians believe that intellectual property stimulates social progress and pushes people to further innovation. Lockeans argue that intellectual property is justified based on deservedness and hard work.

Various moral justifications for private property can be used to argue in favor of the morality of intellectual property, such as:

# Natural Rights/Justice Argument: this argument is based on Lockes idea that a person has a natural right over the labour and/or products which is produced by his/her body. Appropriating these products is viewed as unjust. Although Locke had never explicitly stated that natural right applied to products of the mind, Ronald V. Bettig. "Critical Perspectives on the History and Philosophy of Copyright" in Copyrighting Culture: The Political Economy of Intellectual Property, by Ronald V. Bettig. (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1996), 1920 it is possible to apply his argument to intellectual property rights, in which it would be unjust for people to misuse another's ideas. Richard T. De George, "14. Intellectual Property Rights," in The Oxford Handbook of Business Ethics, by George G. Brenkert and Tom L. Beauchamp, vol. 1, 1st ed. (Oxford, England: Oxford University Press, n.d.), 415416. Locke's argument for intellectual property is based upon the idea that laborers have the right to control that which they create. They argue that we own our bodies which are the laborers, this right of ownership extends to what we create. Thus, intellectual property ensures this right when it comes to production.
# Utilitarian-Pragmatic Argument: according to this rationale, a society that protects private property is more effective and prosperous than societies that do not. Innovation and invention in 19th century America has been said to be attributed to the development of the patent system. Richard T. De George, "14. Intellectual Property Rights," in The Oxford Handbook of Business Ethics, by George G. Brenkert and Tom L. Beauchamp, vol. 1, 1st ed. (Oxford, England: Oxford University Press, n.d.), 416. By providing innovators with "durable and tangible return on their investment of time, labor, and other resources", intellectual property rights seek to maximize social utility. The presumption is that they promote public welfare by encouraging the "creation, production, and distribution of intellectual works". Utilitarians argue that without intellectual property there would be a lack of incentive to produce new ideas. Systems of protection such as Intellectual property optimize social utility.
# "Personality" Argument: this argument is based on a quote from Hegel: "Every man has the right to turn his will upon a thing or make the thing an object of his will, that is to say, to set aside the mere thing and recreate it as his own". Richard T. De George, "14. Intellectual Property Rights," in The Oxford Handbook of Business Ethics, by George G. Brenkert and Tom L. Beauchamp, vol. 1, 1st ed. (Oxford, England: Oxford University Press, n.d.), 417. European intellectual property law is shaped by this notion that ideas are an "extension of oneself and of ones personality". Richard T. De George, "14. Intellectual Property Rights," in The Oxford Handbook of Business Ethics, by George G. Brenkert and Tom L. Beauchamp, vol. 1, 1st ed. (Oxford, England: Oxford University Press, n.d.), 418. Personality theorists argue that by being a creator of something one is inherently at risk and vulnerable for having their ideas and designs stolen and/or altered. Intellectual property protects these moral claims that have to do with personality.

Lysander Spooner (1855) argues "that a man has a natural and absolute rightand if a natural and absolute, then necessarily a perpetual, rightof property, in the ideas, of which he is the discoverer or creator; that his right of property, in ideas, is intrinsically the same as, and stands on identically the same grounds with, his right of property in material things; that no distinction, of principle, exists between the two cases". The Law of Intellectual Property, Part 1 Chapter 1 Section 9 - Lysander Spooner 

Writer Ayn Rand argued in her book that the protection of intellectual property is essentially a moral issue. The belief is that the human mind itself is the source of wealth and survival and that all property at its base is intellectual property. To violate intellectual property is therefore no different morally than violating other property rights which compromises the very processes of survival and therefore constitutes an immoral act. 

==Infringement, misappropriation, and enforcement==

Unauthorized use of intellectual property rights, called "infringement" with respect to patents, copyright, and trademarks, and "misappropriation" with respect to trade secrets, may be a breach of civil law or criminal law, depending on the type of intellectual property, jurisdiction, and the nature of the action.

Patent infringement typically is caused by using or selling a patented invention without permission from the patent holder. The scope of the patented invention or the extent of protection is defined in the claims of the granted patent. There is safe harbor in many jurisdictions to use a patented invention for research. This safe harbor does not exist in the US unless the research is done for purely philosophical purposes, or in order to gather data in order to prepare an application for regulatory approval of a drug. Pradip K. Sahu and Shannon Mrksich, Ph.D. The Hatch-Waxman Act: When Is Research Exempt from Patent Infringement? ABA-IPL Newsletter 22(4) Summer 2004 In general, patent infringement cases are handled under civil law (e.g., in the United States) but several jurisdictions incorporate infringement in criminal law also (for example, Argentina, China, France, Japan, Russia, South Korea). Matthew L. Cutler (2008) International Patent Litigation Survey: A Survey of the Characteristics of Patent Litigation in 17 International Jurisdictions 

Copyright infringement is reproducing, distributing, displaying or performing a work, or to make derivative works, without permission from the copyright holder, which is typically a publisher or other business representing or assigned by the work's creator. It is often called "piracy". While copyright is created the instance a work is fixed, generally the copyright holder can only get money damages if the owner registers the copyright. Enforcement of copyright is generally the responsibility of the copyright holder. The ACTA trade agreement, signed in May 2011 by the United States, Japan, Switzerland, and the EU, requires that its parties add criminal penalties, including incarceration and fines, for copyright and trademark infringement, and obligated the parties to active police for infringement. Irina D. Manta Spring 2011 The Puzzle of Criminal Sanctions for Intellectual Property Infringement Harvard Journal of Law & Technology 24(2):469-518 There is a safe harbor to use copyrighted works under the fair use doctrine.

Trademark infringement occurs when one party uses a trademark that is identical or confusingly similar to a trademark owned by another party, in relation to products or services which are identical or similar to the products or services of the other party. As with copyright, there are common law rights protecting a trademark, but registering a trademark provides legal advantages for enforcement. Infringement can be addressed by civil litigation and, in several jurisdictions, under criminal law. In the United States, the Trademark Counterfeiting Act of 1984 criminalized the intentional trade in counterfeit goods and services and ACTA amplified the penalties. 

Trade secret misappropriation is different from violations of other intellectual property laws, since by definition trade secrets are secret, while patents and registered copyrights and trademarks are publicly available. In the United States, trade secrets are protected under state law, and states have nearly universally adopted the Uniform Trade Secrets Act. The United States also has federal law in the form of the Economic Espionage Act of 1996 (), which makes the theft or misappropriation of a trade secret a federal crime. This law contains two provisions criminalizing two sorts of activity. The first, , criminalizes the theft of trade secrets to benefit foreign powers. The second, , criminalizes their theft for commercial or economic purposes. (The statutory penalties are different for the two offenses.) In Commonwealth common law jurisdictions, confidentiality and trade secrets are regarded as an equitable right rather than a property right but penalties for theft are roughly the same as the United States.

As of 2011 trade in counterfeit copyrighted and trademarked works was a $600 billion industry worldwide and accounted for 57% of global trade. Miriam Bitton (2012) Rethinking the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreements Criminal Copyright Enforcement Measures The Journal Of Criminal Law & Criminology 102(1):67-117 

==Criticisms==

Demonstration in Sweden in support of file sharing, 2006.
"Copying is not theft!" badge with a character resembling Mickey Mouse in reference to the in popular culture rationale behind the Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act of 1998

===The term itself===
Free Software Foundation founder Richard Stallman argues that, although the term intellectual property is in wide use, it should be rejected altogether, because it "systematically distorts and confuses these issues, and its use was and is promoted by those who gain from this confusion". He claims that the term "operates as a catch-all to lump together disparate laws originated separately, evolved differently, cover different activities, have different rules, and raise different public policy issues" and that it creates a "bias" by confusing these monopolies with ownership of limited physical things, likening them to "property rights". Stallman advocates referring to copyrights, patents and trademarks in the singular and warns against abstracting disparate laws into a collective term. Similarly, Boldrin and Levine prefer to use the term "intellectual monopoly" as a more appropriate and clear definition of the concept. Boldrin, Michele, and David K. Levine. Against intellectual monopoly. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008. 

Lawrence Lessig, along with many other copyleft and free software activists, has criticized the implied analogy with physical property (like land or an automobile). They argue such an analogy fails because physical property is generally rivalrous while intellectual works are non-rivalrous (that is, if one makes a copy of a work, the enjoyment of the copy does not prevent enjoyment of the original). Other arguments along these lines claim that unlike the situation with tangible property, there is no natural scarcity of a particular idea or information: once it exists at all, it can be re-used and duplicated indefinitely without such re-use diminishing the original. Stephan Kinsella has objected to intellectual property on the grounds that the word "property" implies scarcity, which may not be applicable to ideas. Stephan Kinsella (2001 Against Intellectual Property Journal of Libertarian Studies 15(2):153 

====Alternative terms====

In civil law jurisdictions, intellectual property has often been referred to as intellectual rights, traditionally a somewhat broader concept that has included moral rights and other personal protections that cannot be bought or sold. Use of the term intellectual rights has declined since the early 1980s, as use of the term intellectual property has increased.

Alternative terms monopolies on information and intellectual monopoly have emerged among those who argue against the "property" or "intellect" or "rights" assumptions, notably Richard Stallman. The backronyms intellectual protectionism and intellectual poverty, Stephan Kinsella for Ludwig von Mises Institute blog, January 6, 2011. Intellectual Poverty whose initials are also IP, have found supporters as well, especially among those who have used the backronym digital restrictions management. Official drm.info site run by the Free Software Foundation Europe (FSFE) Defective by Design Official Website 

The argument that an intellectual property right should (in the interests of better balancing of relevant private and public interests) be termed an intellectual monopoly privilege (IMP) has been advanced by several academics including Birgitte Andersen Birgitte Andersen. "'Intellectual Property Right' Or 'Intellectual Monopoly Privilege: Which One Should Patent Analysts Focus On?" CONFERENCIA INTERNACIONAL SOBRE SISTEMAS DE INOVAO E ESTRATGIAS DE DESENVOLVIMENTO PARA O TERCEIRO MILNIO. Nov 2003 and Thomas Alured Faunce. Martin G, Sorenson C and Faunce TA. Balancing intellectual monopoly privileges and the need for essential medicines Globalization and Health 2007, 3:4 . http://www.globalizationandhealth.com/content/3/1/4 "Balancing the need to protect the intellectual property rights (IPRs) ("which the third author considers are more accurately described as intellectual monopoly privileges (IMPs)) of pharmaceutical companies, with the need to ensure access to essential medicines in developing countries is one of the most pressing challenges facing international policy makers today.") 

===Objections to overbroad intellectual property laws===

Some critics of intellectual property, such as those in the free culture movement, point at intellectual monopolies as harming health (in the case of pharmaceutical patents), preventing progress, and benefiting concentrated interests to the detriment of the masses, Birgitte Andersen. 'Intellectual Property Right' Or 'Intellectual Monopoly Privilege': Which One Should Patent Analysts Focus On? Conferncia Internacional Sobre Sistemas De Inovao E Estratgias De Desenvolvimento Para O Terceiro Milnio. Nov. 2003 Martin G, Sorenson C and Faunce TA. (2007) Editorial: Balancing the need to protect the intellectual property rights (IPRs). Globalization and Health 2007, 3:4 On patents - and argue that the public interest is harmed by ever-expansive monopolies in the form of copyright extensions, software patents, and business method patents. More recently scientists and engineers are expressing concern that patent thickets are undermining technological development even in high-tech fields like nanotechnology. Joshua M. Pearce, Open-source nanotechnology: Solutions to a modern intellectual property tragedy,Nano Today, Volume 8, Issue 4, August 2013, Pages 339341. DOI http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nantod.2013.04.001 open access Usman Mushtaq and Joshua M. Pearce Open Source Appropriate Nanotechnology  Chapter 9 in editors Donald Maclurcan and Natalia Radywyl, Nanotechnology and Global Sustainability, CRC Press, pp. 191-213, 2012. Stallman's got company: Researcher wants nanotech patent moratorium - Ars Technica Freeze on nanotechnology patents proposed to help grow the sector- Wired UK 11-23-2012 

Petra Moser has asserted that historical analysis suggests that intellectual property laws may harm innovation:"Overall, the weight of the existing historical evidence suggests that patent policies, which grant strong intellectual property rights to early generations of inventors, may discourage innovation. On the contrary, policies that encourage the diffusion of ideas and modify patent laws to facilitate entry and encourage competition may be an effective mechanism to encourage innovation" Moser, Petra. 2013. "Patents and Innovation: Evidence from Economic History." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27(1): 23-44. 

Peter Drahos notes, "Property rights confer authority over resources. When authority is granted to the few over resources on which many depend, the few gain power over the goals of the many. This has consequences for both political and economic freedoms with in a society." Peter Drahos and John Braithwaite. Information Feudalism: Who Owns the Knowledge Economy?, Earthscan 2002 

The World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) recognizes that conflicts may exist between the respect for and implementation of current intellectual property systems and other human rights. In 2001 the UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights issued a document called "Human rights and intellectual property" that argued that intellectual property tends to be governed by economic goals when it should be viewed primarily as a social product; in order to serve human well-being, intellectual property systems must respect and conform to human rights laws. According to the Committee, when systems fail to do so they risk infringing upon the human right to food and health, and to cultural participation and scientific benefits. Staff, UN Committee on Economic Social and Cultural Rights. Geneva, November 1230, 2001. Human rights and intellectual property In 2004 the General Assembly of WIPO adopted The Geneva Declaration on the Future of the World Intellectual Property Organization which argues that WIPO should "focus more on the needs of developing countries, and to view IP as one of many tools for developmentnot as an end in itself". The Geneva Declaration on the Future of the World Intellectual Property Organization 

Further along these lines, The ethical problems brought up by IP rights are most pertinent when it is socially valuable goods like life-saving medicines are given IP protection. While the application of IP rights can allow companies to charge higher than the marginal cost of production in order to recoup the costs of research and development, the price may exclude from the market anyone who cannot afford the cost of the product, in this case a life-saving drug. Jorn Sonderholm (2010) Ethical Issues Surrounding Intellectual Property Rights, Philosophy Compass 5(12): 11071115. "An IPR driven regime is therefore not a regime that is conductive to the investment of R&D of products that are socially valuable to predominately poor populations". 

Some libertarian critics of intellectual property have argued that allowing property rights in ideas and information creates artificial scarcity and infringes on the right to own tangible property. Stephan Kinsella uses the following scenario to argue this point:
magine the time when men lived in caves. One bright guylet's call him Galt-Magnondecides to build a log cabin on an open field, near his crops. To be sure, this is a good idea, and others notice it. They naturally imitate Galt-Magnon, and they start building their own cabins. But the first man to invent a house, according to IP advocates, would have a right to prevent others from building houses on their own land, with their own logs, or to charge them a fee if they do build houses. It is plain that the innovator in these examples becomes a partial owner of the tangible property (e.g., land and logs) of others, due not to first occupation and use of that property (for it is already owned), but due to his coming up with an idea. Clearly, this rule flies in the face of the first-user homesteading rule, arbitrarily and groundlessly overriding the very homesteading rule that is at the foundation of all property rights. N. Stephan Kinsella, Against Intellectual property (2008), p. 44. 

Thomas Jefferson once said in a letter to Isaac McPherson on August 13, 1813:

"If nature has made any one thing less susceptible than all others of exclusive property, it is the action of the thinking power called an idea, which an individual may exclusively possess as long as he keeps it to himself; but the moment it is divulged, it forces itself into the possession of every one, and the receiver cannot dispossess himself of it. Its peculiar character, too, is that no one possesses the less, because every other possesses the whole of it. He who receives an idea from me, receives instruction himself without lessening mine; as he who lights his taper at mine, receives light without darkening me." 
Thomas Jefferson, Letter to Isaac McPherson (August 13, 1813) 

In 2005 the RSA launched the Adelphi Charter, aimed at creating an international policy statement to frame how governments should make balanced intellectual property law. Boyle, James (14 October 2005). Protecting the public domain. The Guardian. 

Another limitation of current U.S. Intellectual Property legislation is its focus on individual and joint works; thus, copyright protection can only be obtained in 'original' works of authorship. Philip Bennet, 'Native Americans and Intellectual Property: the Necessity of Implementing Collective Ideals into Current United States Intellectual Property Laws", 2009 This definition excludes any works that are the result of community creativity, for example Native American songs and stories; current legislation does not recognize the uniqueness of indigenous cultural "property" and its ever-changing nature. Simply asking native cultures to 'write down' their cultural artifacts on tangible mediums ignores their necessary orality and enforces a Western bias of the written form as more authoritative.

===Expansion in nature and scope of intellectual property laws===
Expansion of U.S. copyright law (Assuming authors create their works by age 35 and live for seventy years)

Other criticism of intellectual property law concerns the expansion of intellectual property, both in duration and in scope.

In addition, as scientific knowledge has expanded and allowed new industries to arise in fields such as biotechnology and nanotechnology, originators of technology have sought IP protection for the new technologies. Patents have been granted for living organisms, Council for Responsible Genetics, DNA Patents Create Monopolies on Living Organisms. Accessed 2008.12.18. (and in the United States, certain living organisms have been patentable for over a century) Plant Patents USPTO.gov 

The increase in terms of protection is particularly seen in relation to copyright, which has recently been the subject of serial extensions in the United States and in Europe. E.g., the U.S. Copyright Term Extension Act, Pub.L. 105298. Mark Helprin, Op-ed: A Great Idea Lives Forever. Shouldn't Its Copyright? The New York Times, May 20, 2007. Eldred v. Ashcroft Eldred v. Ashcroft, 537 U. S. 186 (2003) With no need for registration or copyright notices, this is thought to have led to an increase in orphan works (copyrighted works for which the copyright owner cannot be contacted), a problem that has been noticed and addressed by governmental bodies around the world. Library of Congress Copyright Office Docket No. 201212 Orphan Works and Mass Digitization Federal Register, Vol. 77, No. 204. Monday, October 22, 2012. Notices. PP 6455564561; see p 64555 first column for international efforts and 3rd column for description of the problem. 

Also with respect to copyright, the American film industry helped to change the social construct of intellectual property via its trade organization, the Motion Picture Association of America. In amicus briefs in important cases, in lobbying before Congress, and in its statements to the public, the MPAA has advocated strong protection of intellectual-property rights. In framing its presentations, the association has claimed that people are entitled to the property that is produced by their labor. Additionally Congress's awareness of the position of the United States as the world's largest producer of films has made it convenient to expand the conception of intellectual property. Dennis Wharton, "MPAA's Rebel With Cause Fights for Copyright Coin," Variety (August 3, 1992), Vol. 348, No. 2, p. 18. These doctrinal reforms have further strengthened the industry, lending the MPAA even more power and authority. William W. Fisher III, The Growth of Intellectual Property:A History of the Ownership of Ideas in the United States Eigentumskulturen im Vergleich (Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1999) 

RIAA representative Hilary Rosen testifies before the Senate Judiciary Committee on the future of digital music (July 11, 2000)
The growth of the Internet, and particularly distributed search engines like Kazaa and Gnutella, have represented a challenge for copyright policy. The Recording Industry Association of America, in particular, has been on the front lines of the fight against copyright infringement, which the industry calls "piracy". The industry has had victories against some services, including a highly publicized case against the file-sharing company Napster, and some people have been prosecuted for sharing files in violation of copyright. The electronic age has seen an increase in the attempt to use software-based digital rights management tools to restrict the copying and use of digitally based works. Laws such as the Digital Millennium Copyright Act have been enacted, that use criminal law to prevent any circumvention of software used to enforce digital rights management systems. Equivalent provisions, to prevent circumvention of copyright protection have existed in EU for some time, and are being expanded in, for example, Article 6 and 7 the Copyright Directive. Other examples are Article 7 of the Software Directive of 1991 (91/250/EEC), and the Conditional Access Directive of 1998 (98/84/EEC). This can hinder legal uses, affecting public domain works, limitations and exceptions to copyright, or uses allowed by the copyright holder. Some copyleft licenses, like GNU GPL 3, are designed to counter that. Laws may permit circumvention under specific conditions like when it is necessary to achieve interoperability with the circumventors program, or for accessibility reasons; however, distribution of circumvention tools or instructions may be illegal.

In the context of trademarks, this expansion has been driven by international efforts to harmonise the definition of "trademark", as exemplified by the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights ratified in 1994, which formalized regulations for IP rights that had been handled by common law, or not at all, in member states. Pursuant to TRIPs, any sign which is "capable of distinguishing" the products or services of one business from the products or services of another business is capable of constituting a trademark. Katherine Beckman and Christa Pletcher (2009) Expanding Global Trademark Regulation Wake Forest Intellectual Property Law Journal 10(2): 215239 

==See also==

* Outline of intellectual property
* Information policy
*Anti-copyright
*Freedom of information
*Artificial scarcity
*Digital rights management#Controversy
*Libertarianism and intellectual property

==Notes==

==References==

* Arai, Hisamitsu. "Intellectual Property Policies for the Twenty-First Century: The Japanese Experience in Wealth Creation", WIPO Publication Number 834 (E). 2000. wipo.int
* Bettig, R. V. (1996). Critical Perspectives on the History and Philosophy of Copyright. In R. V. Bettig, Copyrighting Culture: The Political Economy of Intellectual Property. (pp. 932). Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
* Boldrin, Michele and David K. Levine. "Against Intellectual Monopoly", 2008. dkleving.com
*Hahn, Robert W., Intellectual Property Rights in Frontier Industries: Software and Biotechnology, AEI Press, March 2005.
* Branstetter, Lee, Raymond Fishman and C. Fritz Foley. "Do Stronger Intellectual Property Rights Increase International Technology Transfer? Empirical Evidence from US Firm-Level Data". NBER Working Paper 11516. July 2005. weblog.ipcentral.info
* Connell, Shaun. "Intellectual Ownership". October 2007. rebithofffreedom.org
* De George, Richard T. "14. Intellectual Property Rights." In The Oxford Handbook of Business Ethics, by George G. Brenkert and Tom L. Beauchamp, 1:408-439. 1st ed. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press, n.d.
* Farah, Paolo and Cima, Elena. "Chinas Participation in the World Trade Organization: Trade in Goods, Services, Intellectual Property Rights and Transparency Issues" in Aurelio Lopez-Tarruella Martinez (ed.), , Tirant lo Blanch, Valencia (Spain) 2010, pp. 85121. ISBN 978-84-8456-981-7. Available at SSRN.com
* Gowers, Andrew. "Gowers Review of Intellectual Property". Her Majesty's Treasury, November 2006. hm-treasury.gov.uk ISBN 978011840839.
* Greenhalgh, C. & Rogers M., (2010). Innovation, Intellectual Property, and Economic Growth. New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
* Kinsella, Stephan. "Against Intellectual Property". Journal of Libertarian Studies 15.2 (Spring 2001): 153. mises.org
* Lai, Edwin. "The Economics of Intellectual Property Protection in the Global Economy". Princeton University. April 2001. dklevine.com
*Lee, Richmond K. Scope and Interplay of IP Rights Accralaw offices.
* Lessig, Lawrence. "Free Culture: How Big Media Uses Technology and the Law to Lock Down Culture and Control Creativity". New York: Penguin Press, 2004. free-culture.cc.
* Lindberg, Van. Intellectual Property and Open Source: A Practical Guide to Protecting Code. O'Reilly Books, 2008. ISBN 0-596-51796-3 | ISBN 978-0-596-51796-0
* Maskus, Keith E. "Intellectual Property Rights and Economic Development". Case Western Reserve Journal of International Law, Vol. 32, 471. journals/jil/32-3/maskusarticle.pdf law.case.edu
* Mazzone, Jason. "Copyfraud". Brooklyn Law School, Legal Studies Paper No. 40. New York University Law Review 81 (2006): 1027. (Abstract.)
* Miller, Arthur Raphael, and Michael H. Davis. Intellectual Property: Patents, Trademarks, and Copyright. 3rd ed. New York: West/Wadsworth, 2000. ISBN 0-314-23519-1.
*Moore, Adam, "Intellectual Property", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2011 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), 
* Mossoff, A. 'Rethinking the Development of Patents: An Intellectual History, 1550-1800,' Hastings Law Journal, Vol. 52, p. 1255, 2001
* Rozanski, Felix. "Developing Countries and Pharmaceutical Intellectual Property Rights: Myths and Reality" stockholm-network.org
* Perelman, Michael. Steal This Idea: Intellectual Property and The Corporate Confiscation of Creativity. Palgrave Macmillan, 2004.
* Rand, Ayn. "Patents and Copyrights" in Ayn Rand, ed. 'Capitalism: The Unknown Ideal,' New York: New American Library, 1966, pp. 126128
* Reisman, George. 'Capitalism: A Complete & Integrated Understanding of the Nature & Value of Human Economic Life,' Ottawa, Illinois: 1996, pp. 388389
* Schechter, Roger E., and John R. Thomas. Intellectual Property: The Law of Copyrights, Patents and Trademarks. New York: West/Wadsworth, 2003, ISBN 0-314-06599-7.
* Schneider, Patricia H. "International Trade, Economic Growth and Intellectual Property Rights: A Panel Data Study of Developed and Developing Countries". July 2004. mtholyoke.edu
* Shapiro, Robert and Nam Pham. "Economic Effects of Intellectual Property-Intensive Manufacturing in the United States". July 2007. the-value-of.ip.org
* Spooner, Lysander. "The Law of Intellectual Property; or An Essay on the Right of Authors and Inventors to a Perpetual Property in their Ideas". Boston: Bela Marsh, 1855. 
* Vaidhyanathan, Siva. The Anarchist in the Library: How the Clash Between Freedom and Control Is Hacking the Real World and Crashing the System. New York: Basic Books, 2004.
*

==External links==

* IRIS newsletter on media law in Europe, European Audiovisual Observatory
* Analysis of copyright legislation in Europe, European Audiovisual Observatory

 



[[Great Famine (Ireland)]]

The Great Famine () was a period of mass starvation, disease and emigration in Ireland between 1845 and 1852. It is sometimes referred to, mostly outside Ireland, as the Irish Potato Famine because one-third of the population was then solely reliant on this cheap crop for a number of historical reasons. During the famine approximately 1 million people died and a million more emigrated from Ireland, causing the island's population to fall by between 20% and 25%. The proximate cause of famine was a potato disease commonly known as potato blight.

Although the potato crop failed, the country was still producing and exporting more than enough grain crops to feed the population. Records show during the period Ireland was exporting approximately thirty to fifty shiploads per day of food produce. As a consequence of these exports and a number of other factors such as land acquisition, absentee landlords and the effect of the 1690 penal laws, the Great Famine today is viewed by a number of historical academics as a form of either direct or indirect genocide. A Death-Dealing Famine: The Great Hunger in Ireland by Christine Kinealy 1997; Famine Ghost: Genocide of the Irish By Jack O'Keefe; Confronting Genocide edited by Ren Provost, Payam Akhavan; Baltimore Iconoclast By William C. Hughes, William Hughes 

The famine was a watershed in the history of Ireland. Its effects permanently changed the island's demographic, political and cultural landscape. For both the native Irish and those in the resulting diaspora, the famine entered folk memory and became a rallying point for various Home rule and United Ireland movements, as the whole island was then part of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.

The massive famine soured the already strained relations between many of the Irish people and the British Crown, heightening Irish republicanism, which eventually led to Irish independence in the next century. Modern historians regard it as a dividing line in the Irish historical narrative, referring to the preceding period of Irish history as "pre-Famine".

==Causes and contributing factors==
Starting in 1801, Ireland had been directly governed, under the Act of Union, as part of the United Kingdom. Executive power lay in the hands of the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland and Chief Secretary for Ireland, both of whom were appointed by the British government. Ireland sent 105 members of parliament to the House of Commons of the United Kingdom, and Irish representative peers elected 28 of their own number to sit for life in the House of Lords. Between 1832 and 1859, 70% of Irish representatives were landowners or the sons of landowners.

In the 40 years that followed the union, successive British governments grappled with the problems of governing a country which had, as Benjamin Disraeli put it in 1844, "a starving population, an absentee aristocracy, and an alien Church, and in addition the weakest executive in the world." One historian calculated that between 1801 and 1845, there had been 114 commissions and 61 special committees enquiring into the state of Ireland and that "without exception their findings prophesied disaster; Ireland was on the verge of starvation, her population rapidly increasing, three-quarters of her labourers unemployed, housing conditions appalling and the standard of living unbelievably low."

===Laws that restricted the rights of Irish Catholics===
In the 17th and 18th centuries, Irish Catholics had been prohibited by the penal laws from purchasing or leasing land; from voting, from holding political office; from living in a corporate town or within 5 mi of a corporate town, from obtaining education, from entering a profession, and from doing many other things necessary for a person to succeed and prosper in Irish society at the time. The laws had largely been reformed by 1793, and in 1829, Irish Catholics could again sit in parliament following the Act of Emancipation.

===Landlords and tenants===
During the 18th century, the "middleman system" for managing landed property was introduced. Rent collection was left in the hands of the landlords' agents, or middlemen. This assured the landlord of a regular income, and relieved them of any responsibility; the tenants however were subject to exploitation by the middlemen.

Catholics made up 80% of the population, the bulk of whom lived in conditions of poverty and insecurity despite Catholic emancipation in 1829. At the top of the "social pyramid" was the "ascendancy class", the English and Anglo-Irish families who owned most of the land, and who had more or less limitless power over their tenants. Some of their estates were vast: the Earl of Lucan owned over 60000 acre. Many of these landlords lived in England and were called "absentee landlords". The rent revenue was sent to England, collected from "impoverished tenants" who were paid minimal wages to raise crops and livestock for export.

In 1843, the British Government considered that the land question in Ireland was the root cause of disaffection in the country. They set up a Royal Commission, chaired by the Earl of Devon, to enquire into the laws regarding the occupation of land. Daniel O'Connell described this commission as "perfectly one-sided", being made up of landlords and no tenants. Devon reported in February 1845 that "It would be impossible adequately to describe the privations which they Irish labourer and his family habitually and silently endure ... in many districts their only food is the potato, their only beverage water ... their cabins are seldom a protection against the weather ... a bed or a blanket is a rare luxury ... and nearly in all their pig and a manure heap constitute their only property." The Commissioners concluded that they could not "forbear expressing our strong sense of the patient endurance which the labouring classes have exhibited under sufferings greater, we believe, than the people of any other country in Europe have to sustain."

The Commission stated that bad relations between landlord and tenant were principally responsible. There was no hereditary loyalty, feudal tie or paternalism as existed in England. Ireland was a conquered country. The Earl of Clare said of the landlords, "confiscation is their common title." According to the historian Cecil Woodham-Smith, the landlords regarded the land as a source of income from which to extract as much money as possible. With the Irish "brooding over their discontent in sullen indignation" according to the Earl of Clare, Ireland was seen as a hostile place in which to live, and as a consequence absentee landlords were common, with some visiting their property once or twice in a lifetime, or never. The rents from Ireland were then spent elsewhere; an estimated 6,000,000 was remitted out of Ireland in 1842.

According to Woodham-Smith, the ability of the middlemen was measured by the amount of money they could contrive to extract. They were described in evidence before the Commission as "land sharks", "bloodsuckers" and "the most oppressive species of tyrant that ever lent assistance to the destruction of a country".

The middlemen leased large tracts of land from the landlords on long leases with fixed rents, which they then sublet as they saw fit. They split the holding into smaller and smaller parcels to increase the amount of rent they could obtain. Tenants could be evicted for reasons such as non-payment of rents (which were high), or if the landlord decided to raise sheep instead of grain crops. The cottier paid his rent by working for the landlord.
Any improvements made on the holdings by the tenants became the property of the landlords when the lease expired or was terminated, which acted as a disincentive to improvements. The tenants had no security of tenure on the land; being tenants "at will" they could be turned out whenever the landlord chose. This class of tenant made up the majority of tenant farmers in Ireland, the exception being in Ulster where, under a practice known as "tenant right", tenants were compensated for any improvements made to their holdings. The commission according to Woodham-Smith stated that "the superior prosperity and tranquility of Ulster, compared with the rest of Ireland, were due to tenant right."

Landlords in Ireland often used their powers without remorse, and the people lived in dread of them. In these circumstances, Woodham-Smith writes "industry and enterprise were extinguished and a peasantry created which was one of the most destitute in Europe."

===Tenants, subdivisions, and bankruptcy===
In 1845, 24% of all Irish tenant farms were of 0.42 hectares (15 acres) in size, while 40% were of 26 hectares (515 acres). Holdings were so small that no crop other than potatoes would suffice to feed a family, nor could ranching be a possibility due to the limited land. The British government reported, shortly before the famine, that poverty was so widespread that one-third of all Irish small holdings could not support their families, after paying their rent, except by earnings of seasonal migrant labour in England and Scotland. Following the famine, reforms were implemented making it illegal to further divide land holdings.

The 1841 census showed a population of just over eight million. Two-thirds of those depended on agriculture for their survival, but they rarely received a working wage. They had to work for their landlords in return for the patch of land they needed to grow enough food for their own families. This was the system which forced Ireland and its peasantry into monoculture since only the potato could be grown in sufficient quantity. The rights to a plot of land in Ireland could mean the difference between life and death in the early 19th century.

===Potato dependency===
The potato was introduced to Ireland as a garden crop of the gentry. By the late 17th century, it had become widespread as a supplementary rather than a principal food because the main diet still revolved around butter, milk, and grain products. Over the course of one day, men could eat 60 potatoes, women 40, and children 25 due to their exhausting work. In the first two decades of the 18th century, however, it became a base food of the poor, especially in winter. Furthermore, a disproportionate share of the potatoes grown in Ireland were of a single variety, the Irish Lumper. The expansion of the economy between 1760 and 1815 saw the potato make inroads into the diet of the people and become a staple food year round for farmers. The large dependency on this single crop, and the lack of genetic variability among the plants that made up the crop in Ireland, were two of the reasons why the emergence of Phytophthora infestans had such devastating effects in Ireland and had less severe effects in other European countries (which were also hit by the disease). Other European countries also hit by Phytophthora infestans 

The potato's spread was essential to the development of the cottier system, supporting an extremely cheap workforce, but at the cost of lower living standards. For the labourer, it was essentially a potato wage that shaped the expanding agrarian economy.

The expansion of tillage led to an inevitable expansion of the potato acreage and an expansion of peasant farmers. By 1841, there were over half a million peasant farmers, with 1.75 million dependants. The principal beneficiary of this system was the English consumer.

Potato production during the Great Famine. Note: years 1844, 1845, 1846, and 1848 are extrapolated.

The potato was also used extensively as a fodder crop for livestock immediately prior to the famine. Approximately 33% of production, amounting to 5000000 ST, was normally used in this way. 

===Blight in Ireland===
Prior to the arrival in Ireland of the disease Phytophthora infestans, commonly known as blight, there were only two main potato plant diseases. One was called "dry rot" or "taint" and the other was a virus, known popularly as "curl". Phytophthora infestans is an oomycete (not a fungus).
An 1849 depiction of Bridget O'Donnell and her two children during the famine.

In 1851, the Census of Ireland Commissioners recorded 24 failures of the potato crop going back to 1728, of varying severity. In 1739, the crop was "entirely destroyed", and again in 1740. In 1770, the crop largely failed again. In 1800, there was another "general" failure, and in 1807, 50% of the crop was lost. In 1821 and 1822, the potato crop failed completely in Munster and Connaught, and 1830 and 1831 were years of failure in Mayo, Donegal, and Galway. In 1832, 1833, 1834 and 1836, a large number of districts suffered serious loss, and in 1835, the potato failed in Ulster. 1836 and 1837 brought "extensive" failures throughout Ireland, and again in 1839 failure was universal throughout the country; both 1841 and 1844 potato crop failure was widespread. According to Woodham-Smith, "the unreliability of the potato was an accepted fact in Ireland."

How and when the blight Phytophthora infestans arrived in Europe is still uncertain; according to P.M.A Bourke, Bourke, 1964, The Emergence of Potato Blight 18431846. Nature 203:805808. however, it almost certainly was not present prior to 1842, and probably arrived in 1844. The origin of the pathogen has been traced to Toluca Valley of Mexico, Neiderhauser, JS 1991 Phytophthora infestans: the Mexican connection pp 2545 Symposium of the Mycological Society. Lucas, JA,
Shattock, RC, Shaw, DS, Cooke, LR, eds. Cambridge University Press. whence it spread first within North America and then to Europe. The 1845-6 blight was caused by the HERB-1 strain of the blight. 

In 1844, Irish newspapers carried reports concerning a disease which for two years had attacked the potato crops in America. According to James Donnelly, a likely source was the eastern United States, where in 1843 and 1844 blight largely destroyed the potato crops. He suggests that ships from Baltimore, Philadelphia, or New York City could have brought diseased potatoes to European ports. WC Paddock suggests that it was transported on potatoes being carried to feed passengers on clipper ships sailing from America to Ireland.

Once it was introduced, it spread rapidly. By late summer and early autumn of 1845, it had spread throughout the greater part of northern and central Europe. Belgium, Holland, northern France and southern England by mid-August had all been stricken.

On 16 August 1845, the Gardeners' Chronicle and Horticultural Gazette printed a report which described "a blight of unusual character" in the Isle of Wight. A week later, on 23 August, it reported that "A fearful malady has broken out among the potato crop... In Belgium the fields are said to be completely desolated. There is hardly a sound sample in Covent Garden market... As for cure for this distemper, there is none..." These reports were extensively covered in Irish newspapers. On 13 September the Gardeners' Chronicle made "a dramatic announcement": "We stop the Press with very great regret to announce that the potato Murrain has unequivocally declared itself in Ireland." The British Government were nevertheless optimistic through the next few weeks.

Crop loss in 1845 has been estimated at anywhere from one third to as high as one half of cultivated acreage. The Mansion House Committee in Dublin, to which hundreds of letters were directed from all over Ireland, claimed on 19 November 1845 to have ascertained beyond the shadow of doubt that "considerably more than one-third of the entire of the potato crop... has been already destroyed".

In 1846, three-quarters of the harvest was lost to blight. By December, a third of a million destitute people were employed in public works. According to Cormac  Grda the first attack of potato blight caused considerable hardship in rural Ireland, from the autumn of 1846, when the first deaths from starvation were recorded. Seed potatoes were scarce in 1847. Little had been sown, so despite average yields, hunger continued. 1848 yields would be only two-thirds of normal. Since over three million Irish people were totally dependent on potatoes for food, hunger and famine were inevitable.

==Reaction in Ireland==
The Corporation of Dublin sent a memorial to the Queen, "praying her" to call Parliament together early (Parliament was at this time prorogued), and to recommend the requisition of some public money for public works, especially railways in Ireland. The Town Council of Belfast met and made similar suggestions, but neither body asked for charity, according to Mitchel. "They demanded that, if Ireland was indeed an Integral part of the realm, the common exchequer of both islands should be usednot to give alms, but to provide employment on public works of general utility." It was Mitchel's opinion that "if Yorkshire and Lancashire had sustained a like calamity in England, there is no doubt such measures as these would have been taken, promptly and liberally."

A deputation from the citizens of Dublin, including the Duke of Leinster, the Lord Mayor, Lord Cloncurry, and Daniel O'Connell, went to the current Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and offered suggestions, such as opening the ports to foreign corn for a time, stopping distillation from grain, or providing public works; that this was extremely urgent, as millions of people would shortly be without food. Lord Heytesbury told them they "were premature", and told them not to be alarmed, that learned men (Playfair and Lindley) had been sent from England to enquire into all those matters; and that the Inspectors of Constabulary and Stipendiary Magistrates were charged with making constant reports from their districts; and there was no "immediate pressure on the market". Of these reports from Lord Heytesbury, Peel in a letter to Sir James Graham was to say that he found the accounts "very alarming", though he reminded him that there was, according to Woodham-Smith "always a tendency to exaggeration in Irish news".

On 8 December 1845, Daniel O'Connell, in the Repeal Association, proposed the following remedies to the pending disaster. One of the first things he suggested was the introduction of "Tenant-Right" as practised in Ulster, giving the landlord a fair rent for his land, but giving the tenant compensation for any money he might have laid out on the land in permanent improvements.

O'Connell then pointed out the means used by the Belgian legislature during the same season: shutting their ports against the export of provisions, but opening them to imports. He suggested that if Ireland had a domestic Parliament the ports would be thrown open and the abundant crops raised in Ireland would be kept for the people of Ireland. O'Connell maintained that only an Irish parliament would provide for the people both food and employment, saying that a repeal of the Act of Union was a necessity and Ireland's only hope.
John Mitchel

John Mitchel, one of the leading political writers of Young Ireland, as early as 1844, in The Nation raised the issue of the "Potato Disease" in Ireland, noting how powerful an agent hunger had been in certain revolutions. On 14 February 1846, he put forward his views on "the wretched way in which the famine was being trifled with", and asked, had not the Government even yet any conception that there might be soon "millions of human beings in Ireland having nothing to eat."

On 28 February, writing on the Coercion Bill which was then going through the House of Lords, he noted that this was the only kind of legislation that was sure to meet with no obstruction in the British House of Commons. His view was that however the government may differ about feeding the Irish people, "they agree most cordially in the policy of taxing, prosecuting and ruining them." (As it happened, the bill was subsequently defeated, and Peel's government fell.)

In an article on "English Rule" on 7 March, Mitchel wrote that the Irish People were "expecting famine day by day" and they attributed it collectively, not to "the rule of heaven as to the greedy and cruel policy of England." He continued in the same article to write that the people "believe that the season as they roll are but ministers of England's rapacity; that their starving children cannot sit down to their scanty meal but they see the harpy claw of England in their dish." The people, Mitchel wrote, watched as their "food melting in rottenness off the face of the earth," all the while watching "heavy-laden ships, freighted with the yellow corn their own hands have sown and reaped, spreading all sail for England."

Mitchel later wrote one of the first widely circulated tracts on the famine, The Last Conquest of Ireland (Perhaps) in 1861. It established the widespread view that the treatment of the famine by the British was a deliberate murder of the Irish and contained the famous phrase: Mitchel was charged with sedition because of his writings, but this charge was dropped and he was convicted by a packed jury under the newly enacted Treason Felony Act and sentenced to 14 years transportation to Bermuda.

The Nation according to Charles Gavan Duffy, insisted that the one remedy was that which the rest of Europe had adopted, which even the parliaments of the Pale had adopted in periods of distress, which was to retain in the country the food raised by her people till the people were fed.

Ireland at this time was, according to the Act of Union of 1801, an integral part of the British imperial homeland, "the richest empire on the globe," and was "the most fertile portion of that empire," in addition; Ireland was sheltered by both "... Habeas corpus and trial by jury ...". And yet Ireland's elected representatives seemed powerless to act on the country's behalf as Members of the British Parliament. Commenting on this at the time John Mitchel wrote: "That an island which is said to be an integral part of the richest empire on the globe ... should in five years lose two and a half millions of its people (more than one fourth) by hunger, and fever the consequence of hunger, and flight beyond sea to escape from hunger ..."
The period of the potato blight in Ireland from 1845 to 1851 was full of political confrontation. A more radical Young Ireland group seceded from the Repeal movement and attempted an armed rebellion in the Young Irelander Rebellion of 1848. It was unsuccessful.

==Government response==
F.S.L. Lyons characterised the initial response of the British government to the early less severe phase of the famine as "prompt and relatively successful." Confronted by widespread crop failure in the autumn of 1845, Prime Minister Sir Robert Peel purchased 100,000 worth of maize and cornmeal secretly from America. Baring Brothers & Co initially acted as purchasing agents for the Prime Minister. The government hoped that they would not "stifle private enterprise" and that their actions would not act as a disincentive to local relief efforts. Due to weather conditions, the first shipment did not arrive in Ireland until the beginning of February 1846.

The maize corn was then re-sold for a penny a pound. The corn when it arrived had not been ground and was inedible , and this task involved a long and complicated process if it was to be done correctly and it was unlikely to be carried out locally. In addition, before the cornmeal could be consumed, it had to be 'very much' cooked again, or eating it could result in severe bowel complaints. Because of maize's (commonly) yellow colour, and the fact that it had to be ground twice, it became known in Ireland as 'Peel's brimstone'. In 1846, Peel then moved to repeal the Corn Laws, tariffs on grain which kept the price of bread artificially high. The famine situation worsened during 1846 and the repeal of the Corn Laws in that year did little to help the starving Irish; the measure split the Conservative Party, leading to the fall of Peel's ministry. In March, Peel set up a programme of public works in Ireland but was forced to resign as Prime Minister on 29 June. He was defeated in the House of Commons on a motion that the Irish Coercion Bill be read a second time on 25 June. According to Michael Doheny, the majority against him was 73, and it was made of the "Whig party, the extreme Conservatives, the ultra-Radicals and Irish Repealers." Ten days after, Lord John Russell assumed the seals of office.

The measures undertaken by Peel's successor, Lord John Russell, proved comparatively "inadequate" as the crisis deepened. Russell's ministry introduced public works projects, which by December 1846 employed some half million Irish and proved impossible to administer. Sir Charles Trevelyan, who was in charge of the administration of government relief to the victims of the Irish Famine, limited the Government's actual relief because he thought "the judgement of God sent the calamity to teach the Irish a lesson". For his policy, he was commemorated in the song The Fields of Athenry. The Public Works were "strictly ordered" to be unproductivethat is, they would create no fund to repay their own expenses. Many hundreds of thousands of "feeble and starving men" according to John Mitchel, were kept digging holes, and breaking up roads, which was doing no service.
A memorial to the victims of the Doolough Tragedy (30 March 1849). To continue receiving relief, hundreds were instructed to travel many miles in bad weather. A large number died on the journey.

The new Lord John Russell Whig administration, influenced by their laissez-faire belief, believed that the market would provide the food needed but at the same time ignored the food exports to England, then halted government food and relief works, leaving many hundreds of thousands of people without any work, money or food. In January, the government abandoned these projects and turned to a mixture of "indoor" and "outdoor" direct relief; the former administered in workhouses through the Poor Law, the latter through soup kitchens. The costs of the Poor Law fell primarily on the local landlords, who in turn attempted to reduce their liability by evicting their tenants. This was then facilitated through the "Cheap Ejectment Acts." The poor law amendment act was passed in June 1847. According to James Donnelly in Fearful Realities: New Perspectives on the Famine, it embodied the principle popular in Britain that Irish property must support Irish poverty. The landed proprietors in Ireland were held in Britain to have created the conditions that led to the famine. It was asserted however, that the British parliament since the Act of Union of 1800 was partly to blame. This point was raised in the Illustrated London News on 13 February 13, 1847, "There was no law it would not pass at their request, and no abuse it would not defend for them." On 24 March The Times reported that Britain had permitted in Ireland "a mass of poverty, disaffection, and degradation without a parallel in the world. It allowed proprietors to suck the very life-blood of that wretched race."

The "Gregory clause" of the Poor Law prohibited anyone who held at least  of an acre from receiving relief. This in practice meant that if a farmer, having sold all his produce to pay rent, duties, rates and taxes, should be reduced, as many thousands of them were, to applying for public outdoor relief, he would not get it until he had first delivered up all his land to the landlord. Of this Law Mitchel was to write: "it is the able-bodied idler only who is to be fedif he attempted to till but one rood of ground, he dies." This simple method of ejectment was called "passing paupers through the workhouse"a man went in, a pauper came out. These factors combined to drive thousands of people off the land: 90,000 in 1849, and 104,000 in 1850.

===Irish food exports during Famine ===
Records show Irish lands exported food even during the worst years of the Famine. When Ireland had experienced a famine in 17821783, ports were closed to keep Irish-grown food in Ireland to feed the Irish. Local food prices promptly dropped. Merchants lobbied against the export ban, but government in the 1780s overrode their protests. No such export ban happened in the 1840s.

Throughout the entire period of the Famine, Ireland was exporting enormous quantities of food to England. In Ireland before and after the famine, Cormac O'Grada points out, "Although the potato crop failed, the country was still producing and exporting more than enough grain crops to feed the population. But that was a 'money crop' and not a 'food crop' and could not be interfered with." Up to 75 percent of Irish soil was devoted to wheat, oats, barley and other crops that were grown for export and shipped abroad while the people starved.

In History Ireland magazine (1997, issue 5, pp. 3236), Christine Kinealy, a Great Hunger scholar, lecturer, and Drew University professor, relates her findings: Almost 4,000 vessels carried food from Ireland to the ports of Bristol, Glasgow, Liverpool and London during 1847, when 400,000 Irish men, women and children died of starvation and related diseases. She also writes that Irish exports of calves, livestock (except pigs), bacon and ham actually increased during the Famine. This food was shipped under British military guard from the most famine-stricken parts of Ireland; Ballina, Ballyshannon, Bantry, Dingle, Killala, Kilrush, Limerick, Sligo, Tralee and Westport. A wide variety of commodities left Ireland during 1847, including peas, beans, onions, rabbits, salmon, oysters, herring, lard, honey, tongues, animal skins, rags, shoes, soap, glue and seed. The most shocking export figures concern butter. Butter was shipped in firkins, each one holding 9 gallons. In the first nine months of 1847, 56,557 firkins were exported from Ireland to Bristol, and 34,852 firkins were shipped to Liverpool which correlates to 822,681 gallons of butter exported to England from Ireland during nine months of the worst year of the Famine.The poor did not have sufficient money to obtain the food produced and the British government facilitated its exportation http://ighm.nfshost.com/exports-in-famine-times/ 

Cecil Woodham-Smith, an authority on the Irish Famine, wrote in that no issue has provoked so much anger and embittered relations between England and Ireland as "the indisputable fact that huge quantities of food were exported from Ireland to England throughout the period when the people of Ireland were dying of starvation." Ireland remained a net exporter of food throughout most of the five-year famine.

The following poem written by Miss Jane Francesca Elgee (later Lady Wilde), a well known and popular author, was carried in The Nation:

==Charity==

William Smith O'Brien, speaking on the subject of charity in a speech to the Repeal Association, February 1845, applauded the fact that the universal sentiment on the subject of charity was that they would accept no English charity. He expressed the view that the resources of this country were still abundantly adequate to maintain the population and that until those resources had been utterly exhausted, he hoped that there was no one in "Ireland who will so degrade himself as to ask the aid of a subscription from England".

Mitchel wrote in his The Last Conquest of Ireland (Perhaps), on the same subject, that no one from Ireland ever asked for charity during this period, and that it was England who sought charity on Ireland's behalf, and, having received it, was also responsible for administering it. He suggested that it has been carefully inculcated by the British Press, "that the moment Ireland fell into distress, she became an abject beggar at England's gate, and that she even craved alms from all mankind." He affirmed that in Ireland no one ever asked alms or favours of any kind from England or any other nation, but that it was England herself that begged for Ireland. He suggested that it was England that "sent 'round the hat over all the globe, asking a penny for the love of God to relieve the poor Irish," and constituting herself the agent of all that charity, took all the profit of it.

Large sums of money were donated by charities; Calcutta is credited with making the first donation of 14,000. The money was raised by Irish soldiers serving there and Irish people employed by the East India Company. Pope Pius IX sent funds and Queen Victoria donated 2,000.

In addition to the religious, non-religious organisations came to the assistance of famine victims. The British Relief Association was one such group. Founded in 1847, the Association raised money throughout England, America and Australia; their funding drive benefited by a "Queen's Letter", a letter from Queen Victoria appealing for money to relieve the distress in Ireland. With this initial letter the Association raised 171,533. A second, somewhat less successful "Queen's Letter" was issued in late 1847. In total, the British Relief Association raised approximately 200,000 (c. US$1,000,000 at the time).

Private initiatives such as The Central Relief Committee of the Society of Friends (Quakers) attempted to fill the gap caused by the end of government relief and eventually the government reinstated the relief works, although bureaucracy slowed the release of food supplies.

===Ottoman aid===
According to legend, in 1845, Ottoman Sultan Abdlmecid declared his intention to send 10,000 to Irish farmers, but Queen Victoria requested that the Sultan send only 1,000, because she herself had sent only 2,000. The Sultan is supposed to have sent the 1,000 along with three ships full of food. According to Abdullah Aymaz in an article in The Fountain magazine, the British administration tried to block the ships, but the food arrived secretly at Drogheda harbour and was left there by Ottoman sailors. Shipping records relating to the port appear not to have survived. Newspaper reports suggest that ships from Thessaloniki in the Ottoman Empire sailed up the River Boyne in May 1847, although it has also been claimed that the river was dry at the time. A letter in the Ottoman archives of Turkey, written by Irish notables explicitly thanks the Sultan for his help. 

===From Native Americans===
In 1847, midway through the famine, a group of Native American Choctaws collected $710 (although many articles say the original amount was $170 after a misprint in Angie Debo's The Rise and Fall of the Choctaw Republic) and sent it to help starving Irish men, women and children. "It had been just 16 years since the Choctaw people had experienced the Trail of Tears, and they had faced starvation ... It was an amazing gesture", according to Judy Allen, editor of the Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma's newspaper, Biskinik. To mark the 150th anniversary, eight Irish people retraced the Trail of Tears, and the donation was publicly commemorated by President Mary Robinson.

==Eviction==
Landlords were responsible for paying the rates of every tenant who paid less than 4 in yearly rent. Landlords whose land was crowded with poorer tenants were now faced with large bills. They began clearing the poor tenants from their small plots, and letting the land in larger plots for over 4 which then reduced their debts. In 1846, there had been some clearances, but the great mass of evictions came in 1847. According to James S. Donnelly Jr, it is impossible to be sure how many people were evicted during the years of the famine and its immediate aftermath. It was only in 1849 that the police began to keep a count, and they recorded a total of almost 250,000 persons as officially evicted between 1849 and 1854.

Donnelly considered this to be an underestimate, and if the figures were to include the number pressured into "voluntary" surrenders during the whole period (18461854) the figure would almost certainly exceed half a million persons. While Helen Litton says there were also thousands of "voluntary" surrenders, she notes also that there was "precious little voluntary about them." In some cases, tenants were persuaded to accept a small sum of money to leave their homes, "cheated into believing the workhouse would take them in."

West Clare was one of the worst areas for evictions, where landlords turned thousands of families out and demolished their derisory cabins. Captain Kennedy in April 1848 estimated that 1,000 houses, with an average of six people to each, had been levelled since November. The Mahon family, Strokestown House alone in 1847 evicted 3,000 people, and according to John Gibney were still able to dine on lobster soup.

After Clare, the worst area for evictions was County Mayo, accounting for 10% of all evictions between 1849 and 1854. The Earl of Lucan, who owned over 60000 acre was among the worst evicting landlords. He was quoted as saying 'he would not breed paupers to pay priests'. Having turned out in the parish of Ballinrobe over 2,000 tenants alone, the cleared land he then used as grazing farms. In 1848, the Marquis of Sligo owed 1,650 to Westport Union; he was also an evicting landlord, though he claimed to be selective, saying he was only getting rid of the idle and dishonest. Altogether, he cleared about 25% of his tenants.

According to Litton, evictions might have taken place earlier but for fear of the secret societies. However they were now greatly weakened by the Famine. Revenge still occasionally took place, with seven landlords being shot, six fatally, during the autumn and winter of 1847. Ten other occupiers of land, though without tenants, were also murdered, she says.

Lord Clarendon, alarmed that this might mean rebellion, asked for special powers. Lord John Russell was not sympathetic to this appeal. Lord Clarendon believed that the landlords themselves were mostly responsible for the tragedy in the first place, saying "It is quite true that landlords in England would not like to be shot like hares and partridges...but neither does any landlord in England turn out fifty persons at once and burn their houses over their heads, giving them no provision for the future." The Crime and Outrage Act was passed in December 1847 as a compromise and additional troops were sent to Ireland.

Under the notorious Gregory clause, described by Donnelly as a "vicious amendment to the Irish poor law, named after William H. Gregory, M.P. and commonly known as the quarter-acre clause, provided that no tenant holding more than a quarter-acre of land would be eligible for public assistance either in or outside the workhouse. This clause had been a successful Tory amendment to the Whig poor-relief bill which became law in early June 1847, where its potential as an estate-clearing device was widely recognised in parliament, though not in advance. At first the poor law commissioners and inspectors viewed the clause as a valuable instrument for a more cost-effective administration of public relief, but the drawbacks soon became apparent, even from an administrative perspective. They would soon view them as little more than murderous from a humanitarian perspective. According to Donnelly it became obvious that the quarter-acre clause was "indirectly a death-dealing instrument."

==Emigration==

Emigrants Leave Ireland, engraving by Henry Doyle (18271893), from Mary Frances Cusack's Illustrated History of Ireland, 1868.

While the famine was responsible for a significant increase in emigration from Ireland, of anywhere from 45% to nearly 85% depending on the year and the county, it was not the sole cause. Nor was it even the era when mass emigration from Ireland commenced. That can be traced to the middle of the 18th century, when some 250,000 people left Ireland to settle in the New World alone, over a period of some 50 years. From the defeat of Napoleon to the beginning of the famine, a period of 30 years, "at least 1,000,000 and possibly 1,500,000 emigrated". However, during the worst of the famine, emigration reached somewhere around 250,000 in one year alone, with far more emigrants leaving from western Ireland than any other part.

Families did not migrate en masse but younger members of families did. So much so that emigration almost became a rite of passage, as evidenced by the data that show that, unlike similar emigration throughout world history, women emigrated just as often, just as early, and in the same numbers as men. The emigrant started a new life in a new land, sent remittances " 1,404,000 by 1851" back to his/her family in Ireland which, in turn, allowed another member of the family to emigrate.

Emigration during the famine years of 18451850 was to England, Scotland, the US, Canada, and Australia. Many of those fleeing to the Americas used the well-established McCorkell Line.

Of the 100,000 Irish that sailed to Canada in 1847, an estimated one out of five died from disease and malnutrition, including over 5,000 at Grosse Isle. Mortality rates of 30% aboard the coffin ships were common.

By 1854, between 1.5 and 2 million Irish left their country due to evictions, starvation, and harsh living conditions. In America, most Irish became city-dwellers: with little money, many had to settle in the cities that the ships they came on landed in. By 1850, the Irish made up a quarter of the population in Boston, New York City, Philadelphia and Baltimore. In addition, Irish populations became prevalent in some American mining communities.
A graph of the populations of Ireland axis and Europe axis indexed against date.

The 1851 census reported that more than half the inhabitants of Toronto, Ontario were Irish, and in 1847 alone, 38,000 famine Irish flooded a city with fewer than 20,000 citizens. Other Canadian cities such as Saint John, New Brunswick; Quebec City and Montreal, Quebec; Ottawa, Kingston and Hamilton, Ontario also received large numbers of Famine Irish since Canada, as part of the British Empire, could not close its ports to Irish ships (unlike the US), and they could get passage cheaply (or free in the case of tenant evictions) in returning empty lumber holds. However fearing nationalist insurgencies the British government placed harsh restrictions on Irish immigration to Canada after 1847 resulting in larger influxes to the US The largest Famine grave site outside of Ireland is at Grosse-le, Quebec, an island in the St. Lawrence River used to quarantine ships near Quebec City. In 1851, about a quarter of Liverpool's population was Irish-born.

The famine marked the beginning of the steep depopulation of Ireland in the 19th century. Population had increased by 1314% in the first three decades of the 19th century. Between 1831 and 1841, population grew by 5%. Application of Thomas Malthus's idea of population expanding geometrically while resources increase arithmetically was popular during the famines of 1817 and 1822. However by the 1830s, a decade before the famine, they were seen as overly simplistic and Ireland's problems were seen "less as an excess of population than as a lack of capital investment." The population of Ireland was increasing no faster than that of England, which suffered no equivalent catastrophe.

==1848 rebellion==

William Smith O'Brien

In 1847, William Smith O'Brien, the leader of the Young Ireland party, became one of the founding members of the Irish Confederation to campaign for a Repeal of the Act of Union, and called for the export of grain to be stopped and the ports closed. The following year he organised the resistance of landless farmers in County Tipperary against the landowners and their agents.

==Death toll==
It is not known exactly how many people died during the period of the Famine, although it is believed more died from diseases than from starvation. State registration of births, marriages or deaths had not yet begun, and records kept by the Roman Catholic Church are incomplete. Eyewitness accounts have helped medical historians identify both the ailments and effects of famine, and have been used to evaluate and explain in greater detail features of the famine. In Mayo, English Quaker William Bennett wrote of 
Revd Dr. Traill Hall, a Church of Ireland rector in Schull, described 
Marasmic children also left a permanent image on Quaker Joseph Crosfield who in 1846 witnessed a
William Forster wrote in Carrick-on-Shannon that 

One possible estimate has been reached by comparing the expected population with the eventual numbers in the 1850s -see Irish population analysis. Earlier predictions expected that by 1851 Ireland would have a population of 89 million. A census taken in 1841 revealed a population of slightly over 8 million. A census immediately after the famine in 1851 counted 6,552,385, a drop of almost 1.5 million in 10 years. Modern historian R.J. Foster estimates that "at least 775,000 died, mostly through disease, including cholera in the latter stages of the holocaust". He further notes that "a recent sophisticated computation estimates excess deaths from 1846 to 1851 as between 1,000,000 and 1,500,000...; after a careful critique of this, other statisticians arrive at a figure of 1,000,000." In addition, in excess of 1 million Irish immigrated to Great Britain, US, Canada, Australia, and elsewhere, while millions emigrated over following decades.

 Decline in population 184151 (%) 
 Leinster Munster Ulster Connaught Ireland 
 15.3 22.5 15.7 28.8 20 
 Table from Joe Lee, The Modernisation of Irish Society (Gill History of Ireland Series No.10) p. 2 

Detailed statistics of the population of Ireland since 1841 are available at Irish population analysis.

Perhaps the best-known estimates of deaths at a county level are those by Joel Mokyr. The range of Mokyr's mortality figures goes from 1.1 million to 1.5 million Famine deaths in Ireland between 1846 and 1851. Mokyr produced two sets of data which contained an upper-bound and lower-bound estimate, which showed not much difference in regional patterns. Because of such anomalies, Cormac  Grda revisited the work of S. H. Cousens. Cousens' estimates of mortality relied heavily on retrospective information contained in the 1851 census. The death tables, contained in the 1851 census have been rightly criticised, as underestimating the true extent of mortality, Cousens' mortality of 800,000 is now regarded as much too low. There were a number of reasons for this, because the information was gathered from the surviving householders and others and having to look back over the previous 10 years, it underestimates the true extent of disease and mortality. Death and emigration had also cleared away entire families, leaving few or no survivors to answer the questions on the census.

Another area of uncertainty lies in the descriptions of disease given by tenants as to the cause of their relatives' deaths. Though Wilde's work has been rightly criticised as underestimating the true extent of mortality, it does provide a framework for the medical history of the Great Famine. The diseases that badly affected the population fell into two categories, famine-induced diseases and diseases of nutritional deficiency. Of the nutritional deficiency diseases the most commonly experienced were starvation and marasmus, as well as condition called at the time dropsy. Dropsy (Edema) was a popular name given for the symptoms of several diseases, one of which, kwashiorkor, is associated with starvation. The greatest mortality, however, was not from nutritional deficiency diseases, but from famine-induced ailments. The malnourished are very vulnerable to infections; therefore, they were more severe when they occurred. Measles, diarrhoeal diseases, tuberculosis, most respiratory infections, whooping cough, many intestinal parasites and cholera were all strongly conditioned by nutritional status. Potentially lethal diseases, such as smallpox and influenza, were so virulent that their spread was independent of nutrition.

A significant cause spreading disease during the Famine was "social dislocation". The best example of this phenomenon was fever, which exacted the greatest toll of death. In the popular mind, as well as among much medical opinion, fever and famine are closely related. This view was not wholly mistaken, but the most critical connection was the congregating of the hungry at soup kitchens, food depots, overcrowded work houses where conditions were ideal for spreading infectious diseases such as typhus, typhoid and relapsing fever. As to the diarrhoeal diseases, their presence was the result of poor hygiene, bad sanitation and dietary changes. The concluding attack on a population incapacitated by famine was delivered by Asiatic cholera. Cholera had visited Ireland, briefly in the 1830s. But in the following decade it spread uncontrollably across Asia, through Europe, and into Britain and finally reached Ireland in 1849.
Population change in Ireland 18411851

On the 1851 census, both Cormac  Grda and Joel Mokyr would also describe it as a famous but flawed source. They would contend that the combination of institutional and individuals figures gives "an incomplete and biased count" of fatalities during the famine.  Grda referencing the work of W. A. MacArthur, writes, specialists have long known the Irish death tables left a lot to be desired in terms of accuracy. As a result,  Grda says that to take the Tables of Death at face value would be a grave mistake, as they seriously undercount the number of deaths both before and during the famine.

In 1851, the census commissioners collected information on the number who died in each family since 1841, the cause, season and year of death. Its disputed findings were as follows: 21,770 total deaths from starvation in the previous decade, and 400,720 deaths from disease. Listed diseases were fever, dysentery, cholera, smallpox and influenza; the first two being the main killers (222,021 and 93,232). The commissioners acknowledged that their figures were incomplete and that the true number of deaths was probably higher: "The greater the amount of destitution of mortality...the less will be the amount of recorded deaths derived through any household form;  for not only were whole families swept away by disease...but whole villages were effaced from off the land." A later historian has this to say: "In 1851, the Census Commissioners attempted to produce a table of mortality for each year since 1841... The statistics provided were flawed and probably under-estimated the level of mortality..."

Other, perhaps less reliable and likely underestimates are that the event led to the deaths of approximately 1 million people through starvation and disease; a further million are thought to have emigrated as a result of the famine. Some scholars estimate that the population of Ireland was reduced by 2025%. All of this occurred while taxes, rents, and food exports were being collected and sent to British landlords, in an amount surpassing 6 million.

==Aftermath==

The potato remained Ireland's staple crop after the famine; at the end of the 19th century, the Irish per capita consumption of four pounds a day was the highest in the world. Later famines made only minimal effect and are generally forgotten, except by historians. By the 1911 census, the island of Ireland's population had fallen to 4.4 million, about the same as the population in 1800 and 2000 and only a half of its peak population.

On the other hand, the population of England and Wales doubled from 16 million in 1841 to 32.5 million in 1901. 

The Famine gave considerable impetus to the shift from Irish to English as the language of the majority. Those most gravely affected by the Famine were mostly in Irish-speaking districts, and those districts also supplied most of the emigrants. Awareness of the cultural loss provided a spur to the work of Irish language activists in Ireland, Britain, America and Australia, resulting in the foundation of such organisations as the Gaelic League.

==Analysis of the government's role==

===Contemporary===
Contemporary opinion was sharply critical of the Russell government's response to and management of the crisis. From the start, there were accusations that the government failed to grasp the magnitude of the disaster. Sir James Graham, who had served as Home Secretary in Sir Robert Peel's late government, wrote to Peel that, in his opinion, "the real extent and magnitude of the Irish difficulty are underestimated by the Government, and cannot be met by measures within the strict rule of economical science."

This criticism was not confined to outside critics. The Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, Lord Clarendon, wrote a letter to Russell on 26 April 1849, urging that the government propose additional relief measures: "I do not think there is another legislature in Europe that would disregard such suffering as now exists in the west of Ireland, or coldly persist in a policy of extermination." Also in 1849 the Chief Poor Law Commissioner, Edward Twisleton, resigned in protest over the Rate-in-Aid Act, which provided additional funds for the Poor Law through a 6p in the pound levy on all rateable properties in Ireland. Twisleton testified that "comparatively trifling sums were required for Britain to spare itself the deep disgrace of permitting its miserable fellow subjects to die of starvation." According to Peter Gray, in his book The Irish Famine, the government spent 7,000,000 for relief in Ireland between 1845 and 1850, "representing less than half of one percent of the British gross national product over five years. Contemporaries noted the sharp contrast with the 20 million pounds compensation given to West Indian slave-owners in the 1830s."

Other critics maintained that even after the government recognised the scope of the crisis, it failed to take sufficient steps to address it. John Mitchel, one of the leaders of the Young Ireland Movement, wrote the following in 1860: "I have called it an artificial famine: that is to say, it was a famine which desolated a rich and fertile island that produced every year abundance and superabundance to sustain all her people and many more. The English, indeed, call the famine a 'dispensation of Providence;' and ascribe it entirely to the blight on potatoes. But potatoes failed in like manner all over Europe; yet there was no famine save in Ireland. The British account of the matter, then, is first, a fraud; second, a blasphemy. The Almighty, indeed, sent the potato blight, but the English created the famine."

Still other critics saw reflected in the government's response the government's attitude to the so-called "Irish Question". Nassau Senior, an economics professor at Oxford University, wrote that the Famine "would not kill more than one million people, and that would scarcely be enough to do any good." In 1848, Denis Shine Lawlor suggested that Russell was a student of the Elizabethan poet Edmund Spenser, who had calculated "how far English colonisation and English policy might be most effectively carried out by Irish starvation." Charles Trevelyan, the civil servant with most direct responsibility for the government's handling of the famine, described it in 1848 as "a direct stroke of an all-wise and all-merciful Providence", which laid bare "the deep and inveterate root of social evil"; the Famine, he affirmed, was "the sharp but effectual remedy by which the cure is likely to be effected. God grant that the generation to which this opportunity has been offered may rightly perform its part..."

===Historical===
Christine Kinealy expresses the consensus of historians when she states that "the major tragedy of the Irish Famine of 184552 marked a watershed in modern Irish history. Its occurrence, however, was neither inevitable nor unavoidable." The underlying factors which combined to cause the famine were aggravated by an inadequate government response. As Kinealy notes,

"...he government had to do something to help alleviate the suffering, the particular nature of the actual response, especially following 1846, suggests a more covert agenda and motivation. As the Famine progressed, it became apparent that the government was using its information not merely to help it formulate its relief policies, but also as an opportunity to facilitate various long-desired changes within Ireland. These included population control and the consolidation of property through various means, including emigration... Despite the overwhelming evidence of prolonged distress caused by successive years of potato blight, the underlying philosophy of the relief efforts was that they should be kept to a minimalist level; in fact they actually decreased as the Famine progressed."

Several writers single out the decision of the government to permit the continued export of food from Ireland as suggestive of the policy-makers' attitudes. Leon Uris suggested that "there was ample food within Ireland", while all the Irish-bred cattle were being shipped off to England. The following exchange appeared in Act IV of George Bernard Shaw's play Man and Superman:
:MALONE. He will get over it all right enough. Men thrive better on disappointments in love than on disappointments in money. I daresay you think that sordid; but I know what I'm talking about. My father died of starvation in Ireland in the black 47, Maybe you've heard of it.
:VIOLET. The Famine?
:MALONE. smouldering passion No, the starvation. When a country is full of food, and exporting it, there can be no famine. My father was starved dead; and I was starved out to America in my mother's arms. English rule drove me and mine out of Ireland. Well, you can keep Ireland. I and my like are coming back to buy England; and we'll buy the best of it. I want no middle class properties and no middle class women for Hector. That's straightforward isn't it, like yourself?

Some also pointed to the structure of the British Empire as a contributing factor. James Anthony Froude wrote that "England governed Ireland for what she deemed her own interest, making her calculations on the gross balance of her trade ledgers, and leaving moral obligations aside, as if right and wrong had been blotted out of the statute book of the Universe." Dennis Clark, an Irish-American historian and critic of empire, claimed that the famine was "the culmination of generations of neglect, misrule and repression. It was an epic of English colonial cruelty and inadequacy. For the landless cabin dwellers it meant emigration or extinction..."

===An Gorta Mr Genocide question===
Ireland's Holocaust mural on the Ballymurphy Road, Belfast. "An Gorta Mr, Britain's genocide by starvation, Ireland's holocaust 18451849."

The famine is still a controversial event in Irish history. Debate and discussion on the British government's response to the failure of the potato crop in Ireland, the exportation of food crops and livestock, the subsequent large-scale starvation, and whether or not this constituted genocide, remains a historically and politically charged issue.

In 1996, Francis A. Boyle, a law professor at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, wrote a report commissioned by the New York-based Irish Famine/Genocide Committee, which concluded that the British government deliberately pursued a race and ethnicity-based policy aimed at destroying the group commonly known as the Irish people and that the policy of mass starvation amounted to genocide per the Hague convention of 1948. On the strength of Boyle's report, the US state of New Jersey included the famine in the "Holocaust and Genocide Curriculum" at the secondary tier.

Historian Peter Duffy writes that "The government's crime, which deserves to blacken its name forever ..." was rooted "in the effort to regenerate Ireland" through "landlord-engineered replacement of tillage plots with grazing lands" that "took precedence over the obligation to provide food ... for its starving citizens. It is little wonder that the policy looked to many people like genocide."

Several commentators have argued that the searing effect of the famine has on Irish cultural memory creates effects similar to that of genocide, while maintaining that one did not occur. Robert Kee suggests that the Famine is seen as "comparable" in its force on "popular national consciousness to that of the 'final solution' on the Jews," and that it is not "infrequently" thought that the Famine was something very like "a form of genocide engineered by the English against the Irish people." This point was echoed by James Donnelly, a historian at the University of WisconsinMadison, who wrote in his work Landlord and Tenant in Nineteenth-century Ireland, "I would draw the following broad conclusion: at a fairly early stage of the Great Famine the government's abject failure to stop or even slow down the clearances (evictions) contributed in a major way to enshrining the idea of English state-sponsored genocide in Irish popular mind. Or perhaps one should say in the Irish mind, for this was a notion that appealed to many educated and discriminating men and women, and not only to the revolutionary minority...And it is also my contention that while genocide was not in fact committed, what happened during and as a result of the clearances had the look of genocide to a great many Irish..."

Historian Cormac  Grda disagreed that the famine was genocide: first, that "genocide includes murderous intent and it must be said that not even the most bigoted and racist commentators of the day sought the extermination of the Irish"; second, that most people in Whitehall "hoped for better times in Ireland" and third, that the claim of genocide overlooks "the enormous challenges facing relief efforts, both central, local, public and private".  Grda thinks that a case of neglect is easier to sustain than that of genocide.
Famine Memorial in Dublin

Edward Lengel claims that views of the Irish as racially inferior, and for this reason significantly responsible for their circumstances, gained purchase in Great Britain during and immediately after the famine, especially through influential publications such as The Medical Times and The Times.

Comparisons between An Gorta Mr and other major man-made "famines" are frequent, such as that engineered by Stalin in 1932 in one of the most fertile regions on earth, often regarded as the bread basket of Europe, the Ukraine. Holodomor and Gorta Mr: Histories, Memories and Representations of Famine in Ukraine and Ireland (Anthem Series on Russian, East European and Eurasian Studies) Holodomor, Famine in Ukraine 19321933: A Crime against Humanity or Genocide? Renate Stark. Irish Journal of Applied Social Studies Est 1998. Published by Social Care Ireland Holodomor in Ukraine and Great Famine in Ireland. An event known as the Holodomor which translates to, Hunger plague, as it similarly used the control of food as a means of bringing about the governments ideals, in this case collectivism, and indeed the Holodomor was regarded as a genocide by Raphael Lemkin who coined the term, although no Soviet government order was issued explicitly stating 'an order to kill with famine a certain number of Ukrainians or other peasants'. Thus, in legal terms it could not be seen as proven that the famine of 193233 was indeed thoroughly planned. New research, however, has established
that the intentionality of this was sufficiently expressed by many legal acts aimed specifically at the Ukrainian citizenship. An Gorta Mr, like the Holodomor, has been the subject of similar controversy and debate over being classified as a genocide.

==Memorials==

The Great Famine is memorialised in many locations throughout Ireland, especially in those regions that suffered the greatest losses, and also in cities overseas with large populations descended from Irish immigrants. These include, at Custom House Quays, Dublin, the thin sculptural figures, by artist Rowan Gillespie, who are portrayed as if walking towards the emigration ships on the Dublin Quayside. There is also a large memorial at the Murrisk Millennium Peace Park at the foot of Croagh Patrick in County Mayo. Among the memorials in the US is the Irish Hunger Memorial near a section of the Manhattan waterfront in New York City, where many fleeing Irish arrived. An annual Great Famine walk, the brainchild of the Irish author/humanitarian, Don Mullan, from Doolough to Louisburgh, Co. Mayo, was inaugurated in 1988 and has been led by such notable personalities as Archbishop Desmond Tutu of South Africa and the Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma. The walk, organised by AFrI (Action From Ireland), takes place on the first or second Saturday of May and links the memory of the Great Hunger with a contemporary Human Rights issue. Commemorating the Doolough Tragedy, the walk was covered by the three major US television networks: ABC, NBC and CBS, during its first three years.

==See also==
* History of the potato
* European Potato Failure (the wider agrarian crisis in Europe at the same time)
* Great Famine's effect on the American economy
* (2009 novel)
* Highland Potato Famine (agrarian crisis in Scotland at the same time)
* Holodomor, a 1930s famine in Ukraine, the causes of which are also the subject of debate
* List of famines
* List of natural disasters in Britain and Ireland
* "The truth about Ireland" - Henry George's account of the Irish famine in chapter 6 of his Progress and Poverty.

==Footnotes==

==Citations==

==References==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==

* John Kelly, The Graves are Walking, The Great Famine and the Saga of the Irish People (2012)
* Mary E. Daly, The Famine in Ireland
* R. Dudley Edwards and T. Desmond Williams (eds.), The Great Famine: Studies in Irish history 184552
* Peter Gray, The Irish Famine
* Joseph O'Connor, Star of the Sea
* Cormac  Grda, An Economic History of Ireland
* Robert Kee, Ireland: A History (ISBN 0-349-10678-9)
* Christine Kinealy, This Great Calamity: The Irish Famine 1845  1852, history.ac.uk
* John Mitchel, The Last Conquest of Ireland (1861) (University College Dublin Press reprint, 2005 paperback) ISBN 1-904558-36-4
* Marita Conlon-McKenna, Under the Hawthorn Tree
* Canon John O'Rourke, The Great Irish Famine (ISBN 1-85390-049-4 Hardback) (ISBN 1-85390-130-X Paperback) Veritas Publications 1989. First published in 1874.
* Liam O'Flaherty, Famine
* Colm Tibn and Diarmaid Ferriter, The Irish Famine, ISBN 978-1-86197-249-1 (first edition, hardback)
* Kevin Baker, Paradise Alley
* Several books by Young Irelanders make reference to the Great Irish Famine
* 

==External links==

* Irish National Archives information on the Famine
* Quinnipiac University's An Gorta Mor site  includes etexts
* Hunger on Trial: An Activity on the Irish Potato Famine and Its Meaning for Today A free downloadable lesson for high school social studies classrooms from the Zinn Education Project.
* Cork Multitext Project article on the Famine, by Donnchadh  Corrin

 



[[Isle of Man]]

The Isle of Man (; Ellan is Manx for "island"; Vannin is the genitive case of Mannin, and means "of Mann". ), otherwise known simply as Mann (, ), is a self-governing British Crown Dependency, located in the Irish Sea between the islands of Great Britain and Ireland. The head of state is Queen Elizabeth II, who holds the title of Lord of Mann. The Lord of Mann is represented by a Lieutenant Governor, but its foreign relations and defence are the responsibility of the British Government.

The island has been inhabited since before 6500 BC. As one of the six Celtic nations, Gaelic cultural influence began in the 5th century AD, and the Manx language, a branch of the Gaelic languages, gradually emerged. In 627, Edwin of Northumbria conquered the Isle of Man along with most of Mercia. In the 9th century, the Norse began to settle there. Norse people from Scotland then established the Kingdom of the Isles. The King's title would then carry the suffix, "and the Isles". Magnus III, the King of Norway, was also known as "King of Mann and the Isles" as part of the Hebrides civilization between 1099 and 1103. Magnus 3 Olavsson Berrftt  Norsk biografisk leksikon. Snl.no. Retrieved on 29 July 2013. A Norse-Gaelic culture arose and the island came under Norse control. In 1266, the island became part of Scotland, as formalised by the Treaty of Perth. After a period of alternating rule by the kings of Scotland and England, the island came under the feudal lordship of the English Crown in 1399. The lordship revested into the British Crown in 1765, but the island never became part of the kingdom of Great Britain or its successor the United Kingdom, retaining its status as an internally self-governing Crown dependency.

== Etymology ==
The Isle of Man is , where is a Manx word meaning island. The earliest form of Man is or , which appears in the genitive case as , hence "Island of Man".

The name is related to the figure of Celtic mythology known as Manannn mac Lir to the Irish and Manawydan to the Welsh. 

The name enters recorded history as Mona (Julius Caesar, 54 BC), and is also recorded as Monapia or Monabia (Pliny the Elder, AD 77), Monda (Ptolemy, AD 150), Mevania or Mnavia (Orosius, AD 416), and Eubonia or Eumonia by Irish writers. Welsh records it as Manaw, and in the Sagas of Icelanders it is Mn. 

 

 

 
 

Though the Isle of Man was never incorporated into the Roman Empire, the island was noted in the Classics where it was called variously Monapia, (Monaoida), (Monarina), Menavi and Mevania. 
 The Old Welsh and Old Irish names for the Isle of Man, Manau and Mano, also occur in Manaw Gododdin, the name for an ancient district in north Britain along the lower Firth of Forth. 
 The name is probably connected with the Welsh name of the island of Anglesey, Ynys Mn 
 and possibly with the Celtic root reflected in Welsh mynydd, Breton menez, and Scottish Gaelic monadh, all of which mean "mountain" and probably derive from the Proto-Indo-European root *men-, "to tower". Indogermanisches Etymologisches Woerterbuch: Record number 1277 (Root / lemma: men-1) In this case, such a name may have referred to the island apparently rising out of the Irish Sea on the horizon. 

== History ==

The Braaid in central Isle of Man, with remnants of a Celtic-Norse roundhouse and two longhouses, c. 650950 AD
Rising water levels cut off the island from the surrounding islands around 8000 BC. Evidence suggests that colonisation of the island took place by sea some time before 6500 BC. 
 The first residents lived in small huts, hunting, fishing and gathering their food. They used small tools made of flint or bone, examples of which have been found near the coast. Representatives of these artefacts are kept at the Manx Museum. Manx Museum Mesolithic collections 
The Kingdom of the Isles about the year 1100. Sodor and Mann in red.
The Neolithic Period marked the coming of knowledge of farming, better stone tools and pottery. It was during this period that megalithic monuments began to appear around the island. Examples from this period can be found at Cashtal yn Ard near Maughold, King Orry's Grave at Laxey, Meayll Circle near Cregneash, and Ballaharra Stones at St John's. This was not the only Neolithic culture: there were also the local Ronaldsway and Bann cultures. Manx Museum Neolithic collections 

During the Bronze Age, the large communal tombs of the megalith builders were replaced with smaller burial mounds. Bodies were put in stone-lined graves along with ornamental containers. The Bronze Age burial mounds created long-lasting markers around the countryside. Manx Museum Bronze Age collections 

The Iron Age marked the beginning of Celtic cultural influence. Large hill forts appeared on hill summits, and smaller promontory forts along the coastal cliffs, while large timber-framed roundhouses were built. It is likely that the first Celts to inhabit the island were Britons speaking Common Brittonic. Around the 5th century AD, cultural influence from Ireland and migration precipitated a process of Gaelicisation evidenced by Ogham inscriptions, giving rise to the Manx language, which is a Goidelic language closely related to Irish and Scottish Gaelic. Manx Museum Celtic Farmers (Iron Age) collections 

Viking settlement of the Isle of Man began at the end of the 8th century. The Vikings established Tynwald and introduced many land divisions that still exist.

== Geography ==
The Calf of Man seen from Cregneash

The Isle of Man is located in the middle of the northern Irish Sea, almost equidistant from England, Ireland, Scotland (closest), and Wales (furthest). It is 52 km long and, at its widest point, 22 km wide. It has an area of around 572 km2. Geography  Isle of Man Public Services Besides the island of Mann itself, the political unit of the Isle of Man includes some nearby small islands: the seasonally inhabited Calf of Man, Chicken Rock on which stands an unmanned lighthouse, St Patrick's Isle and St Michael's Isle. Both of the latter are connected to the mainland by permanent roads/causeways.

Hills in the north and south are separated by a central valley. The extreme north is exceptionally flat, consisting mainly of deposits from glacial advances from western Scotland during colder times. There are more recently deposited shingle beaches at the Point of Ayre. The island has one mountain higher than 600 m, Snaefell, with a height of 620 m. According to an old saying, from the summit one can see six kingdoms: those of the Mann, Scotland, England, Ireland, Wales, and Heaven. 
 
 

 Some versions add a seventh kingdom, that of the Sea, or Neptune. 
 Ian O'Leary Lecture 

=== Population ===
Map of the Isle of Man

At the 2006 interim census, 
 The Isle of Man was home to 81,048 people, of whom 26,218 resided in the island's capital city, Douglas. The majority of the population was born in the Isle of Man (47.6%) while a significant amount were born in England (37.2%). 3.4% in Scotland, 2.1% in Northern Ireland, 2.1% in the Republic of Ireland, 1.2% in Wales and 0.3% in the Channel Islands. The remaining 6.1% were born elsewhere in the world.

==== Census ====

The Isle of Man Full Census, last held in 2011, has been a decennial occurrence since 1821, with interim censuses being introduced from 1966. It is separate from, but similar to, the Census in the United Kingdom.

The 2001 Census was conducted by the Economic Affairs Division of the Isle of Man Treasury, under the authority of the Census Act 1929.

== Climate ==
The Isle of Man has a temperate climate with cool summers and mild winters. Average rainfall is higher than that of the British Isles, because the Isle of Man is far enough from Ireland for the prevailing south-westerly winds to accumulate moisture. Average rainfall is highest at Snaefell, where it is around 1900 mm a year. At lower levels it can be around 800 mm a year. Temperatures remain fairly cool with the recorded maximum being 28.9 C at Ronaldsway on 12 July 1983.

== Government ==
 A composite satellite image of the Isle of Man

The United Kingdom is responsible for the island's defence and ultimately for good governance, and for representing the island in international fora, while the island's own parliament and government have competence over all domestic matters. Isle of Man Government website 

=== Structure ===

The island's parliament, Tynwald, has been in continuous existence since 979AD or earlier, making it the oldest continuously governing body in the world. British Library page on the Chronicle of Mann Tynwald is a bicameral or tricameral legislature, comprising the House of Keys (directly elected by universal suffrage) and the Legislative Council (consisting of indirectly elected and ex-officio members). These two bodies meet together in joint session as Tynwald.

The executive branch of government is the Council of Ministers, which is composed of members of Tynwald. It is headed by the Chief Minister, currently Allan Bell MHK. The Council of Ministers comprises the greater part of the House of Keys.

Vice-regal functions of the Head of State are performed by a Lieutenant Governor.

=== External relations and security ===

====Defence====
Under British law, the Isle of Man is not part of the United Kingdom. However, Britain takes care of its external and defence affairs, and retains paramount power to legislate for the island. There are no independent military forces on the Isle of Man although HMS Ramsey is affiliated with the town of the same name. From 1938 there was a (now disbanded) Manx Regiment of the British Territorial Army, which saw extensive action during the Second World War. In 1779, the Manx Fencible Corps, a fencible regiment of three companies, was raised and disbanded in 1783 at the end of the American War of Independence. Later, the Royal Manx Fencibles was raised at the time of the French Revolutionary Wars and Napoleonic Wars. The 1st Battalion (of 3 companies) was raised in 1793. A 2nd Battalion (of 10 companies) was raised in 1795, See The Forgotten Army: Fencible Regiments for more detail. and it saw action during the Irish Rebellion of 1798. The regiment was disbanded in 1802. A third body of Manx Fencibles was raised in 1803 to defend the Island during the Napoleonic Wars and to assist the Revenue. It was disbanded in 1811. Isle of Man Notebook, "Regiments stationed on the Isle of Man" 

====Emergency Services====
The Isle of Man Government maintains five emergency services. The official Government web portal lists five emergency services here. These are:
* Isle of Man Constabulary (police)
* Isle of Man Coastguard
* Isle of Man Fire and Rescue Service
* Isle of Man Ambulance Service
* Isle of Man Civil Defence Corps

All of these services are controlled directly by the Isle of Man Government, and are independent of the United Kingdom. Nonetheless, the Isle of Man Constabulary voluntarily submits to inspection by the British inspectorate of police, and the Isle of Man Coastguard contracts Her Majesty's Coastguard (UK) for air-sea rescue operations.

==== Citizenship ====
The cover of an Isle of Man passport

Citizenship in the Isle of Man is governed by British law. Passports issued by the Isle of Man Passport Office say "British Islands  Isle of Man" on the cover but the nationality status stated on the passport is simply "British Citizen". Although Manx passport holders are British citizens, because the Isle of Man is not part of the European Union, people born on the Island without a parent or grandparent either born or resident for more than five consecutive years in the United Kingdom do not have the same rights as other British citizens with regard to employment and establishment in the EU. Isle of Man passports can be issued to any British citizen in the Isle of Man (whether or not that person has "Manx status" as an Isle of Man worker under the local Isle of Man employment laws). They can also be issued to Manx-connected British citizens residing in Britain or either of the other Crown Dependencies.

==== European Union ====
The Isle of Man holds neither membership nor associate membership of the European Union. Protocol 3 of the UK's Act of Accession to the Treaty of Rome permits trade for Manx goods without tariffs. Manx government explanation of Protocol 3 In conjunction with the Customs and Excise agreement with the UK, this facilitates free trade with the UK. While Manx goods can be freely moved within the EU, capital and services cannot be.

EU citizens are entitled to travel and reside, but not work, in the island without restriction. And Manx citizenswithout the hereditary qualification outlined aboveare similarly restricted from working in the EU. 

==== Commonwealth of Nations ====

The Isle of Man is not itself a member of the Commonwealth of Nations. By virtue of its relationship with the United Kingdom, it takes part in several Commonwealth institutions, including the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association and the Commonwealth Games. The Government of the Isle of Man has made calls for a more integrated relationship with the Commonwealth, including more direct representation and enhanced participation in Commonwealth organisations and meetings, including Commonwealth Heads of Government Meetings. The Chief Minister of the Isle of Man has said: "A closer connection with the Commonwealth itself would be a welcome further development of the Islands international relationships" 

=== Politics ===
Isle of Man local authorities and sheadings 

Most Manx politicians stand for election as independents rather than as representatives of political parties. Though political parties do exist, their influence is not nearly as strong as in the United Kingdom.

There are two political parties in the Isle of Man. The Liberal Vannin Party (established 2006) with two seats in the House of Keys, they promote greater Manx independence and more accountability in Government. The Manx Labour Party is the other, they hold one seat.

A number of pressure groups also exist on the island. Mec Vannin advocate the establishment of a sovereign republic. MecVannin website The Positive Action Group campaign for three key elements to be introduced into the governance of the island: open accountable government, rigorous control of public finances, and a fairer society. PAG website 

=== Local government ===

Local government on the Isle of Man is based on the concept of ancient parishes. There are two types of local authorities: a corporation for the Borough of Douglas, and bodies of commissioners for the town districts of Castletown, Peel and Ramsey, the village districts of Kirk Michael, Laxey, Onchan, Port Erin and Port St Mary, and the 15 'parish districts' (those parishes or parts of parishes which do not fall within the districts previously mentioned). Local authorities are under the supervision of the Isle of Man Government's Department of Local Government and the Environment (DOLGE).

==Education==

Public education is under the Department of Education and Children. Thirty-four primary schools, five secondary schools, and the Isle of Man College function under the department. Department of Education and Children Home Page  Isle of Man Government Department of Education and Children. Gov.im. Retrieved on 29 July 2013. 

== Economy ==

The Isle of Man is a low-tax economy with no capital gains tax, wealth tax, stamp duty, or inheritance tax Direct Tax  Isle of Man Government and a top rate of income tax of 20%. A tax cap is in force; the maximum amount of tax payable by an individual is 115,000 or 230,000 for couples if they choose to have their incomes jointly assessed. The 115,000 tax cap equates to an assessable income of 589,550. Personal income is assessed and taxed on a total worldwide income basis rather than a remittance basis. This means that all income earned throughout the world is assessable for Manx tax rather than only income earned in or brought into the Island.

The rate of corporation tax is 0% for almost all types of income, the only exceptions are that the profits of banks are taxed at 10%, as is rental (or other) income from land and buildings situated on the Isle of Man. New Assessor of Income Tax  Isle of Man Government Forget Monaco: Isle of Man cuts tax to tempt super-rich  Tax, Money  Independent.co.uk 

Offshore banking, manufacturing, and tourism form key sectors of the economy. Agriculture and fishing, once the mainstays of the economy, now make declining contributions to the Island's Gross Domestic Product (GDP).

Trade takes place mostly with the United Kingdom. The island is in customs union with the UK, and related revenues are pooled and shared under the Common Purse Agreement.

The Manx government promotes island locations for making films by contributing to the production costs. Since 1995, over eighty films have been made on the island. The policy has been criticized as unsustainable. Since 2007, the Isle of Man government invested 34 million in the film industry but recouped only 6.3 million, representing a loss of over 27 million. 

The Isle of Man Government Lottery operated from 1986 to 1997. Since 2 December 1999 the island has participated in the United Kingdom National Lottery. Can I Play The National Lottery On The Isle of Man? UK National Lottery Diary The island is the only jurisdiction outside the United Kingdom where it is possible to play the UK National Lottery. National Lottery FAQ:Can I play while overseas? Since 2010 it has also been possible for projects in the Isle of Man to receive national lottery Good Causes Funding. Manx charities to benefit from lottery APPENDIX 4: CORRESPONDENCE ON THE NATIONAL LOTTERY BILL Paliment.uk The good causes funding is distributed by the Manx Lottery Trust. Manx lottery Trust Tynwald receives the 12p lottery duty for tickets sold in the Island.

=== Communications ===

The main telephone provider on the Isle of Man is Manx Telecom. At present, the island has two mobile operators: Manx Telecom, previously known as Manx Pronto, and Sure. For a short time, Cloud9 operated as a third mobile operator on the island, but has since withdrawn. Broadband internet services are available through four local providers which are Wi-Manx, Domicilium, Manx Computer Bureau and Manx Telecom. The island does not have its own ITU country code, but is accessed via the British country code (+44) and the island's telephone numbers are part of the British telephone numbering plan with local dialling codes 01624 for landlines and 07524, 07624 and 07924 for mobiles.

In 1996 the Isle of Man Government obtained permission to use the .im national top-level domain (TLD) and has ultimate responsibility for its use. The domain is managed on a daily basis by Domicilium, an island-based internet service provider.

In December 2007, the Manx Electricity Authority and its telecommunications subsidiary, e-llan Communications commissioned the laying of a new fibre-optic link that connects the island to a worldwide fibre-optic network.

The Isle of Man has three radio stations: Manx Radio, Energy FM and 3 FM.

There is no insular television service and local transmitters retransmit British mainland digital broadcasts via the free-to-air digital terrestrial service Freeview. Isle of Man is part of the regions served by BBC North West for BBC One and BBC Two television services, and Granada Television for ITV.

Many television services are available by satellite, such as Sky, and Freesat from the group of satellites at 28.2 east, as well as services from a range of other satellites around Europe such as the Astra satellites at 19.2 east and Hotbird.

The Isle of Man has three newspapers, all weeklies, and all owned by Isle of Man Newspapers, a division of the Edinburgh media company Johnston Press. The Isle of Man Courier (distribution 36,318) is free and distributed to homes on the island. The other two newspapers are Isle of Man Examiner (circulation 13,276) and the Manx Independent (circulation 12,255). 
 

Postal services are the responsibility of Isle of Man Post, which took over from the British General Post Office in 1973.

=== Transport ===

The island has a total of 688 mi Isle of Man  About the Island of public roads, all of which are paved. In areas denoted by derestricted signs in the Isle of Man, there is no overriding national speed restriction; only local speed limits are set. Rules for reckless driving and most other driving regulations are enforced in a manner similar to the UK. The Isle of Man Government is constantly reviewing ways of decreasing the number of accidents on public roads. One action currently reviewed by the Government is the possibility to introduce compulsory MOT tests in the Isle of Man to reduce the number of accidents on public roads. 
There is a comprehensive bus network, operated by the government owned bus operator, Bus Vannin.

The Isle of Man Sea Terminal in Douglas is served by frequent ferries to and from Heysham. Douglas is also served by frequent summer services to and from Liverpool with a more restricted timetable operating in winter. There are also limited summer-only services to and from Belfast and Dublin. The Dublin route also operates at Christmas. In conjunction with the Isle of Man TT a limited number of sailings operate to and from Larne in Northern Ireland. All ferries are operated by the Isle of Man Steam Packet Company.

The only commercial airport on the island is the Isle of Man Airport at Ronaldsway. There are scheduled and chartered flights to numerous airports in the United Kingdom and Ireland, as well as further afield. The Irish operator Aer Arann entered a code-sharing agreement with Abu Dhabi airliner Etihad Airways in 2009, a deal which provides for the booking of one-ticket flights from the Isle of Man. 

The island used to have an extensive narrow-gauge railway system, both steam-operated and electric, but the majority of the steam railway tracks have been taken out of service and the track removed. Currently there is a steam railway which runs between Douglas and Port Erin, an electric railway which runs between Douglas and Ramsey and an electric mountain railway which climbs Snaefell.

===Space commerce===
The Isle of Man has become a centre for emerging private space travel companies. A number of the competitors in the Google Lunar X Prize, a $30 million competition for the first privately funded team to send a robot to the moon, are based on the Island. The team summit for the X Prize was held on the Island in October 2010. In 2010 the Island was named the fifth most likely nation to reach the moon next. In January 2011 two research space stations owned by Excalibur Almaz arrived on the Island and were kept in an aircraft hangar at the airfield at the former RAF Jurby located near Jurby. 

== Culture ==

The culture of the Isle of Man is influenced by its Celtic, and to a lesser extent its Norse, origins. Proximity to the UK, popularity as a UK tourist destination, and mass immigration by British migrant workers has meant that British influence has been dominant since the Revestment period. Revival campaigns have attempted to preserve the surviving vestiges of Manx culture after a long period of Anglicisation, and significant interest in the Manx language, history and musical tradition has been the result.

===Language===

A bilingual sign in the Isle of Man featuring Manx Gaelic and English

The official language of the Isle of Man is English, while Manx Gaelic has also had official status since 1985. Manx has traditionally been spoken but is now considered "critically endangered". 
 

Manx is a Goidelic Celtic language and is one of a number of insular Celtic languages spoken in the British Isles. Manx has been officially recognised as a legitimate autochthonous regional language under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, ratified by the United Kingdom on 27 March 2001 on behalf of the Isle of Man government. 

Manx is closely related to Irish and Scottish Gaelic.

In Manx English, the greetings and , which mean good morning and good afternoon respectively, can also be heard. Like Irish and Scottish Gaelic, the English terms evening and afternoon are referred to with one word. Another term used in Manx English is , meaning time enough, and represents a stereotypical view of the Manx attitude to life. 

=== Symbols ===
A sculpture of the Manx triskelion as seen in front of Ronaldsway Airport terminal.

For centuries, the island's symbol has been the so-called "three legs of Mann" (), a triskelion of three legs conjoined at the thigh. The Manx triskelion, which dates with certainty to the late 13th century, is of an uncertain origin. It has been suggested that its origin lies in Sicily, an island which has been associated with triskelions since ancient times. Another possibility is that its origin lies with the emblem of the 10th century Norse-Gaelic dynasty which ruled the island at the time. 

The symbol appears in the island's official flag and official coat of arms, as well as its currency. The Manx triskelion may be reflected in the island's motto, , which appears as part of the island's coat of arms. The Latin motto translates into English as "whichever way you throw, it will stand" or "whithersoever you throw it, it will stand". It dates to the late 17th century when it is known to have appeared on the island's coinage. The original meaning of the motto, however, may have referred to the poor quality of coinage which was common at the timeas in "however it is tested it will pass". . This webpage cited: . This webpage also cited: 

The ragwort or cushag is the Manx national flower. Island Facts  Isle of Man Public Services. Gov.im (12 July 1996). Retrieved on 29 July 2013. 

=== Religion ===
Peel Cathedral.

The predominant religious tradition of the island is Christianity. Before the Protestant Reformation, the island had a long history as part of Catholic Christendom, and in the years following the Reformation, the religious authorities on the island, and later the population of the island, accepted the religious authority of the British monarchy and the Church of England. 
 It has also come under the influence of Irish religious tradition. The island forms a separate diocese called Sodor and Man, which once comprised the medieval kingdom of Man and the Isles ("Sudrys" in old Norse). It now consists of 16 parishes, A full list is given on the Diocesan Registry website. and since 1541 
Act of Parliament (1541) 33 Hen.8 c.31
 has formed part of the Province of York. See official entry in the Anglican Communion directory. 

Other Christian churches also operate on the Isle of Man. The second largest denomination is the Methodist Church, which is close in size to the Anglican diocese. There are eight Roman Catholic parish churches, included in the Catholic Archdiocese of Liverpool. Additionally there are five Baptist churches, four Pentecostal churches, the Salvation Army, a ward of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, two congregations of Jehovah's Witnesses, two United Reformed churches, as well as other Christian churches. There is a small Muslim community, with its own mosque in Douglas, and there is also a small Jewish community. Many religious organisations on the island are listed on the Isle of Man government site "Religious Faiths and Organisations". 

=== Myth, legend and folklore ===
Peel Castle
In Manx mythology, the island was ruled by Manannn mac Lir, a Celtic sea god, who would draw his misty cloak around the island to protect it from invaders. One of the principal theories about the origin of the name Mann is that it is named after Manannan.

In the Manx tradition of folklore, there are many stories of mythical creatures and characters. These include the , a malevolent spirit who according to legend blew the roof off St Trinian's Church in a fit of rage; the ; the ; and the , a ghostly black dog who wandered the walls and corridors of Peel Castle.

The Isle of Man is also said to be home to fairies, known locally as the little folk or themselves. There is a famous Fairy Bridge and it is said to be bad luck if one fails to wish the fairies good morning or afternoon when passing over it. It used to be a tradition to leave a coin on the bridge to ensure good luck. Other types of fairies are the and the .

An old Irish story tells how Lough Neagh was formed when Ireland's legendary giant Fionn mac Cumhaill (commonly anglicised to Finn McCool) ripped up a portion of the land and tossed it at a Scottish rival. He missed, and the chunk of earth landed in the Irish Sea, thus creating the island.

Peel Castle has been proposed as a possible location of the Arthurian Avalon Avalon's Location Isle of Man or as the location of the Grail Castle, site of Lancelot's encounter with the sword bridge of King Melegaunt. King Arthur, Norma Lorre Goodrich, Harper and Row, 1989, p. 318 

===Music===

The music of the Isle of Man reflects Celtic, Norse and other influences, including from its neighbours, Scotland, Ireland, England and Wales. A wide range of music is performed on the island, such as rock, blues, jazz and pop. However, its traditional folk music has undergone a revival since the 1970s, starting with a music festival called in Ramsey. Cliff McGann (1996) Traditional Music on the Isle of Man This was part of a general revival of the Manx language and culture after the death of the last native speaker of Manx in 1974.

=== Food ===
Traditionally the national dish of the island is Spuds and Herrin, boiled potatoes and herring. This plain dish is chosen because of its role supporting the subsistence farmers of the island, who crofted the land and fished the sea for centuries.

A more recent claim for the title of national dish would be the ubiquitous chips, cheese and gravy. This dish, which is similar to poutine, is found in most of the island's fast-food outlets, and consists of thick cut chips, covered in shredded Cheddar cheese and topped with a thick gravy. Isle of Man  Factfile  Daily Life 

Seafood has traditionally accounted for a large proportion of the local diet. Although commercial fishing has declined in recent years, local delicacies include Manx kippers (smoked herring) which are produced by the smokeries in Peel on the west coast of the island, albeit mainly from North Sea herring these days. The smokeries also produce other specialities including smoked salmon and bacon.

Crab, lobster and scallops are commercially fished, and the Queen Scallop (Queenies) is regarded as a particular delicacy, with a light, sweet flavour. Cod, ling and mackerel are often angled for the table, and freshwater trout and salmon can be taken from the local rivers and lakes, supported by the Government fish hatchery at Cornaa.

Cattle, sheep, pigs and poultry are all commercially farmed, Manx lamb from the hill-farms being a popular dish. The Loaghtan, the indigenous breed of Manx sheep, has a rich, dark meat that has found favour with chefs, featuring in dishes on the BBC's MasterChef series.

Manx cheese has also found some success, featuring smoked and herb-flavoured varieties and is stocked by many of the UK's supermarket chains. Manx cheese took bronze medals in the 2005 British Cheese Awards, and sold 578 tonnes over the year.

Beer is brewed on a commercial scale by Okells Brewery (established in 1850) and Bushy's Brewery.
The island has a beer purity law, resembling the German Reinheitsgebot, dating to 1874. Purely Isle of Man 

=== Sports ===

The Isle of Man is represented as a nation in the Commonwealth Games and the Island Games and hosted the IV Commonwealth Youth Games in 2011. Manx athletes have won three gold medals at the Commonwealth Games, including the one by cyclist Mark Cavendish in 2006 in the Scratch race. The Island Games were first held on the island in 1985, and again in 2001.

Isle of Man teams and individuals participate in many sports both on and off the island including rugby union, football, gymnastics, field hockey, netball, Taekwondo, bowling, Obstacle Course Racing and cricket. It being an island, many types of watersports are also popular with residents.

==== Motorcycle racing ====

The main international event associated with the island is the Isle of Man Tourist Trophy race, colloquially known as "The TT", Wright, David. 100 Years of the Isle of Man TT: A Century of Motorcycle Racing. The Crowood Press, 2007 which began in 1907. It takes place in late May and early June. The TT is now an international road racing event for motorcycles, which used to be part of the World Championship, and is long considered to be one of the "greatest motorcycle sporting events of the world". Disko, Sasha. The Image of the Tourist Trophy and British Motorcycling in the Weimar Republic. International Journal of Motorcycle Studies, Nov 2007 Taking place over a two-week period, it has become a festival for motorcycling culture, makes a huge contribution to the islands economy and has become part of Manx identity. Vaukins, Simon. The Isle of Man TT Races: Politics, Economics and National Identity. International Journal of Motorcycle Studies, Nov 2007 For many, the Isle carries the title "road racing capital of the world". Faragher, Martin. Cultural History: Motor-Cycle Road Racing. A New History of the Isle of Man Volume V: The Modern Period 18301999. Ed. John Belchem. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 2000 

The Manx Grand Prix is a separate motorcycle event for amateurs and private entrants that uses the same 60.70 km page 4 Snaefell Mountain Course in late August and early September.

==== Cammag ====

Prior to the introduction of football at the turn of the twentieth century, Cammag was the national sport of the Isle of Man. It is similar to the Irish hurling, and the Scottish game of shinty. Nowadays it is an annual match at St John's.

===Cinema===
The Isle of Man has two cinemas. The Broadway Cinema is located in the Government owned and run Villa Marina and Gaiety Theatre complex. It has a capacity of 154 and also doubles as a conference venue. 

The Palace Cinema is located next to the derelict Castle Mona hotel and is operated by the Sefton Group. It has two screens, Screen One hold 293 customers, while Screen Two is smaller with a capacity of just 95. It was extensively refurbished in August 2011. 

===Manx animals===

Manx Loaghtan Sheep are bred for their meat on the island.
There are two domestic animals specifically connected to the Isle of Man, though they are also found elsewhere.

The Manx cat is a breed of cat noted for having a genetic mutation that causes it to have a shortened tail. The length of this tail can range from a few inches, known as a "stumpy", to being completely nonexistent, or "rumpy". Manx cats display a range of colours and usually have somewhat longer hind legs compared to most cats. The cats have been used as a symbol of the Isle of Man on coins and stamps and at one time the Manx government operated a breeding centre to ensure the continuation of the breed. 

The Manx Loaghtan sheep is a breed native to the island. It has dark brown wool and four, or sometimes six horns. The meat is considered to be a delicacy. There are several flocks on the island and others have been started in England and Jersey.

==Notable residents==

==See also==

* Outline of the Isle of Man
* History of the Isle of Man
*Towns in the Isle of Man

== References ==

== Bibliography ==

* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==

* CIA World Factbook  Listing for the Isle of Man
* Isle of Man News
* Isle of Man (European Union) passport description in PRADO
* Manx Government A comprehensive site covering many aspects of Manx life from fishing to financial regulation
* Isle of Man Airport
* Information on the work and duties of Members of the House of Keys
* Images of the Isle of Man at the English Heritage Archive

*
*

Man

 Man



[[Italic languages]]

The Italic languages are a subfamily of the Indo-European language family originally spoken by Italic peoples. They include the Romance languages derived from Latin (Italian, Spanish, Catalan, Portuguese, French, Romanian, Occitan, etc.); a number of extinct languages of the Italian Peninsula, including Umbrian, Oscan, Faliscan, South Picene; and Latin itself. At present, Latin and its daughter Romance languages are the only surviving languages of the Italic language family.

In the past various definitions of "Italic" have prevailed. This article uses the classification presented by the Linguist List: See under External links below. Italic includes the Latin subgroup (Latin and the Romance languages) as well as the ancient Italic languages (Faliscan, Osco-Umbrian and two unclassified Italic languages, Aequian and Vestinian). Venetic (the language of the ancient Veneti), as revealed by its inscriptions, was also closely related to the Italic languages and is sometimes classified as Italic. However, since it also shares similarities with other Western Indo-European branches (particularly Germanic), some linguists prefer to consider it an independent Indo-European language.

In the extreme view, Italic did not exist, but the different groups descended directly from Indo-European and converged because of geographic contiguity. This view stems in part from the difficulty in identifying a common Italic homeland in prehistory. . 

In the intermediate view, the Italic languages are one of the ten or eleven major subgroups of the Indo-European language family and might therefore have had an ancestor, Common Italic or Proto-Italic, from which its daughter languages descend. Moreover, there are similarities between major groups, although how these similarities are to be interpreted is one of the major debatable issues in the historical linguistics of Indo-European. The linguist Calvert Watkins went so far as to suggest, among ten major groups, a four-way division of East, West, North and South Indo-European. These he considered "dialectical divisions within Proto-Indo-European which go back to a period long before the speakers arrived in their historical areas of attestation." This is not to be considered a nodular grouping; in other words, there was not necessarily any common west Indo-European serving as a node from which the subgroups branched, but rather a hypothesized similarity between the dialects of Proto-Indo-European which developed into the recognized families.

==Origins==
The main debate concerning the origin of the Italic languages is the same as that which preoccupied Greek studies for the last half of the 20th century. The Indo-Europeanists for Greek had hypothesized (see Dorian invasion, Proto-Greek language) that Greek originated outside Greece and was brought in by invaders. Analysis of the lexical items of Mycenaean Greek, an early form of Greek, raised the issue of whether Greek had been formed within Greece from Indo-European elements brought in by migrants or invaders, mixed with elements of indigenous languages. The issue was settled in favour of the origin of Greek being that of a language which had both developed from all of these elements and then also taken its recognisable form all within Greece.

A proto-Italic homeland outside Italy is just as elusive as the home of the hypothetical Greek-speaking invaders. No early form of Italic is available to match Mycenaean Greek. The Italic languages are first attested in writing from Umbrian and Faliscan inscriptions dating to the 7th century BC. The alphabets used are based on the Old Italic alphabet, which is itself based on the Greek alphabet. The Italic alphabets themselves show minor influence from the Etruscan and somewhat more from the Ancient Greek alphabet. The intermediate phases between Italic and Indo-European are still in deficit, with no guarantee that they ever will be found. The question of whether Italic originated outside Italy or developed by assimilation of Indo-European and other elements within Italy, approximately on or within its current range there, remains. Silvestri says: 

Bakkum defines Proto-Italic as a "chronological stage" without an independent development of its own, but extending over late PIE and the initial stages of Proto-Latin and Proto-Sabellic. Meiser's dates of 4000 BC to 1800 BC (well before Mycenaean Greek) he describes as "as good a guess as anyone's." . 

==Branches==
The Italic family has two known branches:
* Latino-Faliscan, including:
** Faliscan, which was spoken in the area around Falerii Veteres (modern Civita Castellana) north of the city of Rome and possibly Sardinia
** Latin, which was spoken in west-central Italy. The Roman conquests eventually spread it throughout the peninsula and beyond in the Roman Empire.
*** Romance languages, the descendants of Latin (evolved dialects of Latin)
* Osco-Umbrian or Sabellian including:
** Oscan, which was spoken in the south-central region of the Italian Peninsula
** Umbrian (not to be confused with the modern Umbrian dialect of Italian), which was spoken in the north-central region
** Volscian
** Marsian, the language of the Marsi
** South Picene, in east-central Italy
** Sabine in Lazio and the central Apennines

In addition, Aequian (spoken by the Aequi just east of Rome) and Vestinian (spoken by the Vestini in northeast Italy) are Italic but too poorly known to be further classified. Sicel in Sicily was reported to have been similar to Latin, but too little is known of it to verify that claim.

As Rome extended its political dominion over the whole of the Italian Peninsula, Latin became dominant over the other Italic languages, which ceased to be spoken perhaps sometime in the 1st century AD. From Vulgar Latin the Romance languages emerged.

It has also been proposed that the Lusitanian language belonged to the Italic family. Indoeuropeos y no Indoeuropeos en la Hispania Prerromana, Salamanca: Universidad, 2000 
==See also==
* Italo-Celtic
* Language families and languages
* Vestinian

==References==

==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* .
* .

==External links==

* Michael de Vaan, Etymological Dictionary of Latin and the other Italic Languages, Leiden Indo-European Etymological Dictionaries Series, Brill Academic Publishers, 2008, 826pp. (part available freely online)
* 
* 



[[Internet Relay Chat]]

Internet Relay Chat (IRC) is a system that facilitates transfer of messages in the form of text. The chat process works on a client/server model of networking. IRC clients are computer programs that a user can install on their system. These clients are able to communicate with chat servers to transfer messages to other clients. It is mainly designed for group communication in discussion forums, called channels, but also allows one-to-one communication via private message as well as chat and data transfer, including file sharing. 

Client software is available for every major operating system that supports Internet access. As of April 2011, the top 100 IRC networks served more than half a million users at a time, with hundreds of thousands of channels operating on a total of roughly 1,500 servers out of roughly 3,200 servers worldwide. 

Over the past decade IRC usage has been declining: since 2003 it has lost 60% of its users (from 1 million to about 400,000 in 2014) and half of its channels (from half a million in 2003). 

==History == 
IRC was created by Jarkko Oikarinen in August 1988 to replace a program called MUT (MultiUser Talk) on a BBS called OuluBox in Finland. Oikarinen found inspiration in a chat system known as Bitnet Relay, which operated on the BITNET. 

IRC was used to report on the 1991 Soviet coup d'tat attempt throughout a media blackout. It was previously used in a similar fashion during the Gulf War. Logs of these and other events are kept in the ibiblio archive. 

==Technical information==

A screenshot of XChat, an IRC client for GTK environments.
Xaric, a text-based IRC client, in use on Mac OS X. Shown are two IRC channels and a private conversation with the software author.
IRC is an open protocol that uses TCP and, optionally, TLS. An IRC server can connect to other IRC servers to expand the IRC network. Users access IRC networks by connecting a client to a server. There are many client implementations, such as mIRC, XChat and irssi, and server implementations, e.g. the original IRCd. Most IRC servers do not require users to register an account but a user will have to set a nickname before being connected. 

IRC was originally a plain text protocol (although later extended), which on request was assigned port 194/TCP by IANA. However, the de facto standard has always been to run IRC on 6667/TCP and nearby port numbers (for example TCP ports 66606669, 7000) to avoid having to run the IRCd software with root privileges.

The protocol specified that characters were 8-bit but did not specify the character encoding the text was supposed to use. This can cause problems when users using different clients and/or different platforms want to converse.

All client-to-server IRC protocols in use today are descended from the protocol implemented in the irc2.4.0 version of the IRC2 server, and documented in RFC 1459. Since RFC 1459 was published, the new features in the irc2.10 implementation led to the publication of several revised protocol documents (RFC 2810, RFC 2811, RFC 2812 and RFC 2813); however, these protocol changes have not been widely adopted among other implementations.

Although many specifications on the IRC protocol have been published, there is no official specification, as the protocol remains dynamic. Virtually no clients and very few servers rely strictly on the above RFCs as a reference.

Microsoft made an extension for IRC in 1998 via the proprietary IRCX. They later stopped distributing software supporting IRCX, instead developing the proprietary MSNP.

The standard structure of a network of IRC servers is a tree. Messages are routed along only necessary branches of the tree but network state is sent to every server and there is generally a high degree of implicit trust between servers. This architecture has a number of problems. A misbehaving or malicious server can cause major damage to the network and any changes in structure, whether intentional or a result of conditions on the underlying network, require a net-split and net-join. This results in a lot of network traffic and spurious quit/join messages to users and temporary loss of communication to users on the splitting servers. Adding a server to a large network means a large background bandwidth load on the network and a large memory load on the server. Once established however, each message to multiple recipients is delivered in a fashion similar to multicast, meaning each message travels a network link exactly once. This is a strength in comparison to non-multicasting protocols such as Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) or Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol (XMPP).

===Commands and replies===

IRC has a line-based structure with the client sending single-line messages to the server, receiving replies to those messages and receiving copies of some messages sent by other clients. In most clients, users can enter commands by prefixing them with a '/'. Depending on the command, these may either be handled entirely by the client, or (generally for commands the client does not recognize) passed directly to the server, possibly with some modification.

Due to the nature of the protocol, automated systems cannot always correctly pair a sent command with its reply with full reliability and are subject to guessing. 

===Channels===
The basic means of communicating to a group of users in an established IRC session is through a channel. Channels on a network can be displayed using the IRC command LIST, which lists all currently available channels that do not have the modes +s or +p set, on that particular network.

Users can join a channel using the JOIN command, in most clients available as /join #channelname. Messages sent to the joined channels are then relayed to all other users. 

Channels that are available across an entire IRC network are prefixed with a '#', while those local to a server use '&'. Other less common channel types include '+' channels'modeless' channels without operators  and '!' channels, a form of timestamped channel on normally non-timestamped networks. 

===Modes===
Users and channels may have modes that are represented by single case-sensitive letters and are set using the MODE command. User modes and channel modes are separate and can use the same letter to mean different things (e.g. usermode "i" is invisible mode whilst channelmode "i" is invite only. ) Modes are usually set and unset using the mode command that takes a target (user or channel), a set of modes to set (+) or unset (-) and any parameters the modes need.

Some but not all channel modes take parameters and some channel modes apply to a user on a channel or add or remove a mask (e.g. a ban mask) from a list associated with the channel rather than applying to the channel as a whole. Modes that apply to users on a channel have an associated symbol that is used to represent the mode in names replies (sent to clients on first joining a channel and use of the names command) and in many clients also used to represent it in the client's displayed list of users in a channel or to display an own indicator for a user's modes.

In order to correctly parse incoming mode messages and track channel state the client must know which mode is of which type and for the modes that apply to a user on a channel which symbol goes with which letter. In early implementations of IRC this had to be hard-coded in the client but there is now a de facto standard extension to the protocol called ISUPPORT that sends this information to the client at connect time using numeric 005. 

There is a small design fault in IRC regarding modes that apply to users on channels: the names message used to establish initial channel state can only send one such mode per user on the channel, but multiple such modes can be set on a single user. For example, if a user holds both operator status (+o) and voice status (+v) on a channel, a new client will be unable to know the less precedented mode (voice). Workarounds for this are possible on both the client and server side but none is widely implemented.

====Standard (RFC 1459) modes====

 User modes 
 Letter Symbol Description 
 i Invisiblecannot be seen without a common channel or knowing the exact name 
 s Receives server notices 
 w Receives wallops 
 o User is an IRC operator (ircop) 

 Channel modes 
 Letter Symbol Parameter(s) Description 
 o @ Name of affected user Channel operatorcan change channel modes and kick users out of the channel among other things 
 s Secret channelnot shown in channel list or user whois except to users already on the channel 
 p Private channellisted in channel list as \"prv\" according to RFC 1459 
 n Users cannot send messages to the channel externally 
 m Channel is moderated (only those who hold operator or voice status on the channel can send messages to it) 
 i Only users with invites may enter the channel. 
 t Only operators can change the channel topic. 
 l Limit number Limits number of users able to be on channel (when full, no new users can join) 
 b Ban mask (nick!user@host with wildcards allowed) Bans hostmasks from channel 
 v + Name of affected user Gives a user voice status on channel (see +m above) 
 k New channel key Sets a channel key such that only users knowing the key can enter 

Many IRCd programmers have added extra modes or modified the behavior of modes in the above list so it is strongly advisable to check the documentation of the IRC network or IRCd (though note that the network may have patched the IRCd) for more detailed information on what the modes do on a particular server or network.

===Channel Operators===
A Channel Operator is a client on an IRC channel that manages the channel.
IRC Channel Operators can be easily seen by a symbol "@", or a Latin letter "+o"/"o".
On most networks, an operator can:
* Kick a user
* Ban a user
* Give other user IRC Channel Operator Status or IRC Channel Voice Status.
* Change the IRC Channel topic.
* Change the IRC Channel Mode locks.

===IRC Operators===

There are also users who maintain elevated rights on their local server, or the entire network; these are called IRC operators, sometimes shortened to IRCops or Opers (not to be confused with channel operators). As the implementation of the IRCd varies, so do the privileges of the IRC operator on the given IRCd. RFC 1459 claims that IRC operators are "a necessary evil" to keep clean state of the network, and as such they need to be able to disconnect and reconnect servers. Additionally, to prevent malicious users or even harmful automated programs from entering IRC, IRC operators are usually allowed to disconnect clients and completely ban IPs or complete subnets. Networks that carry services (Nickserv et al.) usually allow their IRC operators also to handle basic "Ownership" matters. Further privileged rights may include overriding channel bans (being able to join channels they would not be allowed to join, if they were not opered), being able to op themselves on channels where they would not be able without being opered, being auto-opped on channels always and so forth.

===Hostmasks===
A hostmask is a unique identifier of an IRC client connected to an IRC server. IRC servers, services, and other clients including bots can use it to identify a specific IRC session.

The format of a hostmask is nick!user@host. The hostmask looks similar to, but should not be confused with an e-mail address.

The nick part is the nickname chosen by the user and may be changed while connected.
The user part is the username reported by ident on the client. If ident is not available on the client, the username specified when the client connected is used after being prefixed with a tilde. 

The host part is the hostname the client is connecting from. If the IP address of the client cannot be resolved to a valid hostname by the server, it is used instead of the hostname.

Because of the privacy implications of exposing the IP address or hostname of a client, some IRC daemons also provide privacy features, such as InspIRCD or UnrealIRCD's "+x" mode. This hashes a client IP address or masks part of a client's hostname, making it unreadable to users other than IRCops. Users may also have the option of requesting a "virtual host" (or "vhost"), to be displayed in the hostmask to allow further anonymity. Some IRC networks such as Freenode use these as "cloaks" to indicate that a user is affiliated with a group or project. 

==Challenges==
Issues in the original design of IRC were the amount of shared state data being a limitation on its scalability, 1.2.1 Growth the absence of unique user identifications leading to the nickname collision problem, lack of protection from netsplits by means of cyclic routing, 1.2.2 Network failures the trade-off in scalability for the sake of real-time user presence information, protocol weaknesses providing a platform for abuse, 1.2.3 Sociological and security aspects no transparent and optimizable message passing, and no encryption. Some of these issues have been addressed in Modern IRC.

===Attacks===
Because IRC connections are usually unencrypted and typically span long time periods, they are an attractive target for Dos/DDoS attackers and hackers. Because of this, careful security policy is necessary to ensure that an IRC network is not susceptible to an attack such as a takeover war. IRC networks may also K-line or G-line users or networks that have a harming effect.

A small number of IRC servers support SSL/TLS connections for security purposes. This helps stop the use of packet sniffer programs to obtain the passwords of IRC users, but has little use beyond this scope due to the public nature of IRC channels. SSL connections require both client and server support (that may require the user to install SSL binaries and IRC client specific patches or modules on their computers). Some networks also use SSL for server to server connections, and provide a special channel flag (such as +S) to only allow SSL-connected users on the channel, while disallowing operator identification in clear text, to better utilize the advantages that SSL provides. 

IRC served as an early laboratory for many kinds of Internet attacks, such as using fake ICMP unreachable messages to break TCP-based IRC connections (nuking) to annoy users or facilitate takeovers.

===Abuse prevention===
One of the most contentious technical issues surrounding IRC implementations, which survives to this day, is the merit of "Nick/Channel Delay" vs. "Timestamp" protocols. Both methods exist to solve the problem of denial-of-service attacks, but take very different approaches.
The problem with the original IRC protocol as implemented was that when two servers split and rejoined, the two sides of the network would simply merge their channels. If a user could join on a "split" server, where a channel that existed on the other side of the network was empty, and gain operator status, they would become a channel operator of the "combined" channel after the netsplit ended; if a user took a nickname that existed on the other side of the network, the server would kill both users when rejoining (i.e., 'nick-collision').
This was often abused to "mass-kill" all users on a channel, thus creating "opless" channels where no operators were present to deal with abuse. Apart from causing problems within IRC, this encouraged people to conduct denial of service attacks against IRC servers in order to cause netsplits, which they would then abuse.

====Nick/channel delay====
The nick/channel delay (abbreviated ND/CD) solution to this problem was very simple. After a user signed off and the nickname became available, or a channel ceased to exist because all its users left (as often happens during a netsplit), the server would not allow any user to use that nickname or join that channel, until a certain period of time (the delay) had passed. The idea behind this was that even if a netsplit occurred, it was useless to an abuser because they could not take the nickname or gain operator status on a channel, and thus no collision of a nickname or 'merging' of a channel could occur. To some extent, this inconvenienced legitimate users, who might be forced to briefly use a different name (appending an underscore was popular) after rejoining.

====Timestamping====
The alternative, the timestamp or TS protocol, took a different approach. Every nickname and channel on the network was assigned a timestampthe date and time when it was created. When a netsplit occurred, two users on each side were free to use the same nickname or channel, but when the two sides were joined, only one could survive. In the case of nicknames, the newer user, according to their TS, was killed; when a channel collided, the members (users on the channel) were merged, but the channel operators on the "losing" side of the split lost their channel operator status.
TS is a much more complicated protocol than ND/CD, both in design and implementation, and despite having gone through several revisions, some implementations still have problems with "desyncs" (where two servers on the same network disagree about the current state of the network), and allowing too much leniency in what was allowed by the 'losing' side. Under the original TS protocols, for example, there was no protection against users setting bans or other modes in the losing channel that would then be merged when the split rejoined, even though the users who had set those modes lost their channel operator status. Some modern TS-based IRC servers have also incorporated some form of ND and/or CD in addition to timestamping in an attempt to further curb abuse.
Most networks today use the timestamping approach. The timestamp versus ND/CD disagreements caused several servers to split away from EFnet and form the newer IRCnet. After the split, EFnet moved to a TS protocol, while IRCnet used ND/CD.

====SAVE====
In recent versions of the IRCnet ircd, as well as ircds using the TS6 protocol (including Charybdis and InspIRCd), ND has been extended/replaced by a mechanism called SAVE. This mechanism assigns every client a unique UID upon connecting to an IRC server. This ID starts with a number, which is forbidden in nicks (although some ircds, namely IRCnet and InspIRCd, allow clients to switch to their own UID as the nickname).

If two clients with the same nickname join from different sides of a netsplit ("nick collision"), the first server to see this collision will force both clients to change their nick to their UID, thus saving both clients from being disconnected. On IRCnet, the nickname will also be locked for some time (ND) to prevent both clients from changing back to the original nickname, thus colliding again.

==Networks==
The first IRC server, tolsun.oulu.fi, a Sun-3 server on display near the University of Oulu computer centre. (2001)

There are thousands of running IRC networks in the world. They run various implementations of IRC servers, and are administered by various groups of IRC operators, but the protocol exposed to IRC users is very similar, and all IRC networks can be accessed by the same client software, although there might be slight incompatibilities and limited functionality due to the differing server implementations.

The largest IRC networks have traditionally been grouped as the "Big Four" a designation for networks that top the statistics. The Big Four networks change periodically, but due to the community nature of IRC there are a large number of other networks for users to choose from.

Historically the "Big Four" were: 
* EFnet
* IRCnet
* Undernet
* DALnet

IRC reached 6 million simultaneous users in 2001 and 10 million users in 2003.

As of March 2013 the largest IRC networks were:

* freenode  around 85k users at peak hours
* IRCNet  around 55k users at peak hours
* QuakeNet  around 53k users at peak hours
* Undernet  around 43k users at peak hours
* EFnet  around 33k users at peak hours
* rizon  around 20k users at peak hours

Today, entire IRC grouped has around 400k users at peak hours.

=== Timeline ===

ImageSize = width:800 height:auto barincrement:12
PlotArea = top:10 bottom:50 right:130 left:20
AlignBars = late

DateFormat = yyyy
Period = from:1990 till:2014
TimeAxis = orientation:horizontal
ScaleMajor = unit:year increment:10 start:1990

Colors =
 id:efnet value:rgb(1,0.8,0) legend: EFnet
 id:undernet value:rgb(0.5, 0.6, 0) legend: Undernet
 id:dalnet value:rgb(1, 0.6, 0) legend: DALnet
 id:freenode value:rgb(0.4, 0.4, 0.5) legend: freenode
 id:ircnet value:rgb(0.5, 0.6, 0.7) legend: IRCnet
 id:quakenet value:rgb(0.6, 0.3, 0.4) legend: QuakeNet
 id:rizon value:rgb(0.1, 0.2, 0.7) legend: Rizon

Legend = columns:1 left:115 top:24 columnwidth:100

TextData =
 pos:(20,27) textcolor:black fontsize:M
 text:"IRC networks:"

BarData =
 barset:PM

PlotData=
 width:5 align:left fontsize:S shift:(5,-4) anchor:till
 barset:PM

 from: 1990 till: 2014 color:efnet text:"EFnet"
 from: 1992 till: 2014 color:undernet text:"Undernet"
 from: 1994 till: 2014 color:dalnet text:"DALnet"
 from: 1995 till: 2014 color:freenode text:"freenode"
 from: 1996 till: 2014 color:ircnet text:"IRCnet"
 from: 1997 till: 2014 color:quakenet text:"QuakeNet"
 from: 2002 till: 2014 color:rizon text:"Rizon"

==URI scheme==
There are three recognized URI schemes for Internet Relay Chat, irc, irc6, and ircs, that (when supported) allows hyperlinks of various forms, including
 irc://<host>[:<port>]/[<channel>[?<channel_keyword>]]
(where items enclosed within brackets () are optional) to be used to (if necessary) connect to the specified host (or network, if known to the IRC client) and join the specified channel. (This can be used within the client itself, or from another application such as a Web browser). irc is the default URI, irc6 specifies a connection to be made using IPv6, and ircs specifies a secure connection.

Per the specification, the usual hash symbol (#) will be prepended to channel names that do not begin with an alphanumeric characterallowing it to be omitted. Some implementations (for example, mIRC) will do so unconditionally resulting in a (usually unintended) extra (for example, ##channel), if included in the URL.

Some implementations allow multiple channels to be specified, separated by commas.

==Clients==

===Client software===

Scheme of an IRC network with normal clients (green), bots (blue) and bouncers (orange)

Client software exists for various operating systems or software packages, as well as web-based or inside games. Many different clients are available for the various operating systems, including Windows, Unix & Linux, Mac OS X and mobile operating systems (such as iOS and Android). On Windows, mIRC is one of the most popular clients. 

The higher-level programs also serve as platforms for the IRC clients. For instance, a client called ERC, written entirely in Emacs Lisp is included in v.22.3 of Emacs. Therefore, any platform that can run Emacs can run ERC.

A number of web browsers have built in IRC clients, such as Opera (version 12.17 and earlier) or the ChatZilla add-on for Mozilla Firefox (included as a built-in component of SeaMonkey). Web-based clients, such as Mibbit, can run in most browsers.

Games such as "Pokemon Omega"Warow, Unreal Tournament (up to Unreal Tournament 2004), Uplink, Spring Engine-based games, 0 A.D. and ZDaemon have included IRC. 

Ustream's chat interface is IRC with custom authentication as well as Justin.tv's. 

===Bots===

A typical use of bots in IRC is to provide IRC services or a specific functionality within a channel such as to host a chat-based game or provide notifications of external events.

===Bouncer===

A program that runs as a daemon on a server and functions as a persistent proxy is known as a BNC or bouncer. The purpose is to maintain a connection to an IRC server, acting as a relay between the server and client, or simply to act as a proxy. Should the client lose network connectivity, the BNC may stay connected and archive all traffic for later delivery, allowing the user to resume his IRC session without disrupting their connection to the server. 

Furthermore, as a way of obtaining a bouncer-like effect, an IRC client (typically text-based, for example Irssi) may be run on an always-on server to which the user connects via ssh. This also allows devices that only have ssh functionality, but no actual IRC client installed themselves, to connect to the IRC, and it allows sharing of IRC sessions. 

To keep the IRC client from quitting when the ssh connection closes, the client can be run inside a piece of screen-detaching software (e.g. GNU Screen or tmux), thus staying connected to the IRC network(s) constantly and able to log conversation in channels that the user is interested in, etc. Modelled after this setup, in 2004 an IRC client following the client-server model, called Smuxi, has been launched. 

==Search engines==
There are numerous search engines available to aid the user in finding what they are looking for on IRC. Generally the search engine consists of two parts, a "back-end" (or "spider/crawler") and a front-end "search engine".

The back-end (spider/crawler) is the work horse of the search engine. It is responsible for crawling IRC servers to index the information being sent across them. The information that is indexed usually consists solely of channel text (text that is publicly displayed in public channels). The storage method is usually some sort of relational database, like MySQL or Oracle.

The front-end "search engine" is the user interface to the database. It supplies users with a way to search the database of indexed information to retrieve the data they are looking for. These front-end search engines can also be coded in numerous programming languages. The more popular languages for such search engines and indexing spiders are Perl, PHP and C.

Most search engines have their own spider that is a single application responsible for crawling IRC and indexing data itself; however, others are "user based" indexers. The latter rely on users to install their "add-on" to their IRC client; the add-on is what sends the database the channel information of whatever channels the user happens to be on.

==Modern IRC==
IRC has changed much over its life on the Internet. New server software has added a multitude of new features.
* Services: Network-operated bots to facilitate registration of nicknames and channels, sending messages for offline users and network operator functions.
* Extra modes: While the original IRC system used a set of standard user and channel modes, new servers add many new modes for such features as removing color codes from text, or obscuring a user's hostmask ("cloaking") to protect from denial-of-service attacks.
* Proxy detection: Most modern servers support detection of users attempting to connect through an insecure (misconfigured or exploited) proxy server, which can then be denied a connection. An example is the Blitzed Open Proxy Monitor or BOPM. This proxy detection software is used by several networks, although that real time list of proxies is defunct since early 2006.
* Additional commands: New commands can be such things as shorthand commands to issue commands to Services, to network operator only commands to manipulate a user's hostmask.
* Encryption: For the client-to-server leg of the connection SSL might be used (messages cease to be secure once they are relayed to other users on standard connections, but it makes eavesdropping on or wiretapping an individual's IRC sessions difficult). For client-to-client communication, SDCC (Secure DCC) can be used.
* Connection protocol: IRC can be connected to via IPv4, the current standard version of the Internet Protocol, or by IPv6, the next-generation version of the protocol.

There is an effort of standardization and adding new features to the IRC protocol by IRCv3 working group. 

==Character encoding==
IRC still lacks a single globally accepted standard convention for how to transmit characters outside the 7-bit ASCII repertoire.
IRC servers normally transfer messages from a client to another client just as byte sequences, without any interpretation or recoding of characters. The IRC protocol (unlike e.g. MIME or HTTP) lacks mechanisms for announcing and negotiation character encoding options. This has put the responsibility for choosing the appropriate character codec on the client. In practice, IRC channels have largely used the same character encodings that were also used by operating systems (in particular Unix derivatives) in the respective language communities:

* 7-bit era: In the early days of IRC, especially among Scandinavian and Finnish language users, national variants of ISO 646 were the dominant character encodings. These encode non-ASCII characters like       at code positions 0x5B 0x5C 0x5D 0x7B 0x7C 0x7D (US-ASCII: [ \ ] { | }). That is why these codes are always allowed in nicknames. According to RFC 1459, { | } in nicknames should be treated as lowercase equivalents of [ \ ] respectively. By the late 1990s, the use of 7-bit encodings had disappeared in favour of ISO 8859-1, and such equivalence mappings were dropped from some IRC daemons.

* 8-bit era: Since the early 1990s, 8-bit encodings such as ISO 8859-1 have become commonly used for European languages. Russian users had a choice of KOI8-R, ISO 8859-5 and CP1251, and since about 2000, modern Russian IRC networks convert between these different commonly used encodings of the Cyrillic script.

* Multi-byte era: For a long time, East Asian IRC channels with ideographic scripts in China, Japan, and Korea have been using multi-byte encodings such as EUC or ISO-2022-JP. With the common migration from ISO 8859 to UTF-8 on Linux and Unix platforms since about 2002, UTF-8 has become an increasingly popular substitute for many of the previously used 8-bit encodings in European channels. Some IRC clients are now capable of reading messages both in ISO 8859-1 or UTF-8 in the same channel, heuristically autodetecting which encoding is used. The shift to UTF-8 began in particular on Finnish-speaking IRC (Merkist (Finnish)).

Today, the UTF-8 encoding of Unicode/ISO 10646 would be the most likely contender for a single future standard character encoding for all IRC communication, if such standard ever relaxed the 510 bytes message size restriction. UTF-8 is ASCII compatible and covers the superset of all other commonly used coded character set standards.

==File sharing==
Much like conventional P2P file sharing, users can create file servers that allow them to share files with each other by using customised IRC bots or scripts for their IRC client. Often users will group together to distribute warez via a network of IRC bots. 

Technically, IRC provides no file transfer mechanisms itself; file sharing is implemented by IRC clients, typically using the Direct Client-to-Client (DCC) protocol, in which file transfers are negotiated through the exchange of private messages between clients. The vast majority of IRC clients feature support for DCC file transfers, hence the view that file sharing is an integral feature of IRC. The commonplace usage of this protocol, however, sometimes also causes DCC spam. DCC commands have also been used to exploit vulnerable clients into performing an action such as disconnecting from the server or exiting the client.

==See also==

* Chat room
* Client-to-client protocol
* Comparison of instant messaging protocols
* Comparison of IRC daemons
* Comparison of IRC services
* Internet slang
* List of IRC commands
* Serving channel
* The Hamnet Players

==References==

==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* 
* IRC/2 Numerics List
* History of IRC
* IRC.org  Technical and Historical IRC6 information; Articles on the history of IRC
* IRChelp.org  Internet Relay Chat (IRC) help archive; Large archive of IRC-related documents
* IRCv3  Working group of developers, who add new features to the protocol and write specs for them

 



[[Ideogram]]

"No Dogs!" sign in Spain. The dog illustration is a pictogram. The red circle and bar is an ideogram representing the idea of "no" or "not allowed".

An ideogram or ideograph (from Greek ida "idea" + grph "to write") is a graphic symbol that represents an idea or concept. Some ideograms are comprehensible only by familiarity with prior convention; others convey their meaning through pictorial resemblance to a physical object, and thus may also be referred to as pictograms.

==Terminology==

The term "ideogram" is commonly used to describe logograms in writing systems such as Egyptian hieroglyphs, Sumerian cuneiform and Chinese characters. Dongba script used without Geba decorating is an example of a real ideogram (it is also a pictogram).

In the history of writing, symbols proceeded from ideographic (such as an icon of a bull's head in a list inventory, denoting that the following numeral refers to head of cattle) to logographic (an icon of a bull denoting the Semitic word lep "ox"), to phonetic (the bull's head used as a symbol in rebus writing, indicating the glottal stop at the beginning of the word for "ox", namely, the letter aleph).

Bronze Age writing systems used a combination of these applications, and many signs in hieroglyphic as well as in cuneiform writing could be used either logographically or phonetically.

For example, the Akkadian sign AN () could be an ideograph for "deity", an ideogram for the god Anum in particular, a logograph for the Akkadian stem il- "deity", a logograph for the Akkadian word amu "sky", or a syllabogram for either the syllable an or il.

Although Chinese characters are logograms, two of the smaller classes in the traditional classification are ideographic in origin:
* Simple ideographs ( zhshz) are abstract symbols such as  shng "up" and  xi "down" or numerals such as  sn "three".
* Semantic compounds ( huyz) are semantic combinations of characters, such as  mng "bright", composed of  r "sun" and  yu "moon", or  xi "rest", composed of  rn "person" and  m "tree". In the light of the modern understanding of Old Chinese phonology, researchers now believe that most of the characters originally classified as semantic compounds have an at least partially phonetic nature. 

==See also==

* Heterogram (linguistics)
* Icon (computing)
* Lexigram
* List of symbols
* List of writing systems (including a sublist of ideographic systems)
* Logotype
* Therblig
* Traffic sign

==References==

*DeFrancis, John. 1990. The Chinese Language: Fact and Fantasy. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 0-8248-1068-6
*Hannas, William. C. 1997. Asia's Orthographic Dilemma. University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 0-8248-1892-X (paperback); ISBN 0-8248-1842-3 (hardcover)
*Unger, J. Marshall. 2003. Ideogram: Chinese Characters and the Myth of Disembodied Meaning. ISBN 0-8248-2760-0 (trade paperback), ISBN 0-8248-2656-6 (hardcover)

==External links== 

*The Ideographic Myth Extract from DeFrancis' book.
*American Heritage Dictionary definition
*Merriam-Webster OnLine definition



[[Irish Republican Army]]

 
The Irish Republican Army (IRA) ( ) was an Irish republican revolutionary military organisation. It was descended from the Irish Volunteers, an organisation established on 25 November 1913 that staged the Easter Rising in April 1916. In 1919, the Irish Republic that had been proclaimed during the Easter Rising was formally established by an elected assembly (Dil ireann), and the Irish Volunteers were recognised by Dil ireann as its legitimate army. Thereafter, the IRA waged a guerrilla campaign against British rule in Ireland in the 191921 Irish War of Independence.

Following the signing in 1921 of the Anglo-Irish Treaty, which ended the War of Independence, a split occurred within the IRA. Members who supported the treaty formed the nucleus of the Irish National Army founded by IRA leader Michael Collins. However, much of the IRA was opposed to the treaty. The anti-treaty IRA fought a civil war against their former comrades in 192223, with the intention of creating a fully independent all-Ireland republic. Having lost the civil war, this group remained in existence, with the intention of overthrowing both the Irish Free State and Northern Ireland and achieving the Irish Republic proclaimed in 1916.

==Emergence of the IRA after the Easter Rising==
Cathal Brugha, TD Promh Aire (JanuaryApril 1919) Long-term Minister for Defence and rival to Michael Collins.
The first steps towards reorganising the defeated Irish Volunteers were taken on 27 October 1917 when a convention took place in Dublin. This convention, that subsequently became known as an IRA convention, was called to coincide with the Sinn Fin party conference. Nearly 250 people attended the convention; internment prevented many more from attending. In fact, the Royal Irish Constabulary estimated that 162 companies of volunteers were active in the country, although other sources suggest a higher figure of 390.

The proceedings were presided over by amon de Valera, who had been elected President of Sinn Fin the previous day. Also on the platform were Cathal Brugha and many others who were prominent in the reorganising of the Volunteers in the previous few months, many of them ex-prisoners.

De Valera was elected president. A national executive was also elected, composed of provincial representatives (including Dublin). In addition, a number of directors were elected to head the various IRA departments. Those elected were: Michael Collins (Director for Organisation); Diarmuid Lynch (Director for Communications); Michael Staines (Director for Supply); Rory O'Connor (Director of Engineering). Sen McGarry was voted general secretary, while Cathal Brugha was made Chairman of the Resident Executive, which in effect made him Chief of Staff.

The other elected members were: M. W. O'Reilly (Dublin); Austin Stack (Kerry); Con Collins (Limerick); Sen MacEntee (Belfast); Joe O'Doherty (Donegal); Paul Galligan (Cavan); Eoin O'Duffy (Monaghan); Samus Doyle (Wexford); Peadar Bracken (Offaly); Larry Lardner (Galway); Dick Walsh (Mayo) and another member from Connacht. There were six co-options to make-up the full number when the directors were named from within their ranks. The six were all Dublin men: Eamonn Duggan; Gearid O'Sullivan; Fintan Murphy; Diarmuid O'Hegarty; Dick McKee and Paddy Ryan.

Of the 26 elected, six were also members of the Sinn Fin National Executive, with amon de Valera president of both. Eleven of the 26 were elected Teachta Dla (members of the Dil) in the 1918 general election and 13 in the May 1921 election.

==Dil ireann and the IRA==

amon de Valera
Sinn Fin MPs elected in 1918 fulfilled their election promise not to take their seats in Westminster but instead set up an independent "Assembly of Ireland", or Dil ireann, in the Irish language. On 21 January 1919, this new, unofficial parliament assembled in the Mansion House in Dublin. As its first acts, the Dil elected a prime minister (Promh Aire), Cathal Brugha, and inaugurated a ministry called the Aireacht. In theory, the IRA was responsible to the Dil and was the army of the Irish Republic. In practice, the Dil had great difficulty controlling the actions of the Volunteers.

The new leadership of the Irish Republic worried that the IRA would not accept its authority, given that the Volunteers, under their own constitution, were bound to obey their own executive and no other body. The fear was increased when, on the very day the new national parliament was meeting, 21 January 1919, members of the IRA Third Tipperary Brigade led by Sen Treacy and Dan Breen carried out the Soloheadbeg Ambush and seized a quantity of gelignite, whereby two Royal Irish Constabulary constables (James McDonnell and Patrick O'Connell) were shot dead in the process.

Technically, the men involved were considered to be in a serious breach of IRA discipline and were liable to be court-martialed, but it was considered more politically expedient to hold them up as examples of a rejuvenated militarism. The conflict soon escalated into guerrilla warfare by what were then known as the Flying Columns in remote areas. Attacks on remote Royal Irish Constabulary (RIC) barracks continued throughout 1919 and 1920, forcing the police to consolidate defensively in the larger towns, effectively placing large areas of the countryside in the hands of the Republicans.

Moves to make the IRA the army of the Dil and not its rival had begun before the January attack, and were stepped up. On 31 January 1919 the IRA organ, An tglch ("The Volunteer") published a list of principles agreed between two representatives of the Aireacht, acting Promh Aire Cathal Brugha and Richard Mulcahy and the Executive. It made first mention of the organisation treating "the armed forces of the enemy  whether soldiers or policemen  exactly as a national army would treat the members of an invading army".

In the statement the new relationship between the Aireacht and the IRA was defined clearly.
*The Government was defined as possessing the same power and authority as a normal government.
*It, and not the IRA, sanctions the IRA campaign;
*It explicitly spoke of a state of war.

As part of the ongoing strategy to take control of the IRA, Brugha proposed to Dil ireann on 20 August 1919 that the Volunteers were to be asked, at this next convention, to swear allegiance to the Dil. He further proposed that members of the Dil themselves should swear the same oath. On 25 August Collins wrote to the Promh Aire, amon de Valera, to inform him "the Volunteer affair is now fixed". 

Though this was "fixed" at one level, another year passed before the Volunteers took an oath of allegiance to the Irish Republic and its government, "throughout August 1920". C. Younger, Ireland's Civil War (Frederick Muller, 1968) p. 103. 

A power struggle continued between Brugha and Collins, both cabinet ministers, over who had the greater influence. Brugha was nominally the superior as Minister for Defence, but Collins's powerbase came from his position as Director of Organisation of the IRA and from his membership on the Supreme Council of the IRB. De Valera resented Collins's clear power and influence, which he saw as coming more from the secretive IRB than from his position as a Teachta Dla (TD) and minister in the Aireacht. Brugha and de Valera both urged the IRA to undertake larger, more conventional military actions for the propaganda effect, but were ignored by Collins and Mulcahy. Brugha at one stage proposed the assassination of the entire British cabinet. This was also discounted due to its presumed negative effect on British public opinion. Moreover, many members of the Dil, notably Arthur Griffith did not approve of IRA violence and would have preferred a campaign of passive resistance to British rule. The Dil belatedly accepted responsibility for IRA actions in April 1921, just three months before the end of the Irish War of Independence.

In practice, the IRA was commanded by Collins, with Richard Mulcahy as second in command. These men were able to issue orders and directives to IRA guerrilla units around the country and at times to send arms and organisers to specific areas. However, because of the localised and irregular character of the war, they were only able to exert limited control over local IRA commanders such as Tom Barry, Liam Lynch in Cork and Sen Mac Eoin in Longford.

==The War of Independence==

===IRA campaign and organisation===

Wall plaque marking the site in 1919, where the Active Service Unit of the Dublin Brigade of the Irish Republican Army was founded. The building is in Great Denmark Street, Dublin
The IRA fought a guerrilla war against the Crown forces in Ireland from 1919 to July 1921. The most intense period of the war was from November 1920 to July 1921. The IRA campaign can broadly be split into three phases. The first, in 1919, involved the re-organisation of the Irish Volunteers as a guerrilla army. Organisers such as Ernie O'Malley were sent around the country to set up viable guerrilla units. On paper, there were 100,000 or so Volunteers enrolled after the conscription crisis of 1918. However, only about 15,000 of these participated in the guerrilla war. In 1919, Collins, the IRA's Director of Intelligence, organised the "Squad"an assassination unit based in Dublin which killed police involved in intelligence work; the Irish playwright Brendan Behan's father Stephen Behan was a member of this squad. Typical of Collins's sardonic sense of humour, the squad was often referred to as his "Twelve Apostles". In addition, there were some arms raids on Royal Irish Constabulary barracks. By the end of 1919, four Dublin Metropolitan Police and 11 RIC men had been killed. The RIC abandoned most of their smaller rural barracks in late 1919. Around 400 of these were burned in a co-ordinated IRA operation around the country in April 1920.

The second phase of the IRA campaign, roughly from January to July 1920, involved attacks on the fortified police barracks located in the towns. Between January and June 1920, 16 of these were destroyed and 29 badly damaged. Several events of late 1920 greatly escalated the conflict. Firstly, the British declared martial law in parts of the countryallowing for internment and executions of IRA men. Secondly they deployed paramilitary forces, the Black and Tans and Auxiliary Division, and more British Army personnel into the country. Thus, the third phase of the war (roughly August 1920  July 1921) involved the IRA taking on a greatly expanded British force, moving away from attacking well defended barracks and instead using ambush tactics. To this end the IRA was re-organised into "flying columns"permanent guerrilla units, usually about 20 strong, though sometimes larger. In rural areas, the flying columns usually had bases in remote mountainous areas.

While most areas of the country saw some violence in 19191921, the brunt of the war was fought in Dublin and the southern province of Munster. In Munster, the IRA carried out a significant number of successful actions against British troops, for instance the ambushing and killing of 17 of 18 Auxiliaries by Tom Barry's column at Kilmicheal in West Cork in November 1920, or Liam Lynch's men killing 13 British soldiers near Millstreet early in the next year. At the Crossbarry Ambush in March 1921, 100 or so of Barry's men fought a sizeable engagement with a British column of 1,200, escaping from the British encircling manoeuvre. In Dublin, the "Squad" and elements of the IRA Dublin Brigade were amalgamated into the "Active Service Unit", under Oscar Traynor, which tried to carry out at least three attacks on British troops a day. Usually, these consisted of shooting or grenade attacks on British patrols. Outside Dublin and Munster, there were only isolated areas of intense activity. For instance, the County Longford IRA under Sen Mac Eoin carried out a number of well planned ambushes and successfully defended the village of Ballinalee against Black and Tan reprisals in a three-hour gun battle. In County Mayo, large scale guerrilla action did not break out until spring 1921, when two British forces were ambushed at Carrowkennedy and Tourmakeady. Elsewhere, fighting was more sporadic and less intense.

In Belfast, the war had a character all of its own. The area had a Protestant and Unionist majority and IRA actions were responded to with reprisals against the Catholic population, including killings (such as the McMahon Murders) and the burning of many homes  as on Belfast's Bloody Sunday. The IRA in Belfast and the north generally, although involved in protecting the Catholic community from loyalists and state forces, undertook an arson campaign against factories and commercial premises. The violence in Belfast alone, which continued until October 1922 long after the truce in the rest of the country, claimed the lives of between 400 and 500 people. 

In April 1921, the IRA was again reorganised, in line with the Dil's endorsement of its actions, along the lines of a regular army. Divisions were created based on region, with commanders being given responsibility, in theory, for large geographical areas. In practice, this had little effect on the localised nature of the guerrilla warfare.

In May 1921, the IRA in Dublin attacked and burned the The Custom House. The action was a serious setback as five members were killed and eighty captured.

By the end of the war, in July 1921, the IRA was very hard pressed by the deployment of more British troops into the most active areas and a chronic shortage of arms and ammunition. It has been estimated that the IRA had only about 3,000 rifles (mostly captured from the British) during the war, with a larger number of shotguns and pistols. An ambitious plan to buy arms from Italy in 1921 collapsed when the money did not reach the arms dealers. Towards the end of the war, some Thompson submachine guns were imported from the United States; however 450 of these were intercepted by the American authorities and the remainder only reached Ireland shortly before the Truce.

By June 1921, Collins' assessment was that the IRA was within weeks, possibly even days, of collapse. It had few weapons or ammunition left. Moreover, almost 5,000 IRA men had been imprisoned or interned and over 500 killed. Collins and Mulcahy estimated that the number of effective guerrilla fighters was down to 2,0003,000. However in the summer of 1921, the war was abruptly ended.

===Violent exchange===
At the (IRA) Milltown Cemetery (1983).
The Irish War of Independence was a brutal and bloody affair, with violence and acts of extreme brutality on both sides. The British sent hundreds of World War I veterans to assist the RIC. The veterans at first wore a combination of black police uniforms and tan army uniforms (because of shortages), which, according to one etymology, inspired the nickname Black and Tans. The brutality of the "Black and Tans" is now legendary, although the most excessive repression attributed to the Crown's forces was often that of the Auxiliary Division of the Constabulary. One of the strongest critics of the Black and Tans was King George V who in May 1921 told Lady Margery Greenwood that 'he hated the idea of the 'Black and Tans".' 

The most high profile atrocity of the war took place in Dublin in November 1920, and is still known as Bloody Sunday. In the early hours of the morning, Collins' "Squad" killed fourteen people of whom nine were British agents, some in front of their wives. In reprisal, that afternoon, British forces opened fire on a football crowd at Croke Park, killing 14 civilians. Towards the end of the day, two prominent Republicans and a friend of theirs were arrested and killed by Crown Forces.

The IRA was also involved in the destruction of many stately homes in Munster. These belonged to prominent Loyalists who were aiding the Crown forces, and were burnt to discourage the British policy of destroying the homes of Republicans, suspected and actual. The Church of Ireland Gazette recorded numerous instances of Unionists and Loyalists being shot, burnt or forced from their homes during the early 1920s. In County Cork between 1920 and 1923 the IRA shot over 200 civilians of whom over 70 (or 36%) were Protestants: five times the percentage of Protestants in the civilian population. This was due to the historical inclination of Protestants towards loyalty to the United Kingdom. A convention of Irish Protestant Churches in Dublin in May 1922 signed a resolution placing "on record" that "hostility to Protestants by reason of their religion has been almost, if not wholly, unknown in the twenty-six counties in which Protestants are in the minority." 

Many historic buildings in Ireland were destroyed during the war, most famously the Custom House in Dublin, which was disastrously attacked on de Valera's insistence, to the horror of the more militarily experienced Collins. As he feared, the destruction proved a pyrrhic victory for the Republic, with so many IRA men killed or captured that the IRA in Dublin suffered a severe blow.

This was also a period of social upheaval in Ireland, with frequent strikes as well as other manifestations of class conflict. In this regard, the IRA acted to a large degree as an agent of social control and stability, driven by the need to preserve cross-class unity in the national struggle, and on occasion being used to break strikes. 

Assessments of the effectiveness of the IRA's campaign vary. They were never in a position to engage in conventional warfare. IRA Chief-of-Staff Richard Mulcahy bemoaned the fact that they had not been able to drive the British "out of anything bigger than a fairly good size police barracks". On the other hand, the guerrilla warfare of 191921 had made Ireland ungovernable except by military means. The political, military and financial costs of remaining in Ireland were higher than the British government was prepared to pay and this in a sense forced them into negotiations with the Irish political leaders. According to historian Michael Hopkinson, the guerrilla warfare "was often courageous and effective". Historian David Fitzpatrick observes, "The guerrilla fighters...were vastly outnumbered by the forces of the Crown... The success of the Irish Volunteers in surviving so long is therefore noteworthy." 

==Truce and Treaty==

David Lloyd George, the British Prime Minister, at the time, found himself under increasing pressure (both internationally and from within the British Isles) to try to salvage something from the situation. This was a complete reversal on his earlier position. He had consistently referred to the IRA as a "murder gang" up until then. An unexpected olive branch came from King George V, who, in a speech in Belfast called for reconciliation on all sides, changed the mood and enabled the British and Irish Republican governments to agree to a truce. The Truce was agreed on 11 July 1921. On 8 July, de Valera met General Macready, the British commander in chief in Ireland and agreed terms. The IRA was to retain its arms and the British Army was to remain in barracks for the duration of peace negotiations. Many IRA officers interpreted the truce only as a temporary break in fighting. They continued to recruit and train volunteers, with the result that the IRA had increased its number to over 72,000 men by early 1922.
The signed last page of the Anglo-Irish Treaty.
Negotiations on an Anglo-Irish Treaty took place in late 1921 in London. The Irish delegation was led by Arthur Griffith and Michael Collins.

The most contentious areas of the Treaty for the IRA were abolition of the Irish Republic declared in 1919, the status of the Irish Free State as a dominion in the British Commonwealth and the British retention of the so-called Treaty Ports on Ireland's south coast. These issues were the cause of a split in the IRA and ultimately, the Irish Civil War.

Under the Government of Ireland Act 1920, Ireland was partitioned, creating Northern Ireland and Southern Ireland. Under the terms of the Anglo-Irish agreement of 6 December 1921, which ended the war (19191921), Northern Ireland was given the option of withdrawing from the new state, the Irish Free State, and remaining part of the United Kingdom. The Northern Ireland parliament chose to do that. An Irish Boundary Commission was then set up to review the border.

Irish leaders expected that it would so reduce Northern Ireland's size, by transferring nationalist areas to the Irish Free State, as to make it economically unviable. Partition was not by itself the key breaking point between pro- and anti-Treaty campaigners; both sides expected the Boundary Commission to greatly reduce Northern Ireland. Moreover, Michael Collins was planning a clandestine guerrilla campaign against the Northern state using the IRA. In early 1922, he sent IRA units to the border areas and sent arms to northern units. It was only afterwards, when partition was confirmed, that a united Ireland became the preserve of anti-Treaty Republicans.

==The IRA and the Treaty==

The IRA leadership was deeply divided over the decision by the Dil to ratify the Treaty. Despite the fact that Michael Collins  the de facto leader of the IRA  had negotiated the Treaty, many IRA officers were against it. Of the General Headquarters (GHQ) staff, nine members were in favour of the Treaty while four opposed it. Many of the IRA rank-and-file were against the Treaty and in JanuaryJune 1922, their discontent developed into open defiance of the elected civilian Provisional government of Ireland. Anti-treaty writer Dorothy Macardle has claimed that 70 to 80 percent of the IRA was against the Treaty.

Both sides agreed that the IRA's allegiance was to the (elected) Dil of the Irish Republic, but the anti-Treaty side argued that the decision of the Dil to accept the Treaty (and set aside the Irish Republic) meant that the IRA no longer owed that body its allegiance. They called for the IRA to withdraw from the authority of the Dil and to entrust the IRA Executive with control over the army. On 16 January, the first IRA division  the 2nd Southern Division led by Ernie O'Malley  repudiated the authority of the GHQ. A month later, on 18 February, Liam Forde, O/C of the IRA Mid-Limerick Brigade, issued a proclamation stating that: "We no longer recognise the authority of the present head of the army, and renew our allegiance to the existing Irish Republic". This was the first unit of the IRA to break with the pro-Treaty government.

On 22 March, Rory O'Connor held what was to become an infamous press conference and declared that the IRA would no longer obey the Dil as (he said) it had violated its Oath to uphold the Irish Republic. He went on to say that "we repudiate the Dil  We will set up an Executive which will issue orders to the IRA all over the country." In reply to the question on whether this meant they intended to create a military dictatorship, O'Connor said: "You can take it that way if you like."

On 28 March, the (anti-Treaty) IRA Executive issued statement stating that Minister of Defence (Richard Mulcahy) and the Chief-of-Staff (Eoin O'Duffy) no longer exercised any control over the IRA. In addition, it ordered an end to the recruitment to the new military and police forces of the Provisional Government. Furthermore, it instructed all IRA units to reaffirm their allegiance to the Irish Republic on 2 April.

The stage was set for civil war over the Treaty.

==Civil War==

The pro-treaty IRA soon became the nucleus of the new (regular) Irish National Army created by Collins and Richard Mulcahy. British pressure, and tensions between the pro- and anti-Treaty factions of the IRA, led to a bloody civil war, ending in the defeat of the anti-Treaty faction. On 24 May 1923, Frank Aiken, the (anti-treaty) IRA Chief-of-Staff, called a cease-fire. Many left political activity altogether, but a minority continued to insist that the new Irish Free State, created by the "illegitimate" Treaty, was an illegitimate state. They asserted that their "IRA Army Executive" was the real government of a still-existing Irish Republic. The IRA of the Civil War and subsequent organisations that have used the name claim lineage from that group, which is covered in full at Irish Republican Army.

For information on later organisations using the name Irish Republican Army, see the table below. For a genealogy of organisations using the name IRA after 1922, see List of organisations known as the Irish Republican Army.

==In popular fiction==

==References==

==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* F.S.L. Lyons, Ireland Since the Famine
* 
* Aengus  Snodaigh, IRA Convention meets, An Phoblacht/Republican News, 11 May 2000.
* Seamus Fox, Chronology of Irish History 19191923.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
*

==External links==

 



[[Iron]]

Iron is a chemical element with the symbol Fe (from ) and atomic number 26. It is a metal in the first transition series. It is by mass the most common element on Earth, forming much of Earth's outer and inner core. It is the fourth most common element in the Earth's crust. Its abundance in rocky planets like Earth is due to its abundant production by fusion in high-mass stars, where the production of nickel-56 (which decays to the most common isotope of iron) is the last nuclear fusion reaction that is exothermic. Consequently, radioactive nickel is the last element to be produced before the violent collapse of a supernova scatters precursor radionuclide of iron into space.

Like other group 8 elements, iron exists in a wide range of oxidation states, 2 to +6, although +2 and +3 are the most common. Elemental iron occurs in meteoroids and other low oxygen environments, but is reactive to oxygen and water. Fresh iron surfaces appear lustrous silvery-gray, but oxidize in normal air to give hydrated iron oxides, commonly known as rust. Unlike many other metals which form passivating oxide layers, iron oxides occupy more volume than the metal and thus flake off, exposing fresh surfaces for corrosion.

Iron metal has been used since ancient times, though copper alloys, which have lower melting temperatures, were used even earlier in human history. Pure iron is soft (softer than aluminium), but is unobtainable by smelting. The material is significantly hardened and strengthened by impurities, in particular carbon, from the smelting process. A certain proportion of carbon (between 0.002% and 2.1%) produces steel, which may be up to 1000 times harder than pure iron. Crude iron metal is produced in blast furnaces, where ore is reduced by coke to pig iron, which has a high carbon content. Further refinement with oxygen reduces the carbon content to the correct proportion to make steel. Steels and low carbon iron alloys along with other metals (alloy steels) are by far the most common metals in industrial use, due to their great range of desirable properties and the abundance of iron.

Iron chemical compounds have many uses. Iron oxide mixed with aluminium powder can be ignited to create a thermite reaction, used in welding and purifying ores. Iron forms binary compounds with the halogens and the chalcogens. Among its organometallic compounds is ferrocene, the first sandwich compound discovered.

Iron plays an important role in biology, forming complexes with molecular oxygen in hemoglobin and myoglobin; these two compounds are common oxygen transport proteins in vertebrates. Iron is also the metal used at the active site of many important redox enzymes dealing with cellular respiration and oxidation and reduction in plants and animals.

==Characteristics==

===Mechanical properties===

 Characteristic values of tensile strength (TS) and Brinell hardness (BH) of different forms of iron. Material TS (MPa) BH (Brinell) 
 Iron whiskers 11000 
 Ausformed (hardened) steel 2930 8501200 
 Martensitic steel 2070 600 
 Bainitic steel 1380 400 
 Pearlitic steel 1200 350 
 Cold-worked iron 690 200 
 Small-grain iron 340 100 
 Carbon-containing iron 140 40 
 Pure, single-crystal iron 10 3 

The mechanical properties of iron and its alloys can be evaluated using a variety of tests, including the Brinell test, Rockwell test and the Vickers hardness test. The data on iron is so consistent that it is often used to calibrate measurements or to compare tests. However, the mechanical properties of iron are significantly affected by the sample's purity: pure research-purpose single crystals of iron are actually softer than aluminium, and the purest industrially produced iron (99.99%) has a hardness of 2030 Brinell. An increase in the carbon content of the iron will initially cause a significant corresponding increase in the iron's hardness and tensile strength. Maximum hardness of 65 Rc is achieved with a 0.6% carbon content, although this produces a metal with a low tensile strength. 

===Phase diagram and allotropes===

Iron represents an example of allotropy in a metal. There are at least four allotropic forms of iron, known as , , , and ; at very high pressures, some controversial experimental evidence exists for a phase  stable at very high pressures and temperatures. 
Low-pressure phase diagram of pure iron
As molten iron cools it crystallizes at 1538 C into its  allotrope, which has a body-centered cubic (bcc) crystal structure. As it cools further to 1394 C, it changes to its -iron allotrope, a face-centered cubic (fcc) crystal structure, or austenite. At 912 C and below, the crystal structure again becomes the bcc -iron allotrope, or ferrite. Finally, at 770 C (the Curie point, Tc) iron becomes magnetic. As the iron passes through the Curie temperature there is no change in crystalline structure, but there is a change in "domain structure", where each domain contains iron atoms with a particular electronic spin. In unmagnetized iron, all the electronic spins of the atoms within one domain are in the same direction, however, the neighboring domains point in various other directions and thus over all they cancel each other out. As a result, the iron is unmagnetized. In magnetized iron, the electronic spins of all the domains are aligned, so that the magnetic effects of neighboring domains reinforce each other. Although each domain contains billions of atoms, they are very small, about 10 micrometres across. At pressures above approximately 10 GPa and temperatures of a few hundred kelvin or less, -iron changes into a hexagonal close-packed (hcp) structure, which is also known as -iron; the higher-temperature -phase also changes into -iron, but does so at higher pressure. The -phase, if it exists, would appear at pressures of at least 50 GPa and temperatures of at least 1500 K; it has been thought to have an orthorhombic or a double hcp structure. 

Iron is of greatest importance when mixed with certain other metals and with carbon to form steels. There are many types of steels, all with different properties, and an understanding of the properties of the allotropes of iron is key to the manufacture of good quality steels.

-iron, also known as ferrite, is the most stable form of iron at normal temperatures. It is a fairly soft metal that can dissolve only a small concentration of carbon (no more than 0.021% by mass at 910 C). 

Above 912 C and up to 1400 C -iron undergoes a phase transition from bcc to the fcc configuration of -iron, also called austenite. This is similarly soft and metallic but can dissolve considerably more carbon (as much as 2.04% by mass at 1146 C). This form of iron is used in the type of stainless steel used for making cutlery, and hospital and food-service equipment. 

The high-pressure phases of iron are important as endmember models for the solid parts of planetary cores. The inner core of the Earth is generally assumed to consist essentially of an iron-nickel alloy with  (or ) structure.

The melting point of iron is experimentally well defined for pressures up to approximately 50 GPa. For higher pressures, different studies placed the --liquid triple point at pressures differing by tens of gigapascals and yielded differences of more than 1000 K for the melting point. Generally speaking, molecular dynamics computer simulations of iron melting and shock wave experiments suggest higher melting points and a much steeper slope of the melting curve than static experiments carried out in diamond anvil cells. 

===Isotopes===

Naturally occurring iron consists of four stable isotopes: 5.845% of 54Fe, 91.754% of 56Fe, 2.119% of 57Fe and 0.282% of 58Fe. Of these stable isotopes, only 57Fe has a nuclear spin (1/2). The nuclide 54Fe is predicted to undergo double beta decay, but this process had never been observed experimentally for these nuclei, and only the lower limit on the half-life was established: t1/2>3.11022 years.

60Fe is an extinct radionuclide of long half-life (2.6 million years). G. Rugel, T. Faestermann, K. Knie, G. Korschinek, M. Poutivtsev, D. Schumann, N. Kivel, I. Gnther-Leopold, R. Weinreich, M. Wohlmuther: New Measurement of the 60 Half-Life. In: Physical Review Letters. 103, 2009, S. , . It is not found on Earth, but its ultimate decay product is the stable nuclide nickel-60.

Much of the past work on measuring the isotopic composition of Fe has focused on determining 60Fe variations due to processes accompanying nucleosynthesis (i.e., meteorite studies) and ore formation. In the last decade however, advances in mass spectrometry technology have allowed the detection and quantification of minute, naturally occurring variations in the ratios of the stable isotopes of iron. Much of this work has been driven by the Earth and planetary science communities, although applications to biological and industrial systems are beginning to emerge. 

The most abundant iron isotope 56Fe is of particular interest to nuclear scientists as it represents the most common endpoint of nucleosynthesis. It is often cited, falsely, as the isotope of highest binding energy, a distinction which actually belongs to nickel-62. Since 56Ni is easily produced from lighter nuclei in the alpha process in nuclear reactions in supernovae (see silicon burning process), nickel-56 (14 alpha particles) is the endpoint of fusion chains inside extremely massive stars, since addition of another alpha particle would result in zinc-60, which requires a great deal more energy. This nickel-56, which has a half-life of about 6 days, is therefore made in quantity in these stars, but soon decays by two successive positron emissions within supernova decay products in the supernova remnant gas cloud, first to radioactive cobalt-56, and then stable iron-56. This last nuclide is therefore common in the universe, relative to other stable metals of approximately the same atomic weight.

In phases of the meteorites Semarkona and Chervony Kut a correlation between the concentration of 60Ni, the daughter product of 60Fe, and the abundance of the stable iron isotopes could be found which is evidence for the existence of 60Fe at the time of formation of the Solar System. Possibly the energy released by the decay of 60Fe contributed, together with the energy released by decay of the radionuclide 26Al, to the remelting and differentiation of asteroids after their formation 4.6 billion years ago. The abundance of 60Ni present in extraterrestrial material may also provide further insight into the origin of the Solar System and its early history. 

Nuclei of iron atoms have some of the highest binding energies per nucleon, surpassed only by the nickel isotope 62Ni. This is formed by nuclear fusion in stars. Although a further tiny energy gain could be extracted by synthesizing 62Ni, conditions in stars are unsuitable for this process to be favored. Elemental distribution on Earth greatly favors iron over nickel, and also presumably in supernova element production. 

Iron-56 is the heaviest stable isotope produced by the alpha process in stellar nucleosynthesis; elements heavier than iron and nickel require a supernova for their formation. Iron is the most abundant element in the core of red giants, and is the most abundant metal in iron meteorites and in the dense metal cores of planets such as Earth.

===Nucleosynthesis===
Iron is created by extremely large, extremely hot (over 2.5 billion kelvin) stars through the silicon burning process. It is the heaviest stable element to be produced in this manner. The process starts with the second largest stable nucleus created by silicon burning, which is calcium. One stable nucleus of calcium fuses with one helium nucleus, creating unstable titanium. Before the titanium decays, it can fuse with another helium nucleus, creating unstable chromium. Before the chromium decays, it can fuse with another helium nucleus, creating unstable iron. Before the iron decays, it can fuse with another helium nucleus, creating unstable nickel-56. Any further fusion of nickel-56 consumes energy instead of producing energy, so after the production of nickel-56, the star does not produce the energy necessary to keep the core from collapsing. Eventually, the nickel-56 decays to unstable cobalt-56, which in turn decays to stable iron-56.
When the core of the star collapses, it creates a supernova. Supernovas also create additional forms of stable iron via the r-process.

===Occurrence===

====Planetary occurrence====
 Iron meteorites, similar in composition to the Earth's inner- and outer core
Iron is the sixth most abundant element in the Universe, and the most common refractory element. It is formed as the final exothermic stage of stellar nucleosynthesis, by silicon fusion in massive stars.

Metallic or native iron is rarely found on the surface of the Earth because it tends to oxidize, but its oxides are pervasive and represent the primary ores. While it makes up about 5% of the Earth's crust, both the Earth's inner and outer core are believed to consist largely of an iron-nickel alloy constituting 35% of the mass of the Earth as a whole. Iron is consequently the most abundant element on Earth, but only the fourth most abundant element in the Earth's crust. Most of the iron in the crust is found combined with oxygen as iron oxide minerals such as hematite (Fe2O3) and magnetite (Fe3O4). Large deposits of iron are found in banded iron formations. These geological formations are a type of rock consisting of repeated thin layers of iron oxides alternating with bands of iron-poor shale and chert. The banded iron formations were laid down in the time between and 

About 1 in 20 meteorites consist of the unique iron-nickel minerals taenite (3580% iron) and kamacite (9095% iron). Although rare, iron meteorites are the main form of natural metallic iron on the Earth's surface. 

The red color of the surface of Mars is derived from an iron oxide-rich regolith. This has been proven by Mssbauer spectroscopy. 

====Stocks in use in society====
According to the International Resource Panel's Metal Stocks in Society report, the global stock of iron in use in society is 2200 kg per capita. Much of this is in more-developed countries (700014000 kg per capita) rather than less-developed countries (2000 kg per capita).

==Chemistry and compounds==

 Oxidation state Representative compound 
 2 Disodium tetracarbonylferrate (Collman's reagent) 
 1 
 0 Iron pentacarbonyl 
 1 Cyclopentadienyliron dicarbonyl dimer (\"Fp2\") 
 2 Ferrous sulfate, ferrocene 
 3 Ferric chloride, ferrocenium tetrafluoroborate 
 4 Barium ferrate(IV) 
 5 
 6 Potassium ferrate 

Iron forms compounds mainly in the +2 and +3 oxidation states. Traditionally, iron(II) compounds are called ferrous, and iron(III) compounds ferric. Iron also occurs in higher oxidation states, an example being the purple potassium ferrate (K2FeO4) which contains iron in its +6 oxidation state. Iron(IV) is a common intermediate in many biochemical oxidation reactions. Numerous organometallic compounds contain formal oxidation states of +1, 0, 1, or even 2. The oxidation states and other bonding properties are often assessed using the technique of Mssbauer spectroscopy. 
There are also many mixed valence compounds that contain both iron(II) and iron(III) centers, such as magnetite and Prussian blue (Fe4(Fe6)3). The latter is used as the traditional "blue" in blueprints. 
Hydrated iron(III) chloride, also known as ferric chloride

The iron compounds produced on the largest scale in industry are iron(II) sulfate (FeSO47H2O) and iron(III) chloride (FeCl3). The former is one of the most readily available sources of iron(II), but is less stable to aerial oxidation than Mohr's salt ((NH4)2Fe(SO4)26H2O). Iron(II) compounds tend to be oxidized to iron(III) compounds in the air. 

Unlike many other metals, iron does not form amalgams with mercury. As a result, mercury is traded in standardized 76 pound flasks (34 kg) made of iron. 

===Binary compounds===
Iron reacts with oxygen in the air to form various oxide and hydroxide compounds; the most common are iron(II,III) oxide (Fe3O4), and iron(III) oxide (Fe2O3). Iron(II) oxide also exists, though it is unstable at room temperature. These oxides are the principal ores for the production of iron (see bloomery and blast furnace). They are also used in the production of ferrites, useful magnetic storage media in computers, and pigments. The best known sulfide is iron pyrite (FeS2), also known as fool's gold owing to its golden luster. 

The binary ferrous and ferric halides are well known, with the exception of ferric iodide. The ferrous halides typically arise from treating iron metal with the corresponding binary halogen acid to give the corresponding hydrated salts. 
:Fe + 2 HX  FeX2 + H2
Iron reacts with fluorine, chlorine, and bromine to give the corresponding ferric halides, ferric chloride being the most common:
:2 Fe + 3 X2  2 FeX3 (X = F, Cl, Br)

===Coordination and organometallic compounds===

Prussian blue
Several cyanide complexes are known. The most famous example is Prussian blue, (Fe4(Fe6)3). Potassium ferricyanide and potassium ferrocyanide are also known; the formation of Prussian blue upon reaction with iron(II) and iron(III) respectively forms the basis of a "wet" chemical test. Prussian blue is also used as an antidote for thallium and radioactive caesium poisoning. Prussian blue can be used in laundry bluing to correct the yellowish tint left by ferrous salts in water.

Ferrocene
Several carbonyl compounds of iron are known. The premier iron(0) compound is iron pentacarbonyl, Fe(CO)5, which is used to produce carbonyl iron powder, a highly reactive form of metallic iron. Thermolysis of iron pentacarbonyl gives the trinuclear cluster, triiron dodecacarbonyl. Collman's reagent, disodium tetracarbonylferrate, is a useful reagent for organic chemistry; it contains iron in the 2 oxidation state. Cyclopentadienyliron dicarbonyl dimer contains iron in the rare +1 oxidation state. . 

Ferrocene is an extremely stable complex. The first sandwich compound, it contains an iron(II) center with two cyclopentadienyl ligands bonded through all ten carbon atoms. This arrangement was a shocking novelty when it was first discovered, but the discovery of ferrocene has led to a new branch of organometallic chemistry. Ferrocene itself can be used as the backbone of a ligand, e.g. dppf. Ferrocene can itself be oxidized to the ferrocenium cation (Fc+); the ferrocene/ferrocenium couple is often used as a reference in electrochemistry. 

==History==

===Wrought iron===

The symbol for Mars has been used since antiquity to represent iron. The Delhi iron pillar is an example of the iron extraction and processing methodologies of early India. The iron pillar at Delhi has withstood corrosion for the last 1600 years.
Iron objects of great age are much rarer than objects made of gold or silver due to the ease of corrosion of iron. Beads made from meteoric iron in 3500 BC or earlier were found in Gerzah, Egypt by G. A. Wainwright. The beads contain 7.5% nickel, which is a signature of meteoric origin since iron found in the Earth's crust has very little to no nickel content. Meteoric iron was highly regarded due to its origin in the heavens and was often used to forge weapons and tools or whole specimens placed in churches. Items that were likely made of iron by Egyptians date from 2500 to 3000 BC. Iron had a distinct advantage over bronze in warfare implements. It was much harder and more durable than bronze, although susceptible to rust. However, this is contested. Hittitologist Trevor Bryce argues that before advanced iron-working techniques were developed in India, meteoritic iron weapons used by early Mesopotamian armies had a tendency to shatter in combat, due to their high carbon content. 

The first iron production started in the Middle Bronze Age but it took several centuries before iron displaced bronze. Samples of smelted iron from Asmar, Mesopotamia and Tall Chagar Bazaar in northern Syria were made sometime between 2700 and 3000 BC. The Hittites appear to be the first to understand the production of iron from its ores and regard it highly in their society. They began to smelt iron between 1500 and 1200 BC and the practice spread to the rest of the Near East after their empire fell in 1180 BC. The subsequent period is called the Iron Age. Iron smelting, and thus the Iron Age, reached Europe two hundred years later and arrived in Zimbabwe, Africa by the 8th century. In China, iron only appears circa 700500 BC. Sawyer, Ralph D. and Mei-chn Sawyer. The Seven Military Classics of Ancient China. Boulder: Westview, (1993), p. 10. Iron smelting may have been introduced into China through Central Asia. Pigott, Vincent C. (1999). p. 8. The earliest evidence of the use of a blast furnace in China dates to the 1st century AD, and cupola furnaces were used as early as the Warring States period (403221 BC). Pigott, Vincent C. (1999). The Archaeometallurgy of the Asian Old World. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology. ISBN 0-924171-34-0, p. 191. Usage of the blast and cupola furnace remained widespread during the Song and Tang Dynasties. 

Artifacts of smelted iron are found in India dating from 1800 to 1200 BC, and in the Levant from about 1500 BC (suggesting smelting in Anatolia or the Caucasus). 

The Book of Genesis, fourth chapter, verse 22 contains the first mention of iron in the Old Testament of the Bible; "Tubal-cain, an instructor of every artificer in brass and iron." Other verses allude to iron mining (Job 28:2), iron used as a stylus (Job 19:24), furnace (Deuteronomy 4:20), chariots (Joshua 17:16), nails (I Chron. 22:3), saws and axes (II Sam. 12:31), and cooking utensils (Ezekiel 4:3). The metal is also mentioned in the New Testament, for example in Acts chapter 12 verse 10, "passed through the iron gate that leadeth unto the city" of Antioch.

Iron working was introduced to Greece in the late 11th century BC. Riederer, Josef; Wartke, Ralf-B.: "Iron", Cancik, Hubert; Schneider, Helmuth (eds.): Brill's New Pauly, Brill 2009 The spread of ironworking in Central and Western Europe is associated with Celtic expansion. According to Pliny the Elder, iron use was common in the Roman era. The annual iron output of the Roman Empire is estimated at 84,750 t, Craddock, Paul T. (2008): "Mining and Metallurgy", in: Oleson, John Peter (ed.): The Oxford Handbook of Engineering and Technology in the Classical World, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-518731-1, p. 108 while the similarly populous Han China produced around 5,000 t. Wagner, Donald B.: "The State and the Iron Industry in Han China", NIAS Publishing, Copenhagen 2001, ISBN 87-87062-77-1, p. 73 

During the Industrial Revolution in Britain, Henry Cort began refining iron from pig iron to wrought iron (or bar iron) using innovative production systems. In 1783 he patented the puddling process for refining iron ore. It was later improved by others including Joseph Hall.

===Cast iron===
Cast iron was first produced in China during 5th century BC, originally published in but was hardly in Europe until the medieval period. Giannichedda, Enrico (2007): "Metal production in Late Antiquity", in Technology in Transition AD 300650 Lavan, L.; Zanini, E. and Sarantis, A.(eds.), Brill, Leiden; ISBN 90-04-16549-5, p. 200. The earliest cast iron artifacts were discovered by archaeologists in what is now modern Luhe County, Jiangsu in China. Cast iron was used in ancient China for warfare, agriculture, and architecture. During the medieval period, means were found in Europe of producing wrought iron from cast iron (in this context known as pig iron) using finery forges. For all these processes, charcoal was required as fuel.
Coalbrookdale by Night, 1801. Blast furnaces light the iron making town of Coalbrookdale.
Medieval blast furnaces were about 10 ft tall and made of fireproof brick; forced air was usually provided by hand-operated bellows. Modern blast furnaces have grown much bigger.

In 1709, Abraham Darby I established a coke-fired blast furnace to produce cast iron. The ensuing availability of inexpensive iron was one of the factors leading to the Industrial Revolution. Toward the end of the 18th century, cast iron began to replace wrought iron for certain purposes, because it was cheaper. Carbon content in iron wasn't implicated as the reason for the differences in properties of wrought iron, cast iron and steel until the 18th century.

Since iron was becoming cheaper and more plentiful, it also became a major structural material following the building of the innovative first iron bridge in 1778.

===Steel===

Steel (with smaller carbon content than pig iron but more than wrought iron) was first produced in antiquity by using a bloomery. Blacksmiths in Luristan in western Iran were making good steel by 1000 BC. Then improved versions, Wootz steel by India and Damascus steel by China were developed around 300 BC and 500 AD respectively. These methods were specialized, and so steel did not become a major commodity until the 1850s. Spoerl, Joseph S. A Brief History of Iron and Steel Production. Saint Anselm College 

New methods of producing it by carburizing bars of iron in the cementation process were devised in the 17th century AD. In the Industrial Revolution, new methods of producing bar iron without charcoal were devised and these were later applied to produce steel. In the late 1850s, Henry Bessemer invented a new steelmaking process, involving blowing air through molten pig iron, to produce mild steel. This made steel much more economical, thereby leading to wrought iron no longer being produced. 

===Foundations of modern chemistry===
Antoine Lavoisier used the reaction of water steam with metallic iron inside an incandescent iron tube to produce hydrogen in his experiments leading to the demonstration of the mass conservation. Anaerobic oxidation of iron at high temperature can be schematically represented by the following reactions:

:Fe + H2O  FeO + H2

:2 Fe + 3 H2O  Fe2O3 + 3 H2

:3 Fe + 4 H2O  Fe3O4 + 4 H2

==Industrial production==

The production of iron or steel is a process containing two main stages, unless the desired product is cast iron. The first stage is to produce pig iron in a blast furnace. Alternatively, it may be directly reduced. The second is to make wrought iron or steel from pig iron by a further process.
The fining process of smelting iron ore to make wrought iron from pig iron, with the right illustration displaying men working a blast furnace, from the Tiangong Kaiwu encyclopedia, published in 1637 by Song Yingxing. How iron was extracted in the 19th century

For a few limited purposes like electromagnet cores, pure iron is produced by electrolysis of a ferrous sulfate solution

===Blast furnace===

Ninety percent of all mining of metallic ores is for the extraction of iron. Industrially, iron production involves iron ores, principally hematite (nominally Fe2O3) and magnetite (Fe3O4) in a carbothermic reaction (reduction with carbon) in a blast furnace at temperatures of about 2000 C. In a blast furnace, iron ore, carbon in the form of coke, and a flux such as limestone (which is used to remove silicon dioxide impurities in the ore which would otherwise clog the furnace with solid material) are fed into the top of the furnace, while a massive blast of heated air, about 4 tons per ton of iron, is forced into the furnace at the bottom.

In the furnace, the coke reacts with oxygen in the air blast to produce carbon monoxide:
:2 C + O2  2 CO

The carbon monoxide reduces the iron ore (in the chemical equation below, hematite) to molten iron, becoming carbon dioxide in the process:
:Fe2O3 + 3 CO  2 Fe + 3 CO2

Some iron in the high-temperature lower region of the furnace reacts directly with the coke:
:2 Fe2O3 + 3 C  4 Fe + 3 CO2

The flux is present to melt impurities in the ore, principally silicon dioxide sand and other silicates. Common fluxes include limestone (principally calcium carbonate) and dolomite (calcium-magnesium carbonate). Other fluxes may be used depending on the impurities that need to be removed from the ore. In the heat of the furnace the limestone flux decomposes to calcium oxide (also known as quicklime):

:CaCO3  CaO + CO2

Then calcium oxide combines with silicon dioxide to form a liquid slag.
:CaO + SiO2  CaSiO3

The slag melts in the heat of the furnace. In the bottom of the furnace, the molten slag floats on top of the denser molten iron, and apertures in the side of the furnace are opened to run off the iron and the slag separately. The iron, once cooled, is called pig iron, while the slag can be used as a material in road construction or to improve mineral-poor soils for agriculture 
This heap of iron ore pellets will be used in steel production.

===Direct iron reduction===
Since coke is becoming more regulated due to environmental concerns, alternative methods of processing iron have been developed. "Direct iron reduction" reduces iron ore to a powder called "sponge" iron or "direct" iron that is suitable for steelmaking. There are two main reactions that go on in the direct reduction process:

Natural gas is partially oxidized (with heat and a catalyst):
:2 CH4 + O2  2 CO + 4 H2

These gases are then treated with iron ore in a furnace, producing solid sponge iron:
:Fe2O3 + CO + 2 H2  2 Fe + CO2 + 2 H2O

Silica is removed by adding a limestone flux, later.

===Further processes===

Iron-carbon phase diagram, various stable solid solution forms

Pig iron is not pure iron, but has 45% carbon dissolved in it with small amounts of other impurities like sulfur, magnesium, phosphorus and manganese. As the carbon is the major impurity, the iron (pig iron) becomes brittle and hard. This form of iron, also known as cast iron, is used to cast articles in foundries such as stoves, pipes, radiators, lamp-posts and rails.

Alternatively pig iron may be made into steel (with up to about 2% carbon) or wrought iron (commercially pure iron). Various processes have been used for this, including finery forges, puddling furnaces, Bessemer converters, open hearth furnaces, basic oxygen furnaces, and electric arc furnaces. In all cases, the objective is to oxidize some or all of the carbon, together with other impurities. On the other hand, other metals may be added to make alloy steels.

The hardness of the steel depends upon its carbon content: the higher the percentage of carbon, the greater the hardness and the lesser the malleability. The properties of the steel can also be changed by several methods.

Annealing involves the heating of a piece of steel to 700800 C for several hours and then gradual cooling. It makes the steel softer and more workable.

Steel may be hardened by cold working. The metal is bent or hammered into its final shape at a relatively cool temperature. Cold forging is the stamping of a piece of steel into shape by a heavy press. Wrenches are commonly made by cold forging. Cold rolling, which involves making a thinner but harder sheet, and cold drawing, which makes a thinner but stronger wire, are two other methods of cold working. To harden the steel, it is heated to red-hot and then cooled by quenching it in the water. It becomes harder and more brittle. If it is too hardened, it is then heated to a required temperature and allowed to cool. The steel thus formed is less brittle.

Heat treatment is another way to harden steel. The steel is heated red-hot, then cooled quickly. The iron carbide molecules are decomposed by the heat, but do not have time to reform. Since the free carbon atoms are stuck, it makes the steel much harder and stronger than before. 

Sometimes both toughness and hardness are desired. A process called case hardening may be used. Steel is heated to about 900 C then plunged into oil or water. Carbon from the oil can diffuse into the steel, making the surface very hard. The surface cools quickly, but the inside cools slowly, making an extremely hard surface and a durable, resistant inner layer.

Iron may be passivated by dipping it into a concentrated nitric acid solution. This forms a protective layer of oxide on the metal, protecting it from further corrosion. 

==Applications==
Iron powder

===Metallurgical===

+Iron production 2009 (million tonnes) Steel Statistical Yearbook 2010. World Steel Association Country Iron ore Pig iron Direct iron Steel 
 China 1,114.9 549.4 573.6 
 Australia 393.9 4.4 5.2 
 Brazil 305.0 25.1 0.011 26.5 
 Japan 66.9 87.5 
 India 257.4 38.2 23.4 63.5 
 Russia 92.1 43.9 4.7 60.0 
 Ukraine 65.8 25.7 29.9 
 South Korea 0.1 27.3 48.6 
 Germany 0.4 20.1 0.38 32.7 
 World 1,594.9 914.0 64.5 1,232.4 

Iron is the most widely used of all the metals, accounting for 95% of worldwide metal production. Its low cost and high strength make it indispensable in engineering applications such as the construction of machinery and machine tools, automobiles, the hulls of large ships, and structural components for buildings. Since pure iron is quite soft, it is most commonly combined with alloying elements to make steel.

Commercially available iron is classified based on purity and the abundance of additives. Pig iron has 3.54.5% carbon and contains varying amounts of contaminants such as sulfur, silicon and phosphorus. Pig iron is not a saleable product, but rather an intermediate step in the production of cast iron and steel. The reduction of contaminants in pig iron that negatively affect material properties, such as sulfur and phosphorus, yields cast iron containing 24% carbon, 16% silicon, and small amounts of manganese. It has a melting point in the range of 14201470 K, which is lower than either of its two main components, and makes it the first product to be melted when carbon and iron are heated together. Its mechanical properties vary greatly and depend on the form the carbon takes in the alloy.

"White" cast irons contain their carbon in the form of cementite, or iron-carbide. This hard, brittle compound dominates the mechanical properties of white cast irons, rendering them hard, but unresistant to shock. The broken surface of a white cast iron is full of fine facets of the broken iron-carbide, a very pale, silvery, shiny material, hence the appellation.

In gray iron the carbon exists as separate, fine flakes of graphite, and also renders the material brittle due to the sharp edged flakes of graphite that produce stress concentration sites within the material. A newer variant of gray iron, referred to as ductile iron is specially treated with trace amounts of magnesium to alter the shape of graphite to spheroids, or nodules, reducing the stress concentrations and vastly increasing the toughness and strength of the material.

Wrought iron contains less than 0.25% carbon but large amounts of slag that give it a fibrous characteristic. It is a tough, malleable product, but not as fusible as pig iron. If honed to an edge, it loses it quickly. Wrought iron is characterized by the presence of fine fibers of slag entrapped within the metal. Wrought iron is more corrosion resistant than steel. It has been almost completely replaced by mild steel for traditional "wrought iron" products and blacksmithing.

Mild steel corrodes more readily than wrought iron, but is cheaper and more widely available. Carbon steel contains 2.0% carbon or less, with small amounts of manganese, sulfur, phosphorus, and silicon. Alloy steels contain varying amounts of carbon as well as other metals, such as chromium, vanadium, molybdenum, nickel, tungsten, etc. Their alloy content raises their cost, and so they are usually only employed for specialist uses. One common alloy steel, though, is stainless steel. Recent developments in ferrous metallurgy have produced a growing range of microalloyed steels, also termed 'HSLA' or high-strength, low alloy steels, containing tiny additions to produce high strengths and often spectacular toughness at minimal cost.

Photon mass attenuation coefficient for iron.
Apart from traditional applications, iron is also used for protection from ionizing radiation. Although it is lighter than another traditional protection material, lead, it is much stronger mechanically. The attenuation of radiation as a function of energy is shown in the graph.

The main disadvantage of iron and steel is that pure iron, and most of its alloys, suffer badly from rust if not protected in some way. Painting, galvanization, passivation, plastic coating and bluing are all used to protect iron from rust by excluding water and oxygen or by cathodic protection.

===Iron compounds===
Although its metallurgical role is dominant in terms of amounts, iron compounds are pervasive in industry as well being used in many niche uses. Iron catalysts are traditionally used in the Haber-Bosch Process for the production of ammonia and the Fischer-Tropsch process for conversion of carbon monoxide to hydrocarbons for fuels and lubricants. Powdered iron in an acidic solvent was used in the Bechamp reduction the reduction of nitrobenzene to aniline. 

Iron(III) chloride finds use in water purification and sewage treatment, in the dyeing of cloth, as a coloring agent in paints, as an additive in animal feed, and as an etchant for copper in the manufacture of printed circuit boards. It can also be dissolved in alcohol to form tincture of iron. The other halides tend to be limited to laboratory uses.

Iron(II) sulfate is used as a precursor to other iron compounds. It is also used to reduce chromate in cement. It is used to fortify foods and treat iron deficiency anemia. These are its main uses. Iron(III) sulfate is used in settling minute sewage particles in tank water. Iron(II) chloride is used as a reducing flocculating agent, in the formation of iron complexes and magnetic iron oxides, and as a reducing agent in organic synthesis.

==Biological role==
Iron is abundant in biology. electronic-book ISBN 978-94-007-5561-1 electronic- Iron-proteins are found in all living organisms, ranging from the evolutionarily primitive archaea to humans. The color of blood is due to the hemoglobin, an iron-containing protein. As illustrated by hemoglobin, iron is often bound to cofactors, e.g. in hemes. The iron-sulfur clusters are pervasive and include nitrogenase, the enzymes responsible for biological nitrogen fixation. Influential theories of evolution have invoked a role for iron sulfides in the iron-sulfur world theory.
Structure of Heme b, in the protein additional ligand(s) would be attached to Fe.

Iron is a necessary trace element found in nearly all living organisms. Iron-containing enzymes and proteins, often containing heme prosthetic groups, participate in many biological oxidations and in transport. Examples of proteins found in higher organisms include hemoglobin, cytochrome (see high-valent iron), and catalase. 

===Bioinorganic compounds===
The most commonly known and studied "bioinorganic" compounds of iron (i.e., iron compounds used in biology) are the heme proteins: examples are hemoglobin, myoglobin, and cytochrome P450. These compounds can transport gases, build enzymes, and be used in transferring electrons. Metalloproteins are a group of proteins with metal ion cofactors. Some examples of iron metalloproteins are ferritin and rubredoxin. Many enzymes vital to life contain iron, such as catalase, lipoxygenases, and IRE-BP.

===Health and diet===

Iron is pervasive, but particularly rich sources of dietary iron include red meat, lentils, beans, poultry, fish, leaf vegetables, watercress, tofu, chickpeas, black-eyed peas, blackstrap molasses, fortified bread, and fortified breakfast cereals. Iron in low amounts is found in molasses, teff and farina. Iron in meat (heme iron) is more easily absorbed than iron in vegetables. Food Standards Agency  Eat well, be well  Iron deficiency. Eatwell.gov.uk (2012-03-05). Retrieved on 2012-06-27. Although some studies suggest that heme/hemoglobin from red meat has effects which may increase the likelihood of colorectal cancer, there is still some controversy, and even a few studies suggesting that there is not enough evidence to support such claims. 

Iron provided by dietary supplements is often found as iron(II) fumarate, although iron sulfate is cheaper and is absorbed equally well. Elemental iron, or reduced iron, despite being absorbed at only one third to two thirds the efficiency (relative to iron sulfate), is often added to foods such as breakfast cereals or enriched wheat flour. Iron is most available to the body when chelated to amino acids and is also available for use as a common iron supplement. Often the amino acid chosen for this purpose is the cheapest and most common amino acid, glycine, leading to "iron glycinate" supplements. The Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) for iron varies considerably based on age, gender, and source of dietary iron (heme-based iron has higher bioavailability). Infants may require iron supplements if they are bottle-fed cow's milk. Blood donors and pregnant women are at special risk of low iron levels and are often advised to supplement their iron intake. 

===Uptake and storage===
Iron acquisition poses a problem for aerobic organisms, because ferric iron is poorly soluble near neutral pH. Thus, bacteria have evolved high-affinity sequestering agents called siderophores. 

After uptake, in cells, iron storage is carefully regulated; "free" iron ions do not exist as such. A major component of this regulation is the protein transferrin, which binds iron ions absorbed from the duodenum and carries it in the blood to cells. In animals, plants, and fungi, iron is often the metal ion incorporated into the heme complex. Heme is an essential component of cytochrome proteins, which mediate redox reactions, and of oxygen carrier proteins such as hemoglobin, myoglobin, and leghemoglobin.

Inorganic iron contributes to redox reactions in the iron-sulfur clusters of many enzymes, such as nitrogenase (involved in the synthesis of ammonia from nitrogen and hydrogen) and hydrogenase. Non-heme iron proteins include the enzymes methane monooxygenase (oxidizes methane to methanol), ribonucleotide reductase (reduces ribose to deoxyribose; DNA biosynthesis), hemerythrins (oxygen transport and fixation in marine invertebrates) and purple acid phosphatase (hydrolysis of phosphate esters).

Iron distribution is heavily regulated in mammals, partly because iron ions have a high potential for biological toxicity. 

===Regulation of uptake===

Iron uptake is tightly regulated by the human body, which has no regulated physiological means of excreting iron. Only small amounts of iron are lost daily due to mucosal and skin epithelial cell sloughing, so control of iron levels is mostly by regulating uptake. 
Regulation of iron uptake is impaired in some people as a result of a genetic defect that maps to the HLA-H gene region on chromosome 6. In these people, excessive iron intake can result in iron overload disorders, such as hemochromatosis. Many people have a genetic susceptibility to iron overload without realizing it or being aware of a family history of the problem. For this reason, it is advised that people do not take iron supplements unless they suffer from iron deficiency and have consulted a doctor. Hemochromatosis is estimated to cause disease in between 0.3 and 0.8% of Caucasians. 

MRI finds that iron accumulates in the hippocampus of the brains of those with Alzheimer's disease and in the substantia nigra of those with Parkinson disease. 

===Bioremediation===

Iron eating bacteria live in the hulls of sunken ships such as the Titanic. The acidophile bacteria Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans, Leptospirillum ferrooxidans, Sulfolobus spp., Acidianus brierleyi and Sulfobacillus thermosulfidooxidans can oxidize ferrous iron enzymically. A sample of the fungus Aspergillus niger was found growing from gold mining solution, and was found to contain cyano metal complexes such as gold, silver, copper iron and zinc. The fungus also plays a role in the solubilization of heavy metal sulfides. 

===Permeable reactive barriers===
Zerovalent iron is the main reactive material for permeable reactive barriers. 

==Toxicity==

Large amounts of ingested iron can cause excessive levels of iron in the blood. High blood levels of free ferrous iron react with peroxides to produce free radicals, which are highly reactive and can damage DNA, proteins, lipids, and other cellular components. Thus, iron toxicity occurs when there is free iron in the cell, which generally occurs when iron levels exceed the capacity of transferrin to bind the iron. Damage to the cells of the gastrointestinal tract can also prevent them from regulating iron absorption leading to further increases in blood levels. Iron typically damages cells in the heart, liver and elsewhere, which can cause significant adverse effects, including coma, metabolic acidosis, shock, liver failure, coagulopathy, adult respiratory distress syndrome, long-term organ damage, and even death. Humans experience iron toxicity above 20 milligrams of iron for every kilogram of mass, and 60 milligrams per kilogram is considered a lethal dose. Overconsumption of iron, often the result of children eating large quantities of ferrous sulfate tablets intended for adult consumption, is one of the most common toxicological causes of death in children under six. The Dietary Reference Intake (DRI) lists the Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL) for adults as 45 mg/day. For children under fourteen years old the UL is 40 mg/day.

The medical management of iron toxicity is complicated, and can include use of a specific chelating agent called deferoxamine to bind and expel excess iron from the body. 

==See also==

* El Mutn in Bolivia, where 10% of the world's accessible iron ore is located.
* Iron fertilization  proposed fertilization of oceans to stimulate phytoplankton growth
* Iron (metaphor)
* Iron in folklore
* List of countries by iron production
* Pelletising  process of creation of iron ore pellets
* Rustproof iron
* Steel

==References==

==Bibliography==
* 

==Further reading==
* H. R. Schubert, History of the British Iron and Steel Industry... to 1775 AD (Routledge, London, 1957)
* R. F. Tylecote, History of Metallurgy (Institute of Materials, London 1992).
* R. F. Tylecote, "Iron in the Industrial Revolution" in J. Day and R. F. Tylecote, The Industrial Revolution in Metals (Institute of Materials 1991), 20060.

==External links==

* It's Elemental  Iron
* The Most Tightly Bound Nuclei
* Chemistry in its element podcast (MP3) from the Royal Society of Chemistry's Chemistry World: Iron
* Iron at The Periodic Table of Videos (University of Nottingham)
* Metallurgy for the non-Metallurgist

 

Iron



[[IEEE 802.15]]

IEEE 802.15 is a working group of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) IEEE 802 standards committee which specifies wireless personal area network (WPAN) standards. It includes seven task groups.

==Task Group 1: WPAN / Bluetooth==
Task group one is based on Bluetooth technology. It defines physical layer (PHY) and Media Access Control (MAC) specification for wireless connectivity with fixed, portable and moving devices within or entering personal operating space. Standards were issued in 2002 and 2005. 

==Task Group 2: Coexistence==
Task group two addresses the coexistence of wireless personal area networks (WPAN) with other wireless devices operating in unlicensed frequency bands such as wireless local area networks (WLAN). The IEEE 802.15.2-2003 standard was published in 2003 and task group two went into "hibernation". 

==Task Group 3: High Rate WPAN==

IEEE 802.15.3-2003 is a MAC and PHY standard for high-rate (11 to 55 Mbit/s) WPANs.

IEEE 802.15.3a was an attempt to provide a higher speed Ultra wideband PHY enhancement amendment to IEEE 802.15.3 for applications which involve imaging and multimedia. The members of the task group were not able to come to an agreement choosing between two technology proposals, Multi-band Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (MB-OFDM) and Direct Sequence UWB (DS-UWB), on the table backed by two different industry alliances and was withdrawn in January 2006.

IEEE 802.15.3b-2005 amendment was released on May 5, 2006. It enhanced 802.15.3 to improve implementation and interoperability of the MAC. This will include minor optimizations while preserving backward compatibility. In addition, this amendment corrected errors, clarified ambiguities, and added editorial clarifications.

IEEE 802.15.3c-2009 was published on September 11, 2009. The task group TG3c developed a millimeter-wave-based alternative physical layer (PHY) for the existing 802.15.3 Wireless Personal Area Network (WPAN) Standard 802.15.3-2003. The IEEE 802.15.3 Task Group 3c (TG3c) was formed in March 2005. This mmWave WPAN operates in clear band including 5764 GHz unlicensed band defined by FCC 47 CFR 15.255. The millimeter-wave WPAN will allow high coexistence (close physical spacing) with all other microwave systems in the 802.15 family of WPANs. In addition, the millimeter-wave WPAN allows very high data rate over 2 Gbit/s applications such as high speed internet access, streaming content download (video on demand, HDTV, home theater, etc.), real time streaming and wireless data bus for cable replacement. Optional data rates in excess of 3 Gbit/s will be provided.

==Task Group 4: Low Rate WPAN==
Protocol stack for 802.15.4

IEEE 802.15.4-2003 (Low Rate WPAN) deals with low data rate but very long battery life (months or even years) and very low complexity. The standard defines both the physical (Layer 1) and data-link (Layer 2) layers of the OSI model. The first edition of the 802.15.4 standard was released in May 2003. Several standardized and proprietary networks (or mesh) layer protocols run over 802.15.4-based networks, including IEEE 802.15.5, ZigBee, 6LoWPAN, WirelessHART, and ISA100.11a.

===WPAN Low Rate Alternative PHY (4a)===

IEEE 802.15.4a (formally called IEEE 802.15.4a-2007) is an amendment to IEEE 802.15.4 specifying additional physical layers (PHYs) to the original standard. The principal interest was in providing higher precision ranging and location capability (1 meter accuracy and better), higher aggregate throughput, adding scalability to data rates, longer range, and lower power consumption and cost. The selected baselines are two optional PHYs consisting of a UWB Pulse Radio (operating in unlicensed UWB spectrum) and a Chirp Spread Spectrum (operating in unlicensed 2.4 GHz spectrum). The Pulsed UWB Radio is based on Continuous Pulsed UWB technology (see C-UWB) and will be able to deliver communications and high precision ranging. 

 

===Revision and Enhancement (4b)===
IEEE 802.15.4b was approved in June 2006 and was published in September 2006 as IEEE 802.15.4-2006. The IEEE 802.15 task group 4b was chartered to create a project for specific enhancements and clarifications to the IEEE 802.15.4-2003 standard, such as resolving ambiguities, reducing unnecessary complexity, increasing flexibility in security key usage, considerations for newly available frequency allocations, and others.

===PHY Amendment for China (4c)===
IEEE 802.15.4c was approved in 2008 and was published in January 2009. This defines a PHY amendment adds new rf spectrum specifications to address the Chinese regulatory changes which have opened the 314-316 MHz, 430-434 MHz, and 779-787 MHz bands for Wireless PAN use within China.

===PHY and MAC Amendment for Japan (4d)===
The IEEE 802.15 Task Group 4d was chartered to define an amendment to the 802.15.4-2006 standard. The amendment defines a new PHY and such changes to the MAC as are necessary to support a new frequency allocation (950 MHz -956 MHz) in Japan while coexisting with passive tag systems in the band.

===MAC Amendment for Industrial Applications (4e)===
The IEEE 802.15 Task Group 4e is chartered to define a MAC amendment to the existing standard 802.15.4-2006. The intent of this amendment is to enhance and add functionality to the 802.15.4-2006 MAC to a) better support the industrial markets and b) permit compatibility with modifications being proposed within the Chinese WPAN. Specific enhancements were made to add channel hopping and a variable time slot option compatible with ISA100.11a. These changes were approved in 2011.

===PHY and MAC Amendment for Active RFID (4f)===
The IEEE 802.15.4f Active RFID System Task Group is chartered to define new wireless Physical (PHY) layer(s) and enhancements to the 802.15.4-2006 standard MAC layer which are required to support new PHY(s) for active RFID system bi-directional and location determination applications.

===PHY Amendment for Smart Utility Network (4g)===
IEEE 802.15.4g Smart Utility Networks (SUN) Task Group is chartered to create a PHY amendment to 802.15.4 to provide a standard that facilitates very large scale process control applications such as the utility smart grid network capable of supporting large, geographically diverse networks with minimal infrastructure, with potentially millions of fixed endpoints. In April 2012 they released the 802.15.4g radio standard. 
The Telecommunications Industry Association TR-51 committee develops standards for similar applications. 

==Task Group 5: mesh networking==
IEEE 802.15.5 provides the architectural framework enabling WPAN devices to promote interoperable, stable, and scalable wireless mesh networking. This standard is composed of two parts: low-rate WPAN mesh and high-rate WPAN mesh networks. The low-rate mesh is built on IEEE 802.15.4-2006 MAC, while the high rate mesh utilizes IEEE 802.15.3/3b MAC. The common features of both meshes include network initialization, addressing, and multihop unicasting. In addition, the low-rate mesh supports multicasting, reliable broadcasting, portability support, trace route and energy saving function, and the high rate mesh supports multihop time-guaranteed service.

==Task Group 6: Body Area Networks==
In December 2011, the IEEE 802.15.6 task group approved a draft of a standard for Body Area Network (BAN) technologies. The draft was approved on 22 July 2011 by Letter Ballot to start the Sponsor Ballot process. 

 Task Group 6 was formed in November 2007 to focus on a low-power and short-range wireless standard 

 

 to be optimized for devices and operation on, in, or around the human body (but not limited to humans) to serve a variety of applications including medical, consumer electronics, and personal entertainment.

==Task Group 7: visible light communication==
As of December 2011, The IEEE 802.15.7 Visible Light Communication Task Group has completed draft 5c of a PHY and MAC standard for Visible Light Communications (VLC). The inaugural meeting for Task Group 7 was held during January 2009, where it was chartered to write standards for free-space optical communication using visible light. 

 

==Wireless Next Generation Standing Committee==
The IEEE P802.15 Wireless Next Generation Standing Committee (SCwng) is chartered to facilitate and stimulate presentations and discussions on new wireless related technologies that may be subject for new 802.15 standardization projects or to address the whole 802.15 work group with issues or concerns with techniques or technologies. 

 

==See also==

* Bluetooth
* DASH7
* Energy harvesting
* EnOcean
* List of device bandwidths
* Sun SPOT
* Ultra wideband (UWB)
* UWB Forum
* Bluetooth low energy
* WiMedia Alliance
* WirelessHD
* Wireless USB
* ZigBee
* 6LoWPAN

==References==

==External links==

*Official web site
*Get IEEE 802 (IEEE 802.15)



[[IEEE 802]]

IEEE 802 refers to a family of IEEE standards dealing with local area networks and metropolitan area networks.

More specifically, the IEEE 802 standards are restricted to networks carrying variable-size packets. (By contrast, in cell relay networks data is transmitted in short, uniformly sized units called cells. Isochronous networks, where data is transmitted as a steady stream of octets, or groups of octets, at regular time intervals, are also out of the scope of this standard.) The number 802 was simply the next free number IEEE could assign, though 802 is sometimes associated with the date the first meeting was held  February 1980.

The services and protocols specified in IEEE 802 map to the lower two layers (Data Link and Physical) of the seven-layer OSI networking reference model. In fact, IEEE 802 splits the OSI Data Link Layer into two sub-layers named Logical Link Control (LLC) and Media Access Control (MAC), so that the layers can be listed like this: 
*Data link layer
**LLC Sublayer
**MAC Sublayer
*Physical layer

The IEEE 802 family of standards is maintained by the IEEE 802 LAN/MAN Standards Committee (LMSC). The most widely used standards are for the Ethernet family, Token Ring, Wireless LAN, Bridging and Virtual Bridged LANs. An individual Working Group provides the focus for each area.

==Working groups==

 Name Description Note 
 IEEE 802.1 Bridging (networking) and Network Management 
 IEEE 802.2 LLC inactive 
 IEEE 802.3 Ethernet 
 IEEE 802.4 Token bus disbanded 
 IEEE 802.5 Defines the MAC layer for a Token Ring inactive 
 IEEE 802.6 MANs (DQDB) disbanded 
 IEEE 802.7 Broadband LAN using Coaxial Cable disbanded 
 IEEE 802.8 Fiber Optic TAG disbanded 
 IEEE 802.9 Integrated Services LAN (ISLAN or isoEthernet) disbanded 
 IEEE 802.10 Interoperable LAN Security disbanded 
 IEEE 802.11 Wireless LAN (WLAN) & Mesh (Wi-Fi certification) 
 IEEE 802.12 100BaseVG disbanded 
 IEEE 802.13 Unused Reserved for Fast Ethernet development 
 IEEE 802.14 Cable modems disbanded 
 IEEE 802.15 Wireless PAN 
 IEEE 802.15.1 Bluetooth certification 
 IEEE 802.15.2 IEEE 802.15 and IEEE 802.11 coexistence 
 IEEE 802.15.3 High-Rate wireless PAN (e.g., UWB, etc.) 
 IEEE 802.15.4 Low-Rate wireless PAN (e.g., ZigBee, WirelessHART, MiWi, etc.) 
 IEEE 802.15.5 Mesh networking for WPAN 
 IEEE 802.15.6 Body area network 
 IEEE 802.16 Broadband Wireless Access (WiMAX certification) 
 IEEE 802.16.1 Local Multipoint Distribution Service 
 IEEE 802.17 Resilient packet ring 
 IEEE 802.18 Radio Regulatory TAG 
 IEEE 802.19 Coexistence TAG 
 IEEE 802.20 Mobile Broadband Wireless Access 
 IEEE 802.21 Media Independent Handoff 
 IEEE 802.22 Wireless Regional Area Network 
 IEEE 802.23 Emergency Services Working Group 
 IEEE 802.24 Smart Grid TAG New (November, 2012) 
 IEEE 802.25 Omni-Range Area Network Not yet ratified 

==See also==
*Computer network

==References==
*IEEE Std 802-1990: IEEE Standards for Local and Metropolitan Networks: Overview and Architecture New York:1990

==External links==
*802 Committee website
*IEEE 802 Standards

*


[[IEEE 802.11]]

IEEE 802.11 is a set of media access control (MAC) and physical layer (PHY) specifications for implementing wireless local area network (WLAN) computer communication in the 2.4, 3.6, 5 and 60 GHz frequency bands. They are created and maintained by the IEEE LAN/MAN Standards Committee (IEEE 802). The base version of the standard was released in 1997 and has had subsequent amendments. The standard and amendments provide the basis for wireless network products using the Wi-Fi brand. While each amendment is officially revoked when it is incorporated in the latest version of the standard, the corporate world tends to market to the revisions because they concisely denote capabilities of their products. As a result, in the market place, each revision tends to become its own standard.
The Linksys WRT54G contains a router with an 802.11b/g radio and two antennas

==General description==
The 802.11 family consists of a series of half-duplex over-the-air modulation techniques that use the same basic protocol. 802.11-1997 was the first wireless networking standard in the family, but 802.11b was the first widely accepted one, followed by 802.11a, 802.11g, 802.11n and 802.11ac. Other standards in the family (cf, h, j) are service amendments and extensions or corrections to the previous specifications.

802.11b and 802.11g use the 2.4 GHz ISM band, operating in the United States under Part 15 of the U.S. Federal Communications Commission Rules and Regulations. Because of this choice of frequency band, 802.11b and g equipment may occasionally suffer interference from microwave ovens, cordless telephones and Bluetooth devices. 802.11b and 802.11g control their interference and susceptibility to interference by using direct-sequence spread spectrum (DSSS) and orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) signaling methods, respectively. 802.11a uses the 5 GHz U-NII band, which, for much of the world, offers at least 23 non-overlapping channels rather than the 2.4 GHz ISM frequency band, where adjacent channels overlap - see list of WLAN channels. Better or worse performance with higher or lower frequencies (channels) may be realized, depending on the environment.

The segment of the radio frequency spectrum used by 802.11 varies between countries. In the US, 802.11a and 802.11g devices may be operated without a license, as allowed in Part 15 of the FCC Rules and Regulations. Frequencies used by channels one through six of 802.11b and 802.11g fall within the 2.4 GHz amateur radio band. Licensed amateur radio operators may operate 802.11b/g devices under Part 97 of the FCC Rules and Regulations, allowing increased power output but not commercial content or encryption. 
 

==History==
802.11 technology has its origins in a 1985 ruling by the U.S. Federal Communications Commission that released the ISM band for unlicensed use. Wolter Lemstra , Vic Hayes , John Groenewegen , The Innovation Journey of Wi-Fi: The Road To Global Success, Cambridge University Press, 2010, ISBN 0-521-19971-9 

In 1991 NCR Corporation/AT&T (now Alcatel-Lucent and LSI Corporation) invented the precursor to 802.11 in Nieuwegein, The Netherlands. The inventors initially intended to use the technology for cashier systems. The first wireless products were brought to the market under the name WaveLAN with raw data rates of 1 Mbit/s and 2 Mbit/s.

Vic Hayes, who held the chair of IEEE 802.11 for 10 years and has been called the "father of Wi-Fi", was involved in designing the initial 802.11b and 802.11a standards within the IEEE. http://news.cnet.com/1200-1070-975460.html 

In 1999, the Wi-Fi Alliance was formed as a trade association to hold the Wi-Fi trademark under which most products are sold. 

==Protocol==
 

===802.11-1997 (802.11 legacy)===

The original version of the standard IEEE 802.11 was released in 1997 and clarified in 1999, but is today obsolete. It specified two net bit rates of 1 or 2 megabits per second (Mbit/s), plus forward error correction code. It specified three alternative physical layer technologies: diffuse infrared operating at 1 Mbit/s; frequency-hopping spread spectrum operating at 1 Mbit/s or 2 Mbit/s; and direct-sequence spread spectrum operating at 1 Mbit/s or 2 Mbit/s. The latter two radio technologies used microwave transmission over the Industrial Scientific Medical frequency band at 2.4 GHz. Some earlier WLAN technologies used lower frequencies, such as the U.S. 900 MHz ISM band.

Legacy 802.11 with direct-sequence spread spectrum was rapidly supplanted and popularized by 802.11b.

===802.11a (OFDM Waveform)===

Originally described as clause 17 of the 1999 specification, the OFDM waveform at 5.8 GHz is now defined in clause 18 of the 2012 specification and provides protocols that allow transmission and reception of data at rates of 1.5 to 54Mbit/s. It has seen widespread worldwide implementation, particularly within the corporate workspace. While the original amendment is no longer valid, the term "802.11a" is still used by wireless access point (cards and routers) manufacturers to describe interoperability of their systems at 5.8 GHz, 54Mbit/s.

The 802.11a standard uses the same data link layer protocol and frame format as the original standard, but an OFDM based air interface (physical layer). It operates in the 5 GHz band with a maximum net data rate of 54 Mbit/s, plus error correction code, which yields realistic net achievable throughput in the mid-20 Mbit/s. http://www.oreillynet.com/wireless/2003/08/08/wireless_throughput.html 

Since the 2.4 GHz band is heavily used to the point of being crowded, using the relatively unused 5 GHz band gives 802.11a a significant advantage. However, this high carrier frequency also brings a disadvantage: the effective overall range of 802.11a is less than that of 802.11b/g. In theory, 802.11a signals are absorbed more readily by walls and other solid objects in their path due to their smaller wavelength and, as a result, cannot penetrate as far as those of 802.11b. In practice, 802.11b typically has a higher range at low speeds (802.11b will reduce speed to 5 Mbit/s or even 1 Mbit/s at low signal strengths). 802.11a also suffers from interference, but locally there may be fewer signals to interfere with, resulting in less interference and better throughput.

===802.11b===

802.11b has a maximum raw data rate of 11 Mbit/s and uses the same media access method defined in the original standard. 802.11b products appeared on the market in early 2000, since 802.11b is a direct extension of the modulation technique defined in the original standard. The dramatic increase in throughput of 802.11b (compared to the original standard) along with simultaneous substantial price reductions led to the rapid acceptance of 802.11b as the definitive wireless LAN technology.

802.11b devices experience interference from other products operating in the 2.4 GHz band. Devices operating in the 2.4 GHz range include microwave ovens, Bluetooth devices, baby monitors, cordless telephones and some amateur radio equipment.

===802.11g===

In June 2003, a third modulation standard was ratified: 802.11g. This works in the 2.4 GHz band (like 802.11b), but uses the same OFDM based transmission scheme as 802.11a. It operates at a maximum physical layer bit rate of 54 Mbit/s exclusive of forward error correction codes, or about 22 Mbit/s average throughput. page 14 802.11g hardware is fully backward compatible with 802.11b hardware and therefore is encumbered with legacy issues that reduce throughput when compared to 802.11a by ~21%.

The then-proposed 802.11g standard was rapidly adopted by consumers starting in January 2003, well before ratification, due to the desire for higher data rates as well as to reductions in manufacturing costs. By summer 2003, most dual-band 802.11a/b products became dual-band/tri-mode, supporting a and b/g in a single mobile adapter card or access point. Details of making b and g work well together occupied much of the lingering technical process; in an 802.11g network, however, activity of an 802.11b participant will reduce the data rate of the overall 802.11g network.

Like 802.11b, 802.11g devices suffer interference from other products operating in the 2.4 GHz band, for example wireless keyboards.

===802.11-2007===
In 2003, task group TGma was authorized to "roll up" many of the amendments to the 1999 version of the 802.11 standard. REVma or 802.11ma, as it was called, created a single document that merged 8 amendments (802.11a, b, d, e, g, h, i, j) with the base standard. Upon approval on March 8, 2007, 802.11REVma was renamed to the then-current base standard IEEE 802.11-2007. IEEE 802.11-2007 

===802.11n===

802.11n is an amendment which improves upon the previous 802.11 standards by adding multiple-input multiple-output antennas (MIMO). 802.11n operates on both the 2.4 GHz and the lesser used 5 GHz bands. Support for 5 GHz bands is optional. It operates at a maximum net data rate from 54 Mbit/s to 600 Mbit/s. The IEEE has approved the amendment and it was published in October 2009. Prior to the final ratification, enterprises were already migrating to 802.11n networks based on the Wi-Fi Alliance's certification of products conforming to a 2007 draft of the 802.11n proposal.

===802.11-2012===
In 2007, task group TGmb was authorized to "roll up" many of the amendments to the 2007 version of the 802.11 standard. REVmb or 802.11mb, as it was called, created a single document that merged ten amendments (802.11k, r, y, n, w, p, z, v, u, s) with the 2007 base standard. In addition much cleanup was done, including a reordering of many of the clauses. Upon publication on March 29, 2012, the new standard was referred to as IEEE 802.11-2012.

===802.11ac===

IEEE 802.11ac-2013 is an amendment to IEEE 802.11, published in December 2013, that builds on 802.11n. Changes compared to 802.11n include wider channels (80 or 160 MHz vs. 40 MHz) in the 5 GHz band, more spatial streams (up to 8 vs. 4), higher order modulation (up to 256-QAM vs. 64-QAM), and the addition of Multi-user MIMO (MU-MIMO). As of October 2013, high-end implementations support 80 MHz channels, three spatial streams, and 256-QAM, yielding a data rate of up to 433.3 Mbit/s per spatial stream, 1300 Mbit/s total, in 80 MHz channels in the 5 GHz band. Vendors have announced plans to release so-called "Wave 2" devices with support for 160 MHz channels, four spatial streams, and MU-MIMO in 2014 and 2015. 

===802.11ad===

IEEE 802.11ad is an amendment that defines a new physical layer for 802.11 networks to operate in the 60 GHz millimeter wave spectrum. This frequency band has significantly different propagation characteristics than the 2.4 GHz and 5 GHz bands where Wi-Fi networks operate. Products implementing the 802.11ad standard are being brought to market under the WiGig brand name. The certification program is now being developed by the Wi-Fi Alliance instead of the now defunct WiGig Alliance. http://gigaom.com/2013/01/03/wi-fi-alliance-gobbles-up-wigig-plans-to-certify-devices-this-year/ The peak transmission rate of 802.11ad is 7Gbit/s. http://standards.ieee.org/getieee802/download/802.11ad-2012.pdf 

===802.11af===

IEEE 802.11af, also referred to as "White-Fi" and "Super Wi-Fi", is an amendment, approved in February 2014, that allows WLAN operation in TV white space spectrum in the VHF and UHF bands between 54 and 790 MHz. It uses cognitive radio technology to transmit on unused TV channels, with the standard taking measures to limit interference for primary users, such as analog TV, digital TV, and wireless microphones. Access points and stations determine their position using a satellite positioning system such as GPS and use the Internet to query a geolocation database (GDB) provided by a regional regulatory agency to discover what frequency channels are available for use at a given time and position. The physical layer uses OFDM and is based on 802.11ac. The propagation path loss as well as the attenuation by materials such as brick and concrete is lower in the UHF and VHF bands than in the 2.4 and 5 GHz bands, which increases the possible range. The frequency channels are 6 to 8 MHz wide, depending on the regulatory domain. Up to four channels may be bonded in either one or two contiguous blocks. MIMO operation is possible with up to four streams used for either spacetime block code (STBC) or multi-user (MU) operation. The achievable data rate per spatial stream is 26.7 Mbit/s for 6 and 7 MHz channels and 35.6 Mbit/s for 8 MHz channels. With four spatial streams and four bonded channels, the maximum data rate is 426.7 Mbit/s for 6 and 7 MHz channels and 568.9 Mbit/s for 8 MHz channels. 

===802.11ah===

IEEE 802.11ah defines a WLAN system operating at sub 1 GHz license-exempt bands, with final approval slated for March 2016. Due to the favorable propagation characteristics of the low frequency spectra, 802.11ah can provide improved transmission range compared with the conventional 802.11 WLANs operating in the 2.4 GHz and 5 GHz bands. 802.11ah can be used for various purposes including large scale sensor networks, extended range hotspot, and outdoor Wi-Fi for cellular traffic offloading, whereas the available bandwidth is relatively narrow.

===802.11ai===

IEEE 802.11ai is an amendment to the 802.11 standard which will add new mechanisms for a faster initial link setup time. http://www.ieee802.org/11/Reports/802.11_Timelines.htm 

===802.11aj===

IEEE 802.11aj is a rebanding of 802.11ad for use in the 45 GHz unlicensed spectrum available in some regions of the world (specifically China). 

===802.11aq===

IEEE 802.11aq is an amendment to the 802.11 standard which will enable pre-association discovery of services. This extends some of the mechanisms in 802.11u that enabled device discovery to further discover the services running on a device, or provided by a network. 

===802.11ax===

IEEE 802.11ax is the successor to 802.11ac and will increase the efficiency of WLAN networks. Currently at a very early stage of development this project has the goal of providing 4x the throughput of 802.11ac https://mentor.ieee.org/802.11/dcn/14/11-14-0165-01-0hew-802-11-hew-sg-proposed-par.docx 

==Channels and frequencies==

802.11b, 802.11g, and 802.11n-2.4 utilize the 2.400  2.500 GHz spectrum, one of the ISM bands. 802.11a and 802.11n use the more heavily regulated 4.915  5.825 GHz band. These are commonly referred to as the "2.4 GHz and 5 GHz bands" in most sales literature. Each spectrum is sub-divided into channels with a center frequency and bandwidth, analogous to the way radio and TV broadcast bands are sub-divided.

The 2.4 GHz band is divided into 14 channels spaced 5 MHz apart, beginning with channel 1 which is centered on 2.412 GHz. The latter channels have additional restrictions or are unavailable for use in some regulatory domains.

Graphical representation of Wi-Fi channels in the 2.4 GHz band

The channel numbering of the 5.725  5.875 GHz spectrum is less intuitive due to the differences in regulations between countries. These are discussed in greater detail on the list of WLAN channels.

===Channel spacing within the 2.4 GHz band===

In addition to specifying the channel centre frequency, 802.11 also specifies (in Clause 17) a spectral mask defining the permitted power distribution across each channel. The mask requires the signal be attenuated a minimum of 20 allocates radio spectrum to various services. At one extreme, Japan permits the use of all 14 channels for 802.11b, and 113 for 802.11g/n-2.4. Other countries such as Spain initially allowed only channels 10 and 11, and France only allowed 10, 11, 12 and 13; however, they now allow channels 1 through 13. North America and some Central and South American countries allow only 1 through 11.

Spectral masks for 802.11g channels 1  14 in the 2.4 GHz band

Since the spectral mask only defines power output restrictions up to 11 MHz from the center frequency to be attenuated by 50 dBr, it is often assumed that the energy of the channel extends no further than these limits. It is more correct to say that, given the separation between channels, the overlapping signal on any channel should be sufficiently attenuated to minimally interfere with a transmitter on any other channel. Due to the near-far problem a transmitter can impact (desense) a receiver on a "non-overlapping" channel, but only if it is close to the victim receiver (within a meter) or operating above allowed power levels.

Confusion often arises over the amount of channel separation required between transmitting devices. 802.11b was based on DSSS modulation and utilized a channel bandwidth of 22 MHz, resulting in three "non-overlapping" channels (1, 6, and 11). 802.11g was based on OFDM modulation and utilized a channel bandwidth of 20 MHz. This occasionally leads to the belief that four "non-overlapping" channels (1, 5, 9 and 13) exist under 802.11g, although this is not the case as per 17.4.6.3 Channel Numbering of operating channels of the IEEE Std 802.11 (2012) which states "In a multiple cell network topology, overlapping and/or adjacent cells using different channels can operate simultaneously without interference if the distance between the center frequencies is at least 25 MHz." 
and section 18.3.9.3 and Figure 18-13.

This does not mean that the technical overlap of the channels recommends the non-use of overlapping channels. The amount of interference seen on a 1, 5, 9, and 13 channel configuration can have very small difference from a three channel configuration and in the paper entitled "Effect of adjacent-channel interference in IEEE 802.11 WLANs" by Villegas this is also demonstrated. 

802.11 non-overlapping channels for 2.4GHz. Covers 802.11b,g,n

Although the statement that channels 1, 5, 9, and 13 are "non-overlapping" is limited to spacing or product density, the concept has some merit in limited circumstances. Special care must be taken to adequately space AP cells since overlap between the channels may cause unacceptable degradation of signal quality and throughput. If more advanced equipment such as spectral analyzers are available, overlapping channels may be used under certain circumstances. This way, more channels are available. 

===Regulatory domains and legal compliance===

IEEE uses the phrase regdomain to refer to a legal regulatory region. Different countries define different levels of allowable transmitter power, time that a channel can be occupied, and different available channels. IEEE Standard 802.11-2007 page 531 Domain codes are specified for the United States, Canada, ETSI (Europe), Spain, France, Japan, and China.

Most Wi-Fi certified devices default to regdomain 0, which means least common denominator settings, i.e. the device will not transmit at a power above the allowable power in any nation, nor will it use frequencies that are not permitted in any nation.

The regdomain setting is often made difficult or impossible to change so that the end users do not conflict with local regulatory agencies such as the United States' Federal Communications Commission.

==Layer 2  Datagrams==
The datagrams are called "frames". Current 802.11 standards define "frame" types for use in transmission of data as well as management and control of wireless links.

Frames are divided into very specific and standardized sections. Each frame consists of a MAC header, payload and frame check sequence (FCS). Some frames may not have the payload. The first two bytes of the MAC header form a frame control field specifying the form and function of the frame. The frame control field is further subdivided into the following sub-fields:
*Protocol Version: two bits representing the protocol version. Currently used protocol version is zero. Other values are reserved for future use.
*Type: two bits identifying the type of WLAN frame. Control, Data and Management are various frame types defined in IEEE 802.11.
*Sub Type: Four bits providing additional discrimination between frames. Type and Sub type together to identify the exact frame.
*ToDS and FromDS: Each is one bit in size. They indicate whether a data frame is headed for a distribution system. Control and management frames set these values to zero. All the data frames will have one of these bits set. However communication within an IBSS network always set these bits to zero.
*More Fragments: The More Fragments bit is set when a packet is divided into multiple frames for transmission. Every frame except the last frame of a packet will have this bit set.
*Retry: Sometimes frames require retransmission, and for this there is a Retry bit which is set to one when a frame is resent. This aids in the elimination of duplicate frames.
*Power Management: This bit indicates the power management state of the sender after the completion of a frame exchange. Access points are required to manage the connection and will never set the power saver bit.
*More Data: The More Data bit is used to buffer frames received in a distributed system. The access point uses this bit to facilitate stations in power saver mode. It indicates that at least one frame is available and addresses all stations connected.
*WEP: The WEP bit is modified after processing a frame. It is toggled to one after a frame has been decrypted or if no encryption is set it will have already been one.
*Order: This bit is only set when the "strict ordering" delivery method is employed. Frames and fragments are not always sent in order as it causes a transmission performance penalty.

The next two bytes are reserved for the Duration ID field. This field can take one of three forms: Duration, Contention-Free Period (CFP), and Association ID (AID).

An 802.11 frame can have up to four address fields. Each field can carry a MAC address. Address 1 is the receiver, Address 2 is the transmitter, Address 3 is used for filtering purposes by the receiver.
* The Sequence Control field is a two-byte section used for identifying message order as well as eliminating duplicate frames. The first 4 bits are used for the fragmentation number and the last 12 bits are the sequence number.
* An optional two-byte Quality of Service control field which was added with 802.11e.
* The Frame Body field is variable in size, from 0 to 2304 bytes plus any overhead from security encapsulation and contains information from higher layers.
* The Frame Check Sequence (FCS) is the last four bytes in the standard 802.11 frame. Often referred to as the Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC), it allows for integrity check of retrieved frames. As frames are about to be sent the FCS is calculated and appended. When a station receives a frame it can calculate the FCS of the frame and compare it to the one received. If they match, it is assumed that the frame was not distorted during transmission. 
 

===Management Frames===
Management Frames allow for the maintenance of communication. Some common 802.11 subtypes include:
*Authentication frame: 802.11 authentication begins with the WNIC sending an authentication frame to the access point containing its identity. With an open system authentication the WNIC only sends a single authentication frame and the access point responds with an authentication frame of its own indicating acceptance or rejection. With shared key authentication, after the WNIC sends its initial authentication request it will receive an authentication frame from the access point containing challenge text. The WNIC sends an authentication frame containing the encrypted version of the challenge text to the access point. The access point ensures the text was encrypted with the correct key by decrypting it with its own key. The result of this process determines the WNIC's authentication status.
*Association request frame: sent from a station it enables the access point to allocate resources and synchronize. The frame carries information about the WNIC including supported data rates and the SSID of the network the station wishes to associate with. If the request is accepted, the access point reserves memory and establishes an association ID for the WNIC.
*Association response frame: sent from an access point to a station containing the acceptance or rejection to an association request. If it is an acceptance, the frame will contain information such an association ID and supported data rates.
*Beacon frame: Sent periodically from an access point to announce its presence and provide the SSID, and other parameters for WNICs within range.
*Deauthentication frame: Sent from a station wishing to terminate connection from another station.
*Disassociation frame: Sent from a station wishing to terminate connection. It's an elegant way to allow the access point to relinquish memory allocation and remove the WNIC from the association table.
*Probe request frame: Sent from a station when it requires information from another station.
*Probe response frame: Sent from an access point containing capability information, supported data rates, etc., after receiving a probe request frame.
*Reassociation request frame: A WNIC sends a reassociation request when it drops from range of the currently associated access point and finds another access point with a stronger signal. The new access point coordinates the forwarding of any information that may still be contained in the buffer of the previous access point.
*Reassociation response frame: Sent from an access point containing the acceptance or rejection to a WNIC reassociation request frame. The frame includes information required for association such as the association ID and supported data rates.

====Information Elements====
2. In terms of ICT, an Information Element (IE) is a part of management frames in the IEEE 802.11 wireless LAN protocol. IEs are a device's way to transfer descriptive information about itself inside management frames. There are usually several IEs inside each such frame, and each is built of TLVs mostly defined outside the basic IEEE 802.11 specification.

The common structure of an IE is as follows:

  1   1   3   1-252 
 ------------------------------------------------
|Type |Length| OUI | Data |
 ------------------------------------------------

Whereas the OUI (organizationally unique identifier) is only used when necessary to the protocol being used, and the data field holds the TLVs relevant to that IE.

===Control Frames===
Control frames facilitate in the exchange of data frames between stations. Some common 802.11 control frames include:
*Acknowledgement (ACK) frame: After receiving a data frame, the receiving station will send an ACK frame to the sending station if no errors are found. If the sending station doesn't receive an ACK frame within a predetermined period of time, the sending station will resend the frame.
*Request to Send (RTS) frame: The RTS and CTS frames provide an optional collision reduction scheme for access points with hidden stations. A station sends a RTS frame to as the first step in a two-way handshake required before sending data frames.
*Clear to Send (CTS) frame: A station responds to an RTS frame with a CTS frame. It provides clearance for the requesting station to send a data frame. The CTS provides collision control management by including a time value for which all other stations are to hold off transmission while the requesting station transmits.

===Data Frames===
Data frames carry packets from web pages, files, etc. within the body. The body begins with an IEEE 802.2 header, with the Destination Service Access Point (DSAP) specifying the protocol; however, if the DSAP is hex AA, the 802.2 header is followed by a Subnetwork Access Protocol (SNAP) header, with the Organizationally Unique Identifier (OUI) and protocol ID (PID) fields specifying the protocol. If the OUI is all zeroes, the protocol ID field is an EtherType value. Almost all 802.11 data frames use 802.2 and SNAP headers, and most use an OUI of 00:00:00 and an EtherType value.

==Standard and amendments==
Within the IEEE 802.11 Working Group, the following IEEE Standards Association Standard and Amendments exist:

* IEEE 802.11-1997: The WLAN standard was originally 1 Mbit/s and 2 Mbit/s, 2.4 GHz RF and infrared (IR) standard (1997), all the others listed below are Amendments to this standard, except for Recommended Practices 802.11F and 802.11T.
*IEEE 802.11a: 54 Mbit/s, 5 GHz standard (1999, shipping products in 2001)
*IEEE 802.11b: Enhancements to 802.11 to support 5.5 and 11 Mbit/s (1999)
*IEEE 802.11c: Bridge operation procedures; included in the IEEE 802.1D standard (2001)
*IEEE 802.11d: International (country-to-country) roaming extensions (2001)
*IEEE 802.11e: Enhancements: QoS, including packet bursting (2005)
*IEEE 802.11F: Inter-Access Point Protocol (2003) Withdrawn February 2006
*IEEE 802.11g: 54 Mbit/s, 2.4 GHz standard (backwards compatible with b) (2003)
*IEEE 802.11h: Spectrum Managed 802.11a (5 GHz) for European compatibility (2004)
*IEEE 802.11i: Enhanced security (2004)
*IEEE 802.11j: Extensions for Japan (2004)
* IEEE 802.11-2007: A new release of the standard that includes amendments a, b, d, e, g, h, i and j. (July 2007)
*IEEE 802.11k: Radio resource measurement enhancements (2008)
*IEEE 802.11n: Higher throughput improvements using MIMO (multiple input, multiple output antennas) (September 2009)
*IEEE 802.11p: WAVEWireless Access for the Vehicular Environment (such as ambulances and passenger cars) (July 2010)
*IEEE 802.11r: Fast BSS transition (FT) (2008)
*IEEE 802.11s: Mesh Networking, Extended Service Set (ESS) (July 2011)
* IEEE 802.11T: Wireless Performance Prediction (WPP)test methods and metrics Recommendation cancelled
*IEEE 802.11u: Improvements related to HotSpots and 3rd party authorization of clients, e.g. cellular network offload (February 2011)
*IEEE 802.11v: Wireless network management (February 2011)
*IEEE 802.11w: Protected Management Frames (September 2009)
*IEEE 802.11y: 36503700 MHz Operation in the U.S. (2008)
*IEEE 802.11z: Extensions to Direct Link Setup (DLS) (September 2010)
* IEEE 802.11-2012: A new release of the standard that includes amendments k, n, p, r, s, u, v, w, y and z (March 2012)
*IEEE 802.11aa: Robust streaming of Audio Video Transport Streams (June 2012)
*IEEE 802.11ac: Very High Throughput <6 GHz; potential improvements over 802.11n: better modulation scheme (expected ~10% throughput increase), wider channels (estimate in future time 80 to 160 MHz), multi user MIMO; (December 2013)
*IEEE 802.11ad: Very High Throughput 60 GHz (December 2012) - see WiGig
*IEEE 802.11ae: Prioritization of Management Frames (March 2012)
*IEEE 802.11af: TV Whitespace (February 2014)

===In process===
*IEEE 802.11mc: Roll-up of 802.11-2012 + aa, ac, ad, ae & af to be published as 802.11-2015 (~ December 2015)
*IEEE 802.11ah: Sub 1 GHz sensor network, smart metering. (~ March 2016)
*IEEE 802.11ai: Fast Initial Link Setup (~ November 2015)
*IEEE 802.11aj: China Millimeter Wave (~ June 2016)
*IEEE 802.11ak: General Links (~ May 2016)
*IEEE 802.11aq: Pre-association Discovery (~ July 2016)
*IEEE 802.11ax: High Efficiency WLAN (~ May 2018)

802.11F and 802.11T are recommended practices rather than standards, and are capitalized as such.

802.11m is used for standard maintenance. 802.11ma was completed for 802.11-2007, 802.11mb was completed for 802.11-2012 and 802.11mc is working towards publishing 802.11-2015.

===Standard vs. amendment===
Both the terms "standard" and "amendment" are used when referring to the different variants of IEEE standards.

As far as the IEEE Standards Association is concerned, there is only one current standard; it is denoted by IEEE 802.11 followed by the date that it was published. IEEE 802.11-2012 is the only version currently in publication. The standard is updated by means of amendments. Amendments are created by task groups (TG). Both the task group and their finished document are denoted by 802.11 followed by a non-capitalized letter. For example IEEE 802.11a and IEEE 802.11b. Updating 802.11 is the responsibility of task group m. In order to create a new version, TGm combines the previous version of the standard and all published amendments. TGm also provides clarification and interpretation to industry on published documents. New versions of the IEEE 802.11 were published in 1999, 2007 and 2012. The next is expected in 2015. http://grouper.ieee.org/groups/802/11/Reports/802.11_Timelines.htm 

==Nomenclature==
Various terms in 802.11 are used to specify aspects of wireless local-area networking operation, and may be unfamiliar to some readers.

For example, Time Unit (usually abbreviated TU) is used to indicate a unit of time equal to 1024 microseconds. Numerous time constants are defined in terms of TU (rather than the nearly equal millisecond).

Also the term "Portal" is used to describe an entity that is similar to an 802.1H bridge. A Portal provides access to the WLAN by non-802.11 LAN STAs.

==Community networks==
With the proliferation of cable modems and DSL, there is an ever-increasing market of people who wish to establish small networks in their homes to share their broadband Internet connection.

Many hotspot or free networks frequently allow anyone within range, including passersby outside, to connect to the Internet. There are also efforts by volunteer groups to establish wireless community networks to provide free wireless connectivity to the public.

==Security==
In 2001, a group from the University of California, Berkeley presented a paper describing weaknesses in the 802.11 Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) security mechanism defined in the original standard; they were followed by Fluhrer, Mantin, and Shamir's paper titled "Weaknesses in the Key Scheduling Algorithm of RC4". Not long after, Adam Stubblefield and AT&T publicly announced the first verification of the attack. In the attack, they were able to intercept transmissions and gain unauthorized access to wireless networks.

The IEEE set up a dedicated task group to create a replacement security solution, 802.11i (previously this work was handled as part of a broader 802.11e effort to enhance the MAC layer). The Wi-Fi Alliance announced an interim specification called Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA) based on a subset of the then current IEEE 802.11i draft. These started to appear in products in mid-2003. IEEE 802.11i (also known as WPA2) itself was ratified in June 2004, and uses the Advanced Encryption Standard AES, instead of RC4, which was used in WEP. The modern recommended encryption for the home/consumer space is WPA2 (AES Pre-Shared Key) and for the Enterprise space is WPA2 along with a RADIUS authentication server (or another type of authentication server) and a strong authentication method such as EAP-TLS.

In January 2005, the IEEE set up yet another task group "w" to protect management and broadcast frames, which previously were sent unsecured. Its standard was published in 2009. 

In December 2011, a security flaw was revealed that affects some wireless routers with a specific implementation of the optional Wi-Fi Protected Setup (WPS) feature. While WPS is not a part of 802.11, the flaw allows a remote attacker to recover the WPS PIN and, with it, the router's 802.11i password in a few hours. http://sviehb.files.wordpress.com/2011/12/viehboeck_wps.pdf http://www.kb.cert.org/vuls/id/723755 US CERT Vulnerability Note VU#723755 

==Non-standard 802.11 extensions and equipment==
Many companies implement wireless networking equipment with non-IEEE standard 802.11 extensions either by implementing proprietary or draft features. These changes may lead to incompatibilities between these extensions.

==See also==
*Bluetooth, another wireless protocol primarily designed for shorter-range applications.
*Comparison of wireless data standards
*OFDM system comparison table
*Ultra-wideband
*Wi-Fi Alliance
*Wi-Fi operating system support
*Wibree
*Wireless Gigabit Alliance, also known as WiGig
*Fujitsu Ltd. v. Netgear Inc.
*Wireless USB, another wireless protocol primarily designed for shorter-range applications.

==References==

* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* IEEE 802.11 working group
* Official timelines of 802.11 standards from IEEE

*



[[Irn-Bru]]

Irn-Bru is a Scottish carbonated soft drink, often described as "Scotland's other national drink" (after Scotch whisky). It is produced in Westfield, Cumbernauld, North Lanarkshire, by A.G. Barr of Glasgow, since moving out of their Parkhead factory in the mid-1990s, and at a second manufacturing site in Mansfield. In addition to being sold throughout the United Kingdom, Barr's Irn-Bru is available throughout the world and can usually be purchased where there is a significant community of people from Scotland. Innovative and sometimes controversial marketing campaigns have kept it as the number one selling soft drink in Scotland, where it competes directly with global brands such as Coca-Cola and Pepsi.

==Overview==
Irn-Bru is known for its bright orange colour. As of 1999 it contained 0.002% of ammonium ferric citrate, sugar, 32 flavouring agents including caffeine and quinine (but not in Australia), and two controversial colourings (Sunset Yellow FCF and Ponceau 4R). On 27 January 2010, A.G. Barr agreed to a Food Standards Agency voluntary ban on these two colourings although no date has been set for their replacement. 

Irn-Bru was first produced in 1901, in the town of Falkirk, under the name Iron Brew. History A.G. Barr Plc (retrieved 21 November 2012). In 1946, a change in laws required that the word brew be removed from the name, as the drink is not brewed. The chairman of the company came up with the idea of changing the spelling of both halves of the name, giving the Irn-Bru brand. 1980 saw the introduction of Low Calorie Irn-Bru: this was re-launched in 1991 as Diet Irn-Bru and again in 2011 as Irn-Bru Sugar Free. The Irn-Bru 32 energy drink variant was launched in 2006.

It has long been the most popular soft drink in Scotland, with Coca-Cola second, but recent competition between the two brands has brought their sales to roughly equal levels. It is also the third best selling soft drink in the UK, after Coca-Cola and Pepsi, outselling high-profile brands such as Fanta, Dr Pepper, Sprite and 7-Up. This success in defending its home market (a feat claimed only by Irn-Bru, Thums Up and Inca Kola) led to ongoing speculation that Coca-Cola, PepsiCo, Inc. or its UK brand franchisee Britvic would attempt to buy A.G. Barr. In November 2012 AG Barr and Britvic announced a merger proposal, in July 2013 the merger collapsed when terms could not be agreed. 

Irn-Bru's advertising slogans used to be 'Scotland's other National Drink', referring to whisky, and 'Made in Scotland from girders', a reference to the rusty colour of the drink; though the closest one can come to substantiating this claim is the 0.002% ammonium ferric citrate listed in the ingredients.

A limited edition Irn-Bru was released in Autumn 2011. Packaged with a black and orange design, and with the signature man icon with an added image of a fire, Fiery Irn-Bru, had a warm, tingly feeling in the mouth once drunk. The after taste to it is similar to ginger but still has the Irn-Bru flavour.

Irn-Bru is also sold in reusable 750ml glass bottles which, like other Barr's drinks, may be returned to the manufacturer in exchange for the 30 pence deposit paid. This scheme is widely available in shops across Scotland.

==Packaging==
Irn-Bru and other Barr brands including Pineappleade, Cream Soda, Tizer, Red Kola, Barr Cola, and Limeade are still available in 750 ml reusable glass bottles. The empty bottles can be returned to the manufacturer via any retailer which sells them, and can usually be exchanged for the deposit (30 pence deposit ).

Irn-Bru
Two litre bottle of Diet Irn-Bru
500ml Limited Edition Can

Irn-Bru and Diet Irn-Bru are available in the following sizes:
* 150 ml can
* 250 ml plastic bottle
* 330 ml can
* 330 ml glass bottle 
* 500 ml can
* 500 ml plastic bottle
* 600 ml plastic bottle (Russia)
* 1 litre plastic bottle
* 1.25 litre bottle (Australia, New Zealand, Russia, Scotland)
* 2 litre plastic bottle
* 2.25 litre plastic bottle (Russia)
* 2.5 litre bottle (Scotland "Big Bru")
* 3 litre plastic bottle
* 355 ml glass bottle (in Canada)
* 750 ml glass bottle
* 5 litre Syrup containers.

In May 2007, Irn-Bru re-designed its bottles and cans.

==Marketing==
A Leeds taxi advertising Irn-Bru outside the University of Leeds

=== Advertising campaigns ===
An early (and long running) advertising campaign was "The Adventures of Ba-Bru and Sandy" comic. A neon sign featuring Ba-Bru stood outside Glasgow Central Station for many years, and was only removed in the late 1980s.

Barr has a long-established gimmick associating Irn-Bru with Scottishness, stemming from the claim of it being Scotland's most popular soft drink. A tagline, "Made in Scotland from girders", was used for several years from the 1980s, usually featuring Irn-Bru drinkers becoming unusually strong, durable, or magnetic.

An advertising campaign launched in 2000 featured eccentric characters and situations. One involved a grandfather (played by actor Robert Wilson) who removed his false teeth to spoil his grandson's interest in his can of Irn-Bru. A further TV advertisement featured a senior citizen in a motorised wheelchair robbing a local shopping market of a supply of Irn-Bru. Further advertising campaigns for Irn-Bru appeared in conjunction with the release of Irn-Bru 32 in 2006. This campaign consisted of a parody commercial of a popular Christmas Cartoon, The Snowman, and was effective in interesting American audiences in the Irn-Bru brand. 

A 2009 advertisement for the product features a group of high school students performing a musical number, with the refrain "It's fizzy, it's ginger, it's phenomenal!" It is a parody of High School Musical, and stars Jack Lowden. 

In response to the Coca Cola 'Share a Coke' campaign, Barr decided to produce thousands of limited edition 750ml bottles of Irn-Bru with the names 'Fanny', 'Senga', 'Rab' and 'Tam' on the label, mimicking that by Coca Cola. The use of the name 'Fanny' ties in with one of Irn-Brus controversial marketing advertisements. 

===Controversy===
One of the most controversial Irn-Bru television adverts evoked 1950s entertainment. A mother plays the piano, while the father and two children deliver a song which ends with the mother singing: "...even though I used to be a man". This advertisement was broadcast in 2000, but when it was repeated in 2003, it led to seventeen complaints Ofcom response to complaints about Leith Agency advert for Irn-Bru, July 2004. about it being offensive to transgender people. Issue A14 of the Ofcom Advertising Complaints bulletin reports that the children's response to their mother's claim was not offensive. The advertisement was meant to be a joke about changing points of view over time. However, the scene involving the mother shaving at the end of the advertisement was deemed to be potentially offensive to transgender people, and so it was taken off the air.

In 2003, an Irn-Bru commercial which showed a midwife trying to entice a baby from its mother's womb during a difficult delivery sparked a complaint from one viewer. Some saw it as upsetting to women who had suffered miscarriages. 

One billboard featured a young woman in a bikini along with the slogan "I never knew four-and-a-half inches could give so much pleasure". Another featured a picture of a cow with the slogan "When I'm a burger, I want to be washed down with Irn-Bru". This billboard resulted in over 700 complaints but was cleared by advertisement watchdogs. Statistics: 1998 Complaints Resolved (Public and industry) A billboard which featured a depressed goth and the slogan 'Cheer up Goth. Have an Irn Bru.' was also criticised for inciting bullying. 

==Brand portfolio==

 Name Launched 
 Irn-Bru 1901 
 Irn-Bru Sugar Free formerly Diet Irn-Bru (19912011) 1991 
 Irn-Bru XS 1995 
 Irn-Bru 32 2006 
 Fiery Irn-Bru 2011 

===Irn-Bru and others===
It can be used as a mixer with alcoholic beveragesmainly vodka and whisky. Indeed, the alcopop WKD (produced by Beverage Brands) was launched as an alcoholic equivalent of Irn-Bru. Barr retaliated by launching a drink combining Irn-Bru and Bell's whisky, though this proved to be unpopular and was discontinued. A later attempt came in the form of an official Irn-Bru flavour in the Red Square line-up of vodka-based drinks; this too has been discontinued. There is an official Irn-Bru WKD flavour.

===Museums===
In the Museum of Scotland, on Chambers Street in Edinburgh, there is a range of exhibits selected by celebritiesSir Sean Connery chose a crate of Irn-Bru.

===Bands and Irn-Bru===
Scottish rock band The Fratellis featured a play on Irn-Bru's logo as one of their T shirt designs in their 2008 tour. The band also brought Irn-Bru with them to drink during their performances.

Elvis Costello references Irn-Bru in "The St. Stephen's Day Murders," referring to a mixture of Tia Maria and "that drink made from girders".

Scottish indiepop band The Orchids reference Irn-Bru in their first single, "I've Got A Habit."

Scottish Folk-n-Roll band Scocha has a song dedicated to Irn-Bru on their album "ScattyBoo". The song is called "Irn Bru"

==Exports and foreign markets==
Irn-Bru is manufactured in five factories in Russia, and manufactured under licence in Canada, the United States, and since May 2008 in Norway. Bru and other Barr products are exported to Spain, Netherlands, Germany, Gibraltar, Greece, and Cyprus, as well as parts of Africa and Asia. It is available in Ireland, increasingly being stocked in BWG and ADM Londis supplied stores, as well as in supermarkets owned by Dunnes Stores and Tesco Ireland. It is also available in Malta, Belgium and, as of 2005, in Poland. It is now sold in Iceland, as of 2011. A similarly named product, using the Iron Brew spelling but bearing little resemblance to Irn-Bru in flavour, colour or packaging, is produced by Coca-Cola in South Africa.

===Australia===
In Australia, Irn-Bru was manufactured and distributed under licence by Occasio Australia Pty Ltd until 2009. It was available in 500ml and 1.25l varieties in both regular and diet. The drink enjoyed growing success in the country, with its first advertising campaign launched in Queensland in September 2007. It was initially available in major chains such as Coles and Woolworths, Caltex service stations and in many independent grocers and convenience stores, however, it was then delisted at Coles supermarkets. Due to manufacturing and bottling issues, Occasio ceased local production in late 2009. British Provender Pty Ltd are now importing Irn-Bru directly from the UK, with stocks now seen on IGA and Coles shelves throughout Australia as of October 2010. Although it is imported from the UK it does not contain caffeine or quinine, so the taste is different from that sold in the UK. Imported cans of the original Scottish-made formula can be found in some import shops for around A$30 each.

===Canada===
Irn-Bru sold in Canada contained no caffeine until recently. In March 2010, Health Canada repealed the ban on caffeine on clear coloured soft drinks and now bottles of Irn-Bru have the label 'Now Contains caffeine' on the packaging. 

The now-defunct McKinley/McInlay soft-drink company in Cape Breton, Nova Scotia, Canada, for many years offered its own non-licensed beverage called Iron Brew. It was a brown carbonated soft-drink with a fruity cola taste. After the company stopped operations around 1990, PepsiCo continued to sell the drink locally as 'Cape Breton's Irn Bru'. The packaging consisted of plainly labelled plastic bottles (black text on a featureless white label) and a disclaimer "Not a source of Iron".

The standard Irn-Bru distributed in Canada also contains the "Not a source of iron" disclaimer on the label.
The UK version of the drink (with caffeine) is commonly imported by speciality retailers, particularly in areas with large British populations. 

===Hong Kong===

Imported Irn-Bru can be found in selected Wellcome supermarkets, in and around areas where the expatriate population is significant such as the Sheung Wan and Central districts.

===Middle East===
A.G. Barr has launched its Irn-Bru product throughout the Middle East

===Norway===
Irn-Bru entered the Norwegian market in May 2008. They had to withdraw from the market again in 2009 as a result of problems with production agreements and lack of funding for proper marketing efforts, and Irn-Bru can not be bought in Norway as of February 2010.

They were believed to be sponsoring the Adeccoligaclub Mjndalen IF in 2009. This later turned out to be fraud carried out by a third party company, and Mjndalen IF never received any sponsorship from Irn-Bru, even though the team played the 2009 season with Irn-Bru marketing on their shirts. 

===Denmark===
Irn-Bru started being sold at 7-Eleven. It has often appeared in the Danish supermarket 'Netto' and 'Rema 1000'. Today only a few 7-Elevens in Denmark continue distributing Irn-Bru.

===United States===
Irn-Bru and Diet Irn-Bru have been formulated since 2002 by A.G. Barr plc to meet the regulations for food colouring of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Ponceau 4R, used in the UK formulation, is prohibited by the FDA. Barr uses alternative food and drink colourants manufactured by a U.S. company approved by the FDA. The product labelling also meets U.S. labelling standards on nutritional information and bar code. Compliant Irn-Bru is solely imported by Great Scot International in Charlotte, North Carolina, who supply distributors and retailers throughout the U.S. It is only supplied in 500 ml.

==See also==

* Iron Brew  a similar South African soft drink
* List of brand name soft drinks products
* List of soft drink flavors
* List of soft drink producers
* List of soft drinks by country

==References==

==Further reading==
* Davidson, Alan. Oxford Companion to Food (1999), "Irn-Bru", p. 407.

==External links==

*Official Irn-Bru web site
*A.G. Barr corporate site for Irn Bru products
*Irn-Bru in the US web site
*Irn-Bru at everything2
*OFCOM A14 Advertising Report  Page 5 contains details of complaints regarding an Irn-Bru advert
*Irn-Bru gallery
*Irn-Bru 32 promotional site
*Diet Irn-Bru promotional site



[[Internet Standard]]

In computer network engineering, an Internet Standard (abbreviated as "STD") is a normative specification of a technology or methodology applicable to the Internet. Internet Standards are created and published by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).

==Overview==
An Internet Standard is a special Request for Comments (RFC) or set of RFCs. An RFC that is to become a Standard or part of a Standard begins as an Internet Draft, and is later (usually after several revisions) accepted and published by the RFC Editor as an RFC and labeled a Proposed Standard. Later, an RFC can be labeled Internet Standard. Collectively, these stages are known as the Standards Track, and are defined in RFC 2026 and RFC 6410. The label Historic is applied to deprecated Standards Track documents or obsolete RFCs that were published before the Standards Track was established.

Only the IETF, represented by the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG), can approve Standards Track RFCs. The definitive list of Internet Standards is maintained in Internet Standards document STD 1: Internet Official Protocol Standards. 

 

==Standardization process==
Becoming a standard is a two step process within the IETF called Proposed Standards and Internet Standards. If an RFC is part of a proposal that is on the Standard Track, then at the first stage, the standard is proposed and subsequently organizations decide whether to implement this Proposed Standard. After the criteria in RFC 6410 is met (two separate implementations, widespread use, no errata etc.), the RFC can advance to Internet Standard.

The Internet Standards Process is defined in several "Best Current Practice" documents, notably BCP 9 ( RFC 2026 and RFC 6410). There were previously three standard maturity levels Proposed Standard, Draft Standard and Standard. RFC 6410 reduced this to two maturity levels.

===Proposed Standard===
A Proposed Standard (PS) is generally stable, has resolved known design choices, is believed to be well-understood, has received significant community review, and appears to enjoy enough community interest to be considered valuable. However, further experience might result in a change or even retraction of the specification before it advances. Usually, neither implementation nor operational experience is required.

===Draft Standard===
In October 2011 RFC 6410 in essence merged this second and the third Internet Standard maturity level for future Internet Standards. Existing older Draft Standards retain that classification. The IESG can reclassify an old Draft Standard as Proposed Standard after two years (October 2013).

===Internet Standard===
An Internet Standard is characterized by a high degree of technical maturity and by a generally held belief that the specified protocol or service provides significant benefit to the Internet community. Generally Internet Standards cover interoperability of systems on the Internet through defining protocols, message formats, schemas, and languages. The most fundamental of the Internet Standards are the ones defining the Internet Protocol.

An Internet Standard ensures that hardware and software produced by different vendors can work together. Having a standard makes it much easier to develop software and hardware that link different networks because software and hardware can be developed one layer at a time. Normally, the standards used in data communication are called protocols.

All Internet Standards are given a number in the STD series - The first document in this series, STD 1, describes the remaining documents in the series, and has a list of Proposed Standards.

Each RFC is static; if the document is changed, it is submitted again and assigned a new RFC number. If an RFC becomes an Internet Standard (STD), it is assigned an STD number but retains its RFC number. When an Internet Standard is updated, its number stays the same and it simply refers to a different RFC or set of RFCs. A given Internet Standard, STD n, may be RFCs x and y at a given time, but later the same standard may be updated to be RFC z instead. For example, in 2007 RFC 3700 was an Internet StandardSTD 1and in May 2008 it was replaced with RFC 5000, so RFC 3700 changed to Historic status, and STD 1 is RFC 5000. When STD 1 is updated again, it will simply refer to a newer RFC, but it will still be STD 1. Note that not all RFCs are standards-track documents, but all Internet Standards and other standards-track documents are RFCs.

The list of Internet standards in RFC 5000 ends with STD 68 (RFC 5234, ABNF) published in 2008. It does not cover STD 69 (a set of five EPP RFCs), 
STD 70 (RFC 5652, CMS) published in 2009, 
STD 71 (RFC 6152, 8BITMIME), and STD 72 (RFC 6409, Mail Submission) published in 2011. 

 Standard Type Associated Protocols 
 Email IMAP, POP, X.400, SMTP, CMC, MIME, binhex, uuencode 
 Web http, CGI, html/xml/vrml/sgml 
 Internet Directory X.500, LDAP 
 Application http, FTP, telnet, gopher, wais 
 Videoconferencing H.320, H.323, Mpeg-1, Mpeg-2 

==See also==
*Internet draft
*Request for Comments
*Standardization
*Web standard

==References==

==External links==
*List of Full Standard RFCs
*Internet Architecture Board
*Internet Engineering Steering Group
*Internet Engineering Task Force
*RFC Editor

 

[[ISOC]]

ISOC is an abbreviation which may refer to:

* Information Security Operations Center, is a location where enterprise information systems are monitored, assessed, and defended.
* Internet Society, an international organization that promotes Internet use and access
* Internal Security Operations Command, a unit of the Thai military devoted to national security issues
* In Service Open Challenge, a Walt Disney World lifeguarding competition
* Islamic Society, an Islamic-based group



[[ITU-T]]

The ITU Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T) is one of the three sectors (divisions or units) of the International Telecommunication Union (ITU); it coordinates standards for telecommunications. 

The standardization work of ITU dates back to 1865, with the birth of the International Telegraph Union (ITU). It became a United Nations specialized agency in 1947, and the International Telegraph and Telephone Consultative Committee (CCITT, from ) was created in 1956. It was renamed ITU-T in 1993. 

ITU has been an intergovernmental public-private partnership organization since its inception and now has a membership of 191 countries (Member States) and over 700 public and private sector companies as well as international and regional telecommunication entities, known as Sector Members and Associates, which undertake most of the work of the Sector. 

ITU-T has a permanent secretariat, the Telecommunication Standardization Bureau (TSB), based at the ITU HQ in Geneva, Switzerland. The elected Director of the Bureau is Malcolm Johnson of the UK. Johnson was elected by the ITU Membership to the directorship for a 4-year term in November 2006 and was reelected for a second term starting January 2011.

== Primary function ==
The ITU-T mission is to ensure the efficient and timely production of standards covering all fields of telecommunications on a worldwide basis, as well as defining tariff and accounting principles for international telecommunication services. ITU-T and TSB General Information 

The international standards that are produced by the ITU-T are referred to as "Recommendations" (with the word ordinarily capitalized to distinguish its meaning from the ordinary sense of the word "recommendation"), as they become mandatory only when adopted as part of a national law.

Since the ITU-T is part of the ITU, which is a United Nations specialized agency, its standards carry more formal international weight than those of most other standards development organizations that publish technical specifications of a similar form. apdip.net (p13) 

== History ==
Although the ITU itself dates back to 1865, the formal standardization processes are more recent.

Two consultative committees were created by the ITUs 1925 Paris conference to deal with the complexities of the international telephone services (known as CCIF, as the French acronym) and long-distance telegraphy (CCIT). 

In view of the basic similarity of many of the technical problems faced by the CCIF and CCIT, a decision was taken in 1956 to merge them to become the single International Telegraph and Telephone Consultative Committee (CCITT, in the French acronym). 

In 1992, the Plenipotentiary Conference (the top policy-making conference of ITU) saw a reform of ITU, giving the Union greater flexibility to adapt to an increasingly complex, interactive and competitive environment. It was at this time that CCITT was renamed the Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T), as one of three Sectors of the Union alongside the Radiocommunication Sector (ITU-R) and the Telecommunication Development Sector (ITU-D). 

Historically, the Recommendations of the CCITT were presented to four-yearly plenary assemblies for endorsement, and the full set of Recommendations were published after each plenary assembly. However, the delays in producing texts, and translating them into other working languages, did not suit the fast pace of change in the telecommunications industry. 

== "Real time" standardization ==
The rise of the personal computer industry in the early 1980s created a new common practice among both consumers and businesses of adopting "bleeding edge" communications technology even if it was not yet standardized. Thus, standards organizations had to put forth standards much faster, or find themselves ratifying de facto standards after the fact.

The ITU-T now operates under much more streamlined processes. The time between an initial proposal of a draft document by a member company and the final approval of a full-status ITU-T Recommendation can now be as short as a few months (or less in some cases). This makes the standardization approval process in the ITU-T much more responsive to the needs of rapid technology development than in the ITU's historical past. New and updated Recommendations are published on an almost daily basis, and much of the library of over 3,270 Recommendations is now free of charge online. ITU-T Standards now freely available online Telecom Standards Newsletter, September 1 2007, Free access for all to ITU-T standards Free access for all to ITU-T standards (Specifications jointly maintained by the ITU-T and ISO/IEC are not free. ITU-T Recommendations overview )

ITU-T has moreover tried to facilitate cooperation between the various forums and standard-developing organizations (SDOs). This collaboration is necessary to avoid duplication of work and the consequent risk of conflicting standards in the market place. 

In the work of standardization, ITU-T cooperates with other SDOs, e.g., the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF). apdip.net (s10) 

=== Development of Recommendations ===
Most of the work of ITU-T is carried out by its Sector Members and Associates, while the Telecommunication Standardization Bureau (TSB) is the executive arm of ITU-T and coordinator for a number of workshops and seminars to progress existing work areas and explore new ones. The events cover a wide array of topics in the field of information and communication technologies (ICT) and attract high-ranking experts as speakers, and attendees from engineers to high-level management from all industry sectors. apdip.net, (s13-16), General information on TSB 

The technical work, the development of Recommendations, of ITU-T is managed by Study Groups (SGs). The people involved in these SGs are experts in telecommunications from all over the world. There are currently 13 SGs. Study groups meet face to face according to a calendar issued by the TSB. apdip.net, (s16), ITU-T Study Groups (Study Period 2009-2012) SGs are augmented by Focus Groups (FGs), an instrument created by ITU-T, providing a way to quickly react to ICT standardization needs and allowing great flexibility in terms of participation and working methods. The key difference between SGs and FGs is that the latter have greater freedom to organize and finance themselves, and to involve non-members in their work. Focus Groups can be created very quickly, are usually short-lived and can choose their own working methods, leadership, financing, and types of deliverables. itu.int, (s23-24), ITU-T Focus Groups Recent examples include work on Next Generation Networking, Internet Protocol Television (IPTV) and digital identity management. ITU Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T) - Focus Groups 

=== Approval of Recommendations ===

The Alternative Approval Process (AAP) is a fast-track approval procedure that was developed to allow standards to be brought to market in the timeframe that industry now demands.

This dramatic overhaul of standards-making by streamlining approval procedures was implemented in 2001 and is estimated to have cut the time involved in this critical aspect of the standardization process by 80 to 90 per cent. This means that an average standard which took around four years to approve and publish until the mid nineties, and two years until 1997, can now be approved in an average of two months, or as little as five weeks.

Besides streamlining the underlying procedures involved in the approval process, an important contributory factor to the use of AAP is electronic document handling. Once the approval process has begun the rest of the process can be completed electronically, in the vast majority of cases, with no further physical meetings.

The introduction of AAP also formalizes public/private partnership in the approval process by providing equal opportunities for both Sector Members and Member States in the approval of technical standards.

Once the text of a draft Recommendation prepared by SG experts is considered mature, it is submitted for review to an SG meeting. If agreed by the meeting it is given Consent. This means that the SG has given its consent that the text is sufficiently mature to initiate a final review process leading to approval of the draft Recommendation.

After this Consent has been achieved, TSB announces the start of the AAP procedure by posting the draft text to the ITU-T web site and calling for comments. This gives the opportunity for all members to review the text. This phase, called Last Call, is a four-week period in which comments can be submitted by Member States and Sector Members.

If no comments other than editorial corrections are received, the Recommendation is considered approved since no issues were identified that might need any further work. However, if there are any comments, the SG chairman, in consultation with TSB, sets up a comment resolution process by the concerned experts. The revised text is then posted on the web for an Additional Review period of three weeks.

Similar to the Last Call phase, in Additional Review the Recommendation is considered as approved if no comments are received. If comments are received, it is apparent that there are some issues that still need more work, and the draft text and all comments are sent to the next Study Group meeting for further discussion and possible approval. itu.int, (s28-29), ITU-T e-FLASH - Issue No. 22 

Those Recommendations considered as having policy or regulatory implications are approved through what is known as the Traditional Approval Process (TAP), which allows a longer period for reflection and commenting by Member States. TAP Recommendations are also translated into the six working languages of ITU (Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish). itu.int, (s27), ITU-T e-FLASH - Issue No. 22 

== Series and Recommendations ==
ITU-T Recommendations are the names given to telecommunications and computer protocol specification documents published by ITU-T.

Many of the Recommendations that define OSI are also ISO standards.

Standards for Internet protocols are typically developed in the IETF, and standards for mobile telephone systems are developed in ETSI and other forums.

=== Series of ITU Recommendations ===
ITU-T issues Recommendations that have names like X.500, where X is the series and 500 is an identifying number. When a Recommendation is updated, it will (mostly) keep the same number, so the year of issue may be necessary to identify a specific version of a Recommendation. The term "X.500" is used both to refer to the specific X.500 Recommendation, and to the entire family of Recommendations named X.5xx, where the specific X.500 Recommendation forms the introduction and overview to the set.

=== International Telecommunication Regulations (ITRs) ===
In addition to the ITU-T Recommendations, which have non-mandatory status until they are adopted in national laws, ITU-T is also the custodian of a binding international treaty, the International Telecommunication Regulations. The ITRs go back to the earliest days of the ITU when there were two separate treaties, dealing with telegraph and telephone. The ITRs were adopted, as a single treaty, at the World Administrative Telegraphy and Telephone Conference held in Melbourne, 1988 (WATTC-88). itu.int 

In line with the current Constitution and Convention of ITU, the ITRs can be amended through a World Conference on International Telecommunications (WCIT), and the next is scheduled for 2012. Before then a process of review of the ITRs, which began in 1998, will continue. ITU-T - Review of the International Telecommunication Regulations (ITRs) 

The ITRs comprise ten articles which deal, inter alia, with the definition of international telecommunication services, cooperation between countries and national administrations, safety of life and priority of telecommunications and charging and accounting principles. The adoption of the ITRs in 1988 is often taken as the start of the wider liberalization process in international telecommunications, though a few countries, including United States and United Kingdom, had made steps to liberalize their markets before 1988. itu.int 

At the December, 2012, World Conference on International Telecommunications, "2010 Plenipotentiary Conference Resolution on Preparations for the 2012 World Conference ...", ITU webpage. Retrieved 2012-03-31. ITU secretary-general Hamadoun Tour will convene member-state delegations in Dubai to renegotiate the ITR treaty. "The sprawling document, which governs telephone, television, and radio networks, may be extended to cover the Internet, raising questions about who should control it, and how", assessed one journalist looking forward to the conference earlier that year. Gross, Michael Joseph, "World War 3.0"], Vanity Fair, May 2012. Retrieved 2012-03-31. 

=== Key standards published by ITU ===
* ASN.1 (Abstract Syntax Notation One)
* Coding of audio G.711 and G.72x series
* Coding of still images JPEG T.80 and JPEG 2000 T.800 series
* Coding of video coding H.262/MPEG2-Video and H.264/MPEG-4 AVC
* Construction, installation and protection of cables and other elements of outside plant, L-series
* Data communication over the telephone network, V-series
* Fax standards T.2  T.4, T.30, T.37, T.38
* G.hn (Next generation wired home networking over powerlines, phonelines and coaxial cable) 
* H.323 family of standards for multimedia and VoIP
* Interconnection rate harmonization, D-series
* International Emergency Preference Scheme E.106
* IMSI codes used in SIM cards E.212
* ISDN and PSTN/3G videoconferencing systems, H.320 and H.324
* ISDN (Integrated Services Digital Network) Q.931
* Open Systems Interconnection
* Optical Transport Network (OTN) G.709, G.798, G.872
* Passive optical networks (PON) G.983, G.984, G.987
* Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) X.509
* Public telecommunication numbering plan, E.164
* Security framework X.805 X.805 : Security architecture for systems providing end-to-end communications http://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-X.805-200310-I/en 
* Signalling System 7 Q.7xx series
* Standards relating to Quality of Service (QoS)
* Specification and Description Language
* Synchronous Digital Hierarchy (SDH) G.707, G.783, G.803
* Wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM)
* X.25
* (x)DSL (Digital Subscriber Line) series of standards for broadband telecoms

== Hot topics ==
* ITU-T is committed to bridging the standardization gap  disparities in the ability of developing countries, relative to developed ones, to access, implement, contribute to and influence international ICT standards. itu.int 
* The ICT Security Standards Roadmap itu.int has been developed to assist in the development of security standards by bringing together information about existing standards and current standards work in key standards development organizations.
* The Next Generation Networks (NGN) concept takes into consideration new realities in the telecommunication industry characterized by factors such as; the need to converge and optimize the operating networks and the extraordinary expansion of digital traffic (i.e., increasing demand for new multimedia services, mobility, etc.).
* 

== See also ==
* Global Standards Collaboration
* International Telecommunication Union
* ITU-R recommendations
* ITU-T recommendations
* World Summit on the Information Society

== References ==

== External links ==
* International Telecommunication Union (ITU) (official site)
* ITU Standardization Sector (ITU-T)
* ITU Radiocommunication Sector (ITU-R)
* ITU Development Sector (ITU-D)
* ITU-T Recommendations

Standards Sector



[[Indian]]

Indian or Indians may refer to:

==People==

=== South Asia ===
* Something of or from the nation of India
* Indian people, people of Indian ethnicity, or people who are citizens of India
* A person belonging to one of the South Asian ethnic groups
* Non-resident Indian and person of Indian origin, a citizen of India who has temporarily emigrated to another country
*

=== The Americas ===
* Indigenous peoples of the Americas, the pre-Columbian inhabitants of North and South America and their descendants
** First Nations, the various Aboriginal peoples in Canada who are neither Inuit nor Mtis
** Native Americans in the United States, the indigenous peoples in the United States
** Indigenous peoples in South America, peoples living in South America in the pre-Columbian era and their descendents
* West Indians, people from the Caribbean region and the Lucayan Archipelago
* Mardi Gras Indians, African-American Carnival revelers in New Orleans, Louisiana, whose suits are influenced by Native American ceremonial apparel

== Languages ==
* Languages of India, including Indo-Aryan languages and Dravidian languages
* Indigenous languages of the Americas, spoken by indigenous peoples from Alaska and Greenland to the southern tip of South America

== Arts ==

=== Film and television ===
* Indian (1996 film), a Tamil film
* Indian (2001 film), a Hindi film
* Indian soap opera, soap operas written, produced, and filmed in India

=== Music ===
* Indians (artist), moniker of Danish singer Sren Lkke Juul accompanied by some musicians also collectively known as Indians
* "Indian" (song), by Sturm und Drang
* "Indians" (song), by Anthrax 
* Indian (soundtrack), an album from the 1996 film
* Indian (band), 2000s sludge/doom metal band

=== Theatre ===
* Indians (play), a 1968 play by Arthur Kopit

== Places ==
* Indian, West Virginia, an unincorporated community in Kanawha County
* Indian Creek (disambiguation)
* Indian River (disambiguation), several rivers and communities
* Indian Run, a stream in the U.S. state of Pennsylvania
* The Indians, British Virgin Islands islets group

== Sports ==
* Cleveland Indians, a professional baseball team based in Cleveland, Ohio
* Indianapolis Indians, a minor league baseball team based in Indianapolis, Indiana
* Indios de Mayagez, a baseball team in the Puerto Rican Professional Baseball League
* Mumbai Indians, a franchise cricket team representing the city of Mumbai in the Indian Premier League
* Frlunda HC or Frlunda Indians, a Swedish professional ice hockey club based in Gothenburg
* Springfield Indians, a minor professional ice hockey franchise, originally based in West Springfield, Massachusetts

== Other uses ==
* Indian (airline), a now defunct state-owned airline of India
* Indian (card game), a simple card game that involves strategy
* Indian (motorcycle), an American brand of motorcycles manufactured from 1901 to 1953
* Indian cuisine, a wide variety of regional cuisines native to India
* Indian Head cent, a coin produced by the United States Mint from 1859 to 1909
*The INDIAN, an web portal for the New Zealand Indian community
* Indus (constellation), a constellation in the southern sky

== See also ==
* Hindustani (disambiguation)
* India (disambiguation)
* Indica (disambiguation)
* Indicus (disambiguation)
* Indicum (disambiguation)



[[Internalization]]

Internalization (or internalisation) has different definitions depending on the field that the term is used in. Internalization is the opposite of externalization. Generally, internalization is the process of consolidating and embedding one's own beliefs, attitudes, and values when it comes to moral behavior. The accomplishment of this may involve the deliberate use of psychoanalytical or behavioral methods.

Internalization of norms might take place following religious conversion, or in the process of the more general moral conversion of the person. Internalization is also often associated with learning (for example, learning ideas or skills) and making use of what has been learned from then on. The notion of internalization therefore also finds currency in applications in education, learning, and training, and in business and management thinking.

== Psychology and sociology ==

In sciences such as psychology and sociology, internalization involves the integration of attitudes, values, standards and the opinions of others into one's own identity or sense of self. In psychoanalytic theory, internalization is a process involving the formation of the super ego. Corsini, R. (1999). The Dictionary of Psychology, USA: Taylor & Francis. Many theorists believe that the internalized values of behavior implemented during early socialization are key factors in predicting a child's future moral character. The self-determination theory Deci, E. L. & Ryan, R. M. (1985). Intrinsic Motivation and Self-Determination in Human Behaviour. New York, N.Y: Plenum Press. proposes a motivational continuum from the extrinsic to intrinsic motivation and autonomous self-regulation. Some research suggests a child's moral self starts to develop around age three. Emde, R. N., Biringen, Z., Clyman, R. B. & Oppenheim, D. (1991). The Moral Self of Infancy: Affective Core and Procedural Knowledge. Developmental Review, 11, 251-270. These early years of socialization may be the underpinnings of moral development in later childhood. Proponents of this theory suggest that children whose view of self is "good and moral" tend to have a developmental trajectory toward pro-social behavior and few signs of anti-social behavior.

In one child developmental study, Kochanska, G., Koenig, J., Barry, R., Kim, S. & Yoon, J. (2010). Children's Conscience During Toddler and Preschool Years, Moral Self, and a Competent, Adaptive Developmental Trajectory. Developmental Psychology. Vol. 46, No. 5, 1320-1332. researchers examined two key dimensions of early conscience  internalization of rules of conduct and empathic affects to others  as factors that may predict future social, adaptive and competent behavior. Data was collected from a longitudinal study of children, from two parent families, at age 25, 38, 52, 67 and 80 months. Children's internalization of each parent's rules and empathy toward each parent's simulated distress were observed at 25, 38 and 52 months. Parents and teachers rated their adaptive, competent, pro-social behavior and anti-social behavior at 80 months. The researchers found that first, both the history of the child's early internalization of parental rules and the history of his or her empathy predicted the children's competent and adaptive functioning at 80 months, as rated by parents and teachers. Second, children with stronger histories of internalization of parental rules from 25 to 52 months perceived themselves as more moral at 67 months. Third, the children that showed stronger internalization from 25 to 52 months came to see themselves as more moral and "good." These self-perceptions, in turn, predicted the way parents and teachers would rate their competent and adaptive functioning at 80 months.

===Internalization as symptom===

In behavioral psychology, the concept of internalization may also refer to disorders and behaviors in which a patient deals with stressors in manners not externally evident. Such disorders and behaviors include depression, anxiety, bulimia and anorexia. 

== Biology ==
In sciences such as biology, internalization is another term for endocytosis, in which molecules such as proteins are engulfed by the cell membrane and drawn into the cell.

== Economics and management ==
In economics, internalization theory explains the practice of multinational enterprises (MNEs) to execute transactions within their organization rather than relying on an outside market. It must be cheaper for an MNE to internalize the transfer of its unique ownership advantages between countries than to do so through markets. In other words, the alternative to internalization through direct investment is some form of licensing of the firm's know-how to a firm in the target economy.

== Finance ==
In finance, internalization can refer to several concepts. "When you place an order to buy or sell a stock, your broker has choices on where to execute your order. Instead of routing your order to a market or market-makers for execution, your broker may fill the order from the firm's own inventory &ndash; this is called 'internalization.' In this way, your broker's firm may make money on the "spread"  which is the difference between the purchase price and the sale price." SEC.gov For a related issue regarding trade execution, see payment for order flow.

==See also==
* Social influence

==Notes==
 

==References==
*Meissner, W. W. (1981), Internalization in Psychoanalysis, International Universities Press, New York.
*Wallis, K. C. and J. L. Poulton (2001), Internalization: The Origins and Construction of Internal Reality, Open University Press, Buckingham and Philadelphia.
*Oxford Open Learning GCSE Psychology - Module three: lesson nine.



[[Ionic]]

Ionic or Ionian may refer to:

==In ancient Greece==
* Ionian School (philosophy) in ancient Greek philosophy
* Ionia, an ancient region in western Anatolia, in which the Ionian settlers established some colonies.
* Ionian Revolt, a revolt by Greek Ionians against the Persian Empire
* Ionians, a people, one of the three great divisions of the ancient Greek people
* Ionic alphabet
* Ionic Greek, any of several related dialects in the ancient Greek language
* Ionic meter, typically based on the metrical unit 
* Ionic numeral system, a certain numeral system with Greek numerals
* Ionic order, one of the orders of classical architecture

==In arts, entertainment, and media==
* Ionian mode, one of the modes in modal music
*The Ionian Mission (1981), an historical novel by Patrick O'Brian

==In astronomy==
* Ionian - of or relating to Io, a moon of the planet Jupiter

==In business==
* Ionian Technologies, a biotechnology company

==In chemistry==
* Ion, in physics and chemistry, an atom or group of atoms with a net electric charge
** Ionic bond, a type of chemical bond involving ions
** Ionic compound, a chemical compound in which ions are held together in a lattice structure by ionic bonds
** Ionic crystal, a crystal consisting of ions bound together by their electrostatic attraction
** Ionic equation, a chemical equation in which electrolytes are written as dissociated ions
** Ionic liquid, a liquid that essentially contains only ions
** Ionic polarization, polarization caused by relative displacements between ions in ionic crystals
** Ionic potential, the ratio of electric charge to the radius of an ion
** Ionic radius, a measure of the size of an ion in a crystal lattice
** Ionic strength, a function of the concentration of all ions present in a solution
** Ionic transfer, the transfer of ions from one liquid phase to another

==In geography and geology==
* Ionian Islands, seven Greek islands which lie on the eastern coast of the Ionian Sea
* Ionian Sea, an arm of the Mediterranean Sea between Greece and Southern Italy
* Ionian Stage, a proposed stage of the Pleistocene epoch, named after the Ionian Sea

==In shipping==
* RMS Ionic (1883), a steamship ocean liner built for the White Star Line 
* SS Ionic (1902), a steamship ocean liner built for the White Star Line 
* SS Ionic Star (1917), a steamship trading vessel built for the Blue Star Line 

==In typography==
* Ionic No. 5, a typeface

==See also==
*Ionia (disambiguation)
*Ionian School (disambiguation)



[[Indium]]

Indium is a chemical element with symbol In and atomic number 49. This rare, very soft, malleable and easily fusible other heavy metal is chemically similar to gallium and thallium, and shows intermediate properties between these two. Indium was discovered in 1863 and named for the indigo blue line in its spectrum that was the first indication of its existence in zinc ores, as a new and unknown element. The metal was first isolated in the following year. Zinc ores continue to be the primary source of indium, where it is found in compound form. Very rarely the element can be found as grains of native (free) metal, but these are not of commercial importance.

Indium's current primary application is to form transparent electrodes from indium tin oxide (ITO) in liquid crystal displays and touchscreens, and this use largely determines its global mining production. It is widely used in thin-films to form lubricated layers (during World War II it was widely used to coat bearings in high-performance aircraft). It is also used for making particularly low melting point alloys, and is a component in some lead-free solders.

Indium is not known to be used by any organism. In a similar way to aluminium salts, indium(III) ions can be toxic to the kidney when given by injection, but oral indium compounds do not have the chronic toxicity of salts of heavy metals, probably due to poor absorption in basic conditions. Radioactive indium-111 (in very small amounts on a chemical basis) is used in nuclear medicine tests, as a radiotracer to follow the movement of labeled proteins and white blood cells in the body.

==Characteristics==

===Physical===
Indium wetting the glass surface of a test tube
Indium is a very soft, silvery-white, highly ductile, relatively rare other metal with a bright luster. It is so soft (Mohs hardness 1.2) that the metal can be cut with a knife, as can sodium. It also leaves a visible line on paper. Like tin, when it is bent indium emits a high-pitched "cry". Like gallium, indium is able to wet glass. Like both, indium has a low melting point, 156.60 C (313.88 F); higher than its lighter homologue, gallium, but lower than its heavier homologue, thallium, and lower than tin. Only mercury, gallium, and most of the alkali metals have lower melting points. Its boiling point is, however, moderate, being 2072 C (3762 F), which is higher than that of thallium, but lower than that of gallium, showing opposition to the melting points trend. Indium thus has a very large liquid range of around 2000 C. The density of indium, 7.31 gcm3, is also higher than that of gallium, but lower than that of thallium. Below its critical temperature of 3.41 K, indium becomes a superconductor. At standard temperature and pressure, indium crystallizes in the tetragonal crystal system in the space group I4/mmmm (lattice parameters: a = 325 pm, c = 495 pm). 

===Chemical===
Indium is an other metal and chemically, is the intermediate element between its group 13 neighbors gallium and thallium. An indium atom has 49 electrons, having an electronic configuration of &#91;Kr&#93;4d105s25p1. In its compounds, indium most commonly loses its three outermost electrons, becoming indium(III) ions, In3+, but in some cases the pair of 5s-electrons can stay within the atom, indium thus being oxidized only to indium(I), In+. This happens due to the inert pair effect, which occurs because of the stabilization of 5s-orbital due to relativistic effects, which are stronger closer to the bottom of the periodic table. In(III) is the more stable oxidation state. Thallium (indium's heavier homolog) shows an even stronger effect, making oxidation to thallium(I) more likely than to thallium(III), making +1 the more likely oxidation state, while gallium (indium's lighter homolog) commonly shows only the +3 oxidation state. Thus while thallium(III) being a moderately strong oxidizing agent, indium(III) is stable and indium(I) is a powerful reducing agent. 

A number of standard electrode potentials, depending on the reaction under study, are reported for indium:

 0.40 In2+ + e  In+ 
 0.49 In3+ + e  In2+ 
 0.443 In3+ + 2 e  In+ 
 0.3382 In3+ + 3 e  In 
 0.14 In+ + e  In 

Indium does not react with water, but it is oxidized by stronger oxidizing agents, such as halogens or oxalic acid, to give indium(III) compounds. It does not react with boron, silicon or carbon, and the corresponding boride, silicide or carbide are not known. Similarly, reaction between indium and hydrogen has not been observed, but both indium(I) and indium(III) hydrides are known. 

Indium(III) oxide is formed at high temperatures during reaction between indium and oxygen, with blue flame. It is amphoteric, i. e. it can react with both acids and bases. Its reaction with water results in insoluble indium(III) hydroxide, which is also amphoteric, reacting with alkalies to give indates(III) and with acids to give indium(III) salts:

:In(OH)3 + 2 NaOH  2 Na + H2O
:In(OH)3 + 3 HCl  InCl3 + 3 H2O

The hydrolysis of sodium indate(III) gives weak indic acid, HInO2. Out of common indium(III) salts, chloride, sulfate and nitrate are soluble. In water solutions, In3+ and - ions are hydrolyzed to give InOH2+ and HInO2 due to generally amphoteric character of indium(III) ions. Indium(III) compounds are not well-soluble, similarly to thallium(III) compounds; however, indium(III) salts of strong acids, such as chloride, sulfate and nitrate are soluble, hydrolyzing in water solutions. The In3+ ion is colorless in solution because of the absence of unpaired electrons in the d- and f-electron shells. 

Indium(I) compounds are not as common as indium(III) ones; only chloride, bromide, iodide, sulfide and cyclopentadienyl are well-characterized. Indium(I) sulfide is the product of reaction between indium and sulfur or indium and hydrogen sulfide, and can be received at 7001000 C. Indium(I) oxide black powder is received at 850 C during reaction between indium and carbon dioxide or during decomposition of indium(III) oxide at 1200 C. Cyclopentadienylindium(I), which was the first organoindium(I) compound reported, is polymer consisting of zigzag chains of alternating indium atoms and cyclopentadienyl complexes.

Less frequently, indium shows intermediate oxidation state +2, which lies between the common ones, most notably in halides, In2X4 and 2-. Several other compounds are known to combine indium(I) and indium(III), such as InI6(InIIICl6)Cl3, InI5(InIIIBr4)2(InIIIBr6), InIInIIIBr4. 
In organic synthesis it is used for indium mediated allylation.

===Isotopes===

Indium occurs naturally on Earth only in two primordial nuclides, indium-113 and indium-115. Indium-115 makes up 95.7% of all indium but it is radioactive, decaying to tin-115 via beta decay with half-life of 4.41 years, four orders of magnitude longer than the age of the universe and nearly 50,000 times longer than that of natural thorium. This situation is uncommon among stable chemical elements; only indium, tellurium, and rhenium have been shown to have most-abundant isotopes that are radioactive. The less common natural isotope of indium, indium-113, is stable.

Indium has 39 known isotopes, ranging in mass between 97 and 135. Only one of them is stable and one has half-life exceeding 1014 years; these are the only naturally occurring isotopes. The most stable artificial indium isotope is indium-111, which has half-life of approximately 2.8 days. All other isotopes have half-lives shorter than 5 hours. Indium also has 47 meta states, out of which indium-114m1 is the most stable, being more stable than the ground state of any indium isotope (except for the primordial ones).

===Creation and occurrence===

The s-process acting in the range from silver to antimony.
Indium is created via the long-lasting, (up to thousands of years), s-process in low-medium mass stars (which range in mass between 0.6 and 10 masses of Sun). When a silver-109 atom (the isotope of which approximately half of all silver in existence is composed), catches a neutron, it undergoes a beta decay to become cadmium-110. Capturing further neutrons, it becomes cadmium-115, which decays to indium-115 via another beta decay. This explains why the radioactive isotope predominates in abundance compared to the stable one. 

Indium is 61st most abundant element in the Earth's crust at approximately 49 ppb, making indium approximately as abundant as mercury. 
Fewer than 10 indium minerals are known, such as dzhalindite (In(OH)3) and indite (FeIn2S4), but none of these occurs in significant deposits.

Based on content of indium in zinc ore stocks, there is a worldwide reserve of approximately 6,000 tonnes of economically viable indium. However, the Indium Corporation, the largest processor of indium, claims that, on the basis of increasing recovery yields during extraction, recovery from a wider range of base metals (including tin, copper and other polymetallic deposits) and new mining investments, the long-term supply of indium is sustainable, reliable and sufficient to meet increasing future demands. 

This conclusion may be reasonable considering that silver, which is one-third as abundant as indium in the Earth's crust, is currently mined at approximately 18,300 tonnes per year, which is 40 times greater than current indium mining rates.

==History==
In 1863, the German chemists Ferdinand Reich and Hieronymous Theodor Richter were testing ores from the mines around Freiberg, Saxony. They dissolved the minerals pyrite, arsenopyrite, galena and sphalerite in hydrochloric acid and distilled raw zinc chloride. As it was known that ores from that region sometimes contain thallium they searched for the green emission lines with spectroscopy. The green lines were absent but a blue line was present in the spectrum. As no element was known with a bright blue emission they concluded that a new element was present in the minerals. They named the element with the blue spectral line indium, from the indigo color seen in its spectrum. Richter went on to isolate the metal in 1864. At the World Fair 1867 an ingot of 0.5 kg was presented. 

In 1924, indium was found to have a valuable ability to stabilize non-ferrous metals, which was the first significant use for the element. It took until 1936 for the U.S. Bureau of Mines to list indium as a commodity, and even in the early 1950s only very limited applications for indium were known, the most important of which was making light-emitting diodes and coating bearings for aircraft engines during World War II. The start of production of indium-containing semiconductors started in 1952. The development and widespread use of indium-containing nuclear control rods increased demand during the 1970s, and the use of indium tin oxide in liquid crystal displays increased and became the major application by 1992. 

==Production==
world production.svg|thumb|World production trend [http://minerals.usgs.gov/ds/2005/140 U.S. Geological Survey - Historical Statistics for Mineral and Material Commodities in the United States; INDIUM STATISTICS // USGS, November 8, 2012 ]]
The lack of indium mineral deposits and the fact that indium is enriched in sulfidic lead, tin, copper, iron and predominately in zinc deposits, makes zinc production the main source for indium. The indium is leached from slag and dust of zinc production. Further purification is done by electrolysis. The exact process varies with the exact composition of the slag and dust. 

Indium is produced mainly from residues generated during zinc ore processing but is also found in iron, lead, and copper ores. China is a leading producer of indium (390 tonnes in 2012), followed by Canada, Japan and South Korea with 70 tonnes each. Tolcin, Amy C. (2013) Indium. USGS Mineral Commodity Summaries. The Teck Cominco refinery in Trail, British Columbia, is a large single-source indium producer, with an output of 32.5 tonnes in 2005, 41.8 tonnes in 2004 and 36.1 tonnes in 2003. South American Silver Corporation's Malku Khota property in Bolivia is a large resource of indium with an indicated resource of 1,481 tonnes and inferred resource of 935 tonnes. Adex Mining Inc.s Mount Pleasant Mine in New Brunswick, Canada, holds some of the worlds total known indium resources. 

The amount of indium consumed is largely a function of worldwide LCD production. Worldwide production in 2007 was 475 tonnes per year from mining and a further 650 tonnes per year from recycling. Demand has risen rapidly in recent years with the popularity of LCD computer monitors and television sets, which now account for 50% of indium consumption. Increased manufacturing efficiency and recycling (especially in Japan) maintain a balance between demand and supply. According to the UNEP, indium's end-of-life recycling rate is less than 1%. Demand increased as the metal is used in LCDs and televisions, and supply decreased when a number of Chinese mining concerns stopped extracting indium from their zinc tailings. In 2002, the price was US$94 per kilogram. The recent changes in demand and supply have resulted in high and fluctuating prices of indium, which from 2006 to 2009 ranged from US$382/kg to US$918/kg.

It has been estimated that there are fewer than 14 years left of indium supplies, based on current rates of extraction, demonstrating the need for additional recycling. 

==Applications==
A magnified image of an LCD screen showing RGB pixels. Individual transistors are seen as white dots in the bottom part.
The first large-scale application for indium was as a coating for bearings in high-performance aircraft engines during World War II. Afterward, production gradually increased as new uses were found in fusible alloys, solders, and electronics. In the 1950s, tiny beads of it were used for the emitters and collectors of PNP alloy junction transistors. In the middle and late 1980s, the development of indium phosphide semiconductors and indium tin oxide thin films for liquid crystal displays (LCD) aroused much interest. By 1992, the thin-film application had become the largest end use. 

===Electronics===
* Indium oxide (In2O3) and indium tin oxide (ITO) are used as a transparent conductive coating applied to glass substrates in the making of electroluminescent panels. 
* Some indium compounds such as indium antimonide, indium phosphide, and indium nitride are semiconductors with useful properties.
* Indium is used in the synthesis of the semiconductor copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS), which is used for the manufacture of thin film solar cells. 
* Used in light-emitting diodes (LEDs) and laser diodes based on compound semiconductors such as InGaN, InGaP that are fabricated by Metalorganic Vapor Phase Epitaxy (MOVPE) technology. 
* Ultrapure metalorganics of indium include high purity trimethylindium (TMI), which is used as a precursor in III-V compound semiconductors, while it is also used as the semiconductor dopant in II-VI compound semiconductors. 
* One of many substitutes for mercury in alkaline batteries to prevent the zinc from corroding and releasing hydrogen gas. 

===Metal and alloys===
Ductile indium wire
* Very small amounts used in aluminium alloy sacrificial anodes (for salt water applications) to prevent passivation of the aluminium.
* To bond gold electrical test leads to superconductors, indium is used as a conducting adhesive and applied under a microscope with precision tweezers. 
* In the form of a wire it is used as a vacuum seal and a thermal conductor in cryogenics and ultra-high vacuum applications, for example, in manufacturing gaskets which deform to fill gaps. 
* Used as a calibration material for Differential scanning calorimetry. 
* It is an ingredient in the gallium-indium-tin alloy Galinstan, which is liquid at room temperature while not being toxic like mercury. 

===Other uses===
* Indium tin oxide is used as a light filter in low-pressure sodium vapor lamps. The infrared radiation is reflected back into the lamp, which increases the temperature within the tube and therefore improves the performance of the lamp. 
* Indium's melting point of 429.7485 K (156.5985 C) is a defining fixed point on the international temperature scale ITS-90. 
* Indium's high neutron capture cross section for thermal neutrons makes it suitable for use in control rods for nuclear reactors, typically in an alloy containing 80% silver, 15% indium, and 5% cadmium. 
* In nuclear engineering, the (n,n') reactions of 113In and 115In are used to determine magnitudes of neutron fluxes. 
* Indium is also used as a thermal interface material by personal computer enthusiasts in the form of pre-shaped foil sheets fitted between the heat-transfer surface of a microprocessor and its heat sink. The application of heat partially melts the foil and allows the indium metal to fill in any microscopic gaps and pits between the two surfaces, removing any insulating air pockets that would otherwise compromise heat transfer efficiency. 
* 111In emits gamma radiation and is used in indium leukocyte imaging, or indium scintigraphy, a technique of medical imaging that is particularly helpful in differentiating conditions such as osteomyelitis from decubitus ulcers for assessment of route and duration of antibiotic therapy. Indium leukocyte scintigraphy has many applications, including early phase drug development, and the monitoring of activity of white blood cells. For the test, blood is taken from the patient, white cells removed, labeled with the radioactive 111In, then re-injected back into the patient. Gamma imaging will then reveal any areas of on-going white cell localization such as new and developing areas of infection.

==Precautions and health issues==
Pure indium in metal form is considered nontoxic by most sources. In the welding and semiconductor industries, where indium exposure is relatively high, there have been no reports of any toxic side-effects. Indium compounds, like aluminum compounds, complex with hydroxyls to form insoluble salts in basic conditions, and are thus not well-absorbed from food, giving them fairly low oral toxicity. Soluble indium(III) is toxic when delivered parenterally, however, causing damage primarily to the kidney (both inner and outer parts), but additionally to heart and liver, and may be teratogenic. Other indium compounds are toxic when administered outside the gastrointestinal tract: for example, anhydrous indium trichloride (InCl3) and indium phosphide (InP) are quite toxic when delivered into the lungs (the latter is a suspected carcinogen). Occupational exposure to indium compounds was associated with PAP, cholesterol ester crystals and granulomas, pulmonary fibrosis, emphysema, and pneumothoraces. The available evidence suggests exposure to indium compounds causes a novel lung disease that may begin with PAP and progress to include fibrosis and emphysema, and, in some cases, premature death 

==See also==

==References==

==External links==
* Indium at The Periodic Table of Videos (University of Nottingham)
* Reducing Agents > Indium low valent
* NIOSH Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)

*



[[Iodine]]

Iodine is a chemical element with symbol I and atomic number 53. The name is from Greek ioeids, meaning violet or purple, due to the color of elemental iodine vapor. Online Etymology Dictionary, s.v. iodine. Retrieved 2012-02-07. 

Iodine and its compounds are primarily used in nutrition, and industrially in the production of acetic acid and certain polymers. Iodine's relatively high atomic number, low toxicity, and ease of attachment to organic compounds have made it a part of many X-ray contrast materials in modern medicine. Iodine has only one stable isotope. A number of iodine radioisotopes are also used in medical applications.

Iodine is found on Earth mainly as the highly water-soluble iodide ion I, which concentrates it in oceans and brine pools. Like the other halogens, free iodine occurs mainly as a diatomic molecule I2, and then only momentarily after being oxidized from iodide by an oxidant like free oxygen. In the universe and on Earth, iodine's high atomic number makes it a relatively rare element. However, its presence in ocean water has given it a role in biology. It is the heaviest essential element utilized widely by life in biological functions (only tungsten, employed in enzymes by a few species of bacteria, is heavier). Iodine's rarity in many soils, due to initial low abundance as a crust-element, and also leaching of soluble iodide by rainwater, has led to many deficiency problems in land animals and inland human populations. Iodine deficiency affects about two billion people and is the leading preventable cause of intellectual disabilities. 

Iodine is required by higher animals for synthesizing thyroid hormones, which contain the element. Because of this function, radioisotopes of iodine are concentrated in the thyroid gland along with nonradioactive iodine. If inhaled, the radioisotope iodine-131, which has a high fission product yield, concentrates in the thyroid, but is easily remedied with non-radioactive potassium iodide treatment.

==Characteristics==
Under standard conditions, iodine is a bluish-black solid appearing to sublimate into a noxious violet-pink gas, the colour due to absorption of visible light by electronic transitions between the highest occupied and lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals. Melting at 113.7 C, it forms compounds with many elements but is less reactive than the other members of its group, the halogens, and has some metallic light reflectance.

In the gas phase, iodine shows its violet color.
Elemental iodine is slightly soluble in water, with one gram dissolving in 3450 ml at 20 C and 1280 ml at 50 C; potassium iodide may be added to increase solubility via formation of triiodide ions. Nonpolar solvents such as hexane and carbon tetrachloride provide a higher solubility. Polar solutions are brown, reflecting the role of these solvents as Lewis bases, while nonpolar solutions are violet, the color of iodine vapor. Charge-transfer complexes form when iodine is dissolved in polar solvents, modifying the energy distribution of iodine's molecular orbitals, hence changing the colour. A metal ion may replace the solvent, in which case the two species exchange electrons, the ion undergoing  backbonding. 

I2PPh3 charge-transfer complexes in CH2Cl2. From left to right: (1) I2 dissolved in dichloromethane. (2) A few seconds after excess PPh3 was added. (3) One minute later after excess PPh3 was added, which contains +I. (4) Immediately after excess I2 was added, which contains +. 

===Structure and bonding===
Structure of solid iodine
Iodine normally exists as a diatomic molecule with an I-I bond length of 270 pm, Wells, A. F. (1984) Structural Inorganic Chemistry, Oxford: Clarendon Press. ISBN 0-19-855370-6. one of the longest single bonds known. The I2 molecules tend to interact via the weak van der Waals forces called the London dispersion forces, and this interaction is responsible for the higher melting point compared to more compact halogens, which are also diatomic. Since the atomic size of iodine is larger, its melting point is higher. The solid crystallizes as orthorhombic crystals. The crystal motif in the HermannMauguin notation is Cmca (No 64), Pearson symbol oS8. The I-I bond is relatively weak, with a bond dissociation energy of 36 kcal/mol, and most bonds to iodine are weaker than for the lighter halides. One consequence of this weak bonding is the relatively high tendency of I2 molecules to dissociate into atomic iodine.

===Isotopes===

Of the 37 known (characterized) isotopes of iodine, only one, 127I, is stable.

The longest-lived radioisotope, 129I, has a half-life of 15.7 million years. This is long enough to make it a permanent fixture of the environment on human time scales, but far too short for it to exist as a primordial isotope today. Instead, iodine-129 is an extinct radionuclide, and its presence in the early solar system is inferred from the observation of an excess of its daughter xenon-129. This nuclide is also newly made by cosmic rays and as a byproduct of artificial nuclear fission, which it is used to monitor as a very long-lived environmental contaminant.

The next-longest-lived radioisotope, iodine-125, has a half-life of 59 days. It is used as a convenient gamma-emitting tag for proteins in biological assays, and a few nuclear medicine imaging tests where a longer half-life is required. It is also commonly used in brachytherapy implanted capsules, which kill tumors by local short-range gamma radiation (but where the isotope is never released into the body).

Iodine-123 (half-life 13 hours) is the isotope of choice for nuclear medicine imaging of the thyroid gland, which naturally accumulates all iodine isotopes.

Iodine-131 (half-life 8 days) is a beta-emitting isotope, which is a common nuclear fission product. It is preferably administered to humans only in very high doses that destroy all tissues that accumulate it (usually the thyroid), which in turn prevents these tissues from developing cancer from a lower dose (paradoxically, a high dose of this isotope appears safer for the thyroid than a low dose). Like other radioiodines, I-131 accumulates in the thyroid gland, but unlike the others, in small amounts it is highly carcinogenic there, it seems, owing to the high local cell mutation due to damage from beta decay. Because of this tendency of 131I to cause high damage to cells that accumulate it and other cells near them (0.6 to 2 mm away, the range of the beta rays), it is the only iodine radioisotope used as direct therapy, to kill tissues such as cancers that take up artificially iodinated molecules (example, the compound iobenguane, also known as MIBG). For the same reason, only the iodine isotope I-131 is used to treat Grave's disease and those types of thyroid cancers (sometimes in metastatic form) where the tissue that requires destruction, still functions to naturally accumulate iodide.

Nonradioactive ordinary potassium iodide (iodine-127), in a number of convenient forms (tablets or solution) may be used to saturate the thyroid gland's ability to take up further iodine, and thus protect against accidental contamination from iodine-131 generated by nuclear fission accidents, such as the Chernobyl disaster and more recently the Fukushima I nuclear accidents, as well as from contamination from this isotope in nuclear fallout from nuclear weapons.

===Occurrence===
Iodomethane
Iodine is rare in the solar system and Earth's crust (4760th in abundance); however, iodide salts are often very soluble in water. Iodine occurs in slightly greater concentrations in seawater than in rocks, 0.05 vs. 0.04 ppm. Minerals containing iodine include caliche, found in Chile. The brown algae Laminaria and Fucus found in temperate zones of the Northern Hemisphere contain 0.0280.454 dry weight percent of iodine. Aside from tungsten, iodine is the heaviest element to be essential in living organisms. About 19,000 tonnes are produced annually from natural sources. 

Organoiodine compounds are produced by marine life forms, the most notable being iodomethane (commonly called methyl iodide). About 214 kilotonnes/year of iodomethane is produced by the marine environment, by microbial activity in rice paddies and by the burning of biological material. The volatile iodomethane is broken up in the atmosphere as part of a global iodine cycle. 

==Chemistry==
Iodine adopts a variety of oxidation states, commonly ranging from (formally) I(VII) to I(-I), and including the intermediate states of I(V), I(III) and I(I). Practically, only the 1 oxidation state is of significance, being the form found in iodide salts and organoiodine compounds. Iodine is a Lewis acid. With electron donors such as triphenylphosphine and pyridine it forms a charge-transfer complex. With the iodide anion it forms the triiodide ion. 
Iodine and the iodide ion form a redox couple. I2 is easily reduced and I is easily oxidized.

===Redox reactions===
In everyday life, iodides are slowly oxidized by atmospheric oxygen to give free iodine. Evidence for this conversion is the yellow tint of certain aged samples of iodide salts and some organoiodine compounds. Lyday, Phyllis A. "Iodine and Iodine Compounds" in Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry, 2005, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, ISBN 978-3-527-30673-2 Vol. A14 pp. 382390. The oxidation of iodide to iodine in air is also responsible for the slow loss of iodide content in iodized salt if exposed to air. Some salts use iodate to prevent the loss of iodine.

Iodine is easily reduced. Most common is the interconversion of I and I2. Molecular iodine can be prepared by oxidizing iodides with chlorine:
:2 I + Cl2  I2 + 2 Cl
or with manganese dioxide in acid solution: 
:2 I + 4 H+ + MnO2  I2 + 2 H2O + Mn2+

Iodine is reduced to hydroiodic acid by hydrogen sulfide and hydrazine: 
:8 I2 + 8 H2S  16 HI + S8
:2 I2 + N2H4  4 HI + N2

When dissolved in fuming sulfuric acid (65% oleum), iodine forms an intense blue solution. The blue color is due to cation, the result of iodine being oxidized by : 

:2 + 2 +  2 + + 2 

The cation is also formed in the oxidation of iodine by pentafluoride|] or pentafluoride|]. The resulting or can be isolated as deep blue crystals. The solutions of these salts turn red when cooled below 60 C, owing to the formation of the cation: 

:2 

Under slightly more alkaline conditions, disproportionates into and an iodine(III) compound. Excess iodine can then react with to form (green) and (black). 

===Oxides===

The best-known oxides are the anions, and , but several other oxides are known, such as the strong oxidant iodine pentoxide.

By contrast with chlorine, the formation of the hypohalite ion (IO) in neutral aqueous solutions of iodine is negligible.
:I2 + H2O H+ + I + HIO (K = 2.01013) In basic solutions (such as aqueous sodium hydroxide), iodine converts in a two stage reaction to iodide and iodate: 
:
I2 + 2 OH  I + IO + H2O (K = 30) 
 3 IO  2 I + (K = 1020) 

Organic derivatives of hypoiodate (2-Iodoxybenzoic acid, and Dess-Martin periodinane) are used in organic chemistry.

Iodic acid (HIO3), periodic acid (HIO4) and their salts are strong oxidizers and are of some use in organic synthesis. Iodine is oxidized to iodate by nitric acid as well as by chlorates: 
:I2 + 10 HNO3  2 HIO3 + 10 NO2 + 4 H2O
:I2 + 2  2 + Cl2

===Other inorganic compounds===

Iodine forms compounds with all the elements except for the noble gases. From the perspective of commercial applications, an important compound is hydroiodic acid, used as a co-catalyst in the Cativa process for the production of acetic acid. Titanium and aluminium iodides are used in the production of butadiene, a precursor to rubber tires. 

Alkali metal salts are common colourless solids that are highly soluble in water. Potassium iodide is a convenient source of the iodide anion; it is easier to handle than sodium iodide because it is not hygroscopic. Both salts are mainly used in the production of iodized salt. Sodium iodide is especially useful in the Finkelstein reaction, because it is soluble in acetone, whereas potassium iodide is less so. In this reaction, an alkyl chloride is converted to an alkyl iodide. This relies on the insolubility of sodium chloride in acetone to drive the reaction:
:R-Cl (acetone) + NaI (acetone)  R-I (acetone) + NaCl (s)

Despite having the lowest electronegativity of the common halogens, iodine reacts violently with some metals, such as aluminium:
:3 I2 + 2 Al  2 AlI3
This reaction produces 314 kJ per mole of aluminium, comparable to thermite's 425 kJ. Yet the reaction initiates spontaneously, and if unconfined, causes a cloud of gaseous iodine due to the high temperature.

Interhalogen compounds are well known; examples include iodine monochloride and trichloride; iodine pentafluoride and heptafluoride.

===Organic compounds===

Organoiodine compounds can be made in many ways. For example, methyl iodide can be prepared from methanol, red phosphorus, and iodine. The iodinating reagent is phosphorus triiodide that is formed in situ:
:3 CH3OH + PI3  3 CH3I + H3PO3

The simplest organoiodine compound is iodomethane, approved as a soil fumigant. The iodoform test uses an alkaline solution of iodine to react with methyl ketones to give the labile triiodomethide leaving group, forming iodoform, which precipitates. Aryl and alkyl iodides both form Grignard reagents. Iodine is sometimes used to activate magnesium when preparing Grignard reagents. Alkyl iodides such as iodomethane are good alkylating agents.

Some drawbacks to the use of organoiodine compounds in chemical synthesis are:
* iodine compounds are more expensive than the corresponding bromides and chlorides, in that order
* iodides are much stronger alkylating agents, and so are more toxic (e.g., methyl iodide is very toxic (T+). 
* low-molecular-weight iodides tend to have a much higher equivalent weight, compared to other alkylating agents (e.g., methyl iodide versus dimethyl carbonate), owing to the atomic mass of iodine.

==Production==
Of the several places in which iodine occurs in nature, only two sources are useful commercially: the caliche, found in Chile, and the iodine-containing brines of gas and oil fields, especially in Japan and the United States. The caliche contains sodium nitrate, which is the main product of the mining activities, and small amounts of sodium iodate and sodium iodide. In the extraction of sodium nitrate, the sodium iodate and sodium iodide are also extracted. The high concentration of iodine in the caliche and the extensive mining made Chile the largest producer of iodine in 2007.

Most other producers use naturally occurring brine for the production of iodine. The Japanese Minami Kanto gas field east of Tokyo and the American Anadarko Basin gas field in northwest Oklahoma are the two largest sources for iodine from brine. The brine has a temperature of over 60 C owing to the depth of the source. The brine is first purified and acidified using sulfuric acid, then the iodide present is oxidized to iodine with chlorine. An iodine solution is produced, but is dilute and must be concentrated. Air is blown into the solution, causing the iodine to evaporate, then it is passed into an absorbing tower containing acid where sulfur dioxide is added to reduce the iodine. The hydrogen iodide (HI) is reacted with chlorine to precipitate the iodine. After filtering and purification the iodine is packed. 

: 2 HI + Cl2  I2 + 2 HCl
: I2 + 2 H2O + SO2  2 HI + H2SO4
: 2 HI + Cl2  I2 + 2 HCl

The production of iodine from seawater via electrolysis is not used owing to the sufficient abundance of iodine-rich brine. Another source of iodine is kelp, used in the 18th and 19th centuries, but it is no longer economically viable. 

Commercial samples often contain high concentrations of impurities, which can be removed by sublimation. The element may also be prepared in an ultra-pure form through the reaction of potassium iodide with copper(II) sulfate, which gives copper(II) iodide initially. That decomposes spontaneously to copper(I) iodide and iodine:

: Cu2+ + 2 I  CuI2
: 2 CuI2  2 CuI + I2

There are also other methods of isolating this element in the laboratory, for example, the method used to isolate other halogens: oxidation of the iodide in hydrogen iodide (often made in situ with an iodide and sulfuric acid) by manganese dioxide.

==History==
Iodine was discovered by French chemist Bernard Courtois in 1811. In French, seaweed that had been washed onto the shore was called "varec", "varech", or "vareck", whence the English word "wrack". Later, "varec" also referred to the ashes of such seaweed: The ashes were used as a source of iodine and salts of sodium and potassium. He was born to a manufacturer of saltpeter (a vital part of gunpowder). At the time of the Napoleonic Wars, France was at war and saltpeter was in great demand. Saltpeter produced from French niter beds required sodium carbonate, which could be isolated from seaweed collected on the coasts of Normandy and Brittany. To isolate the sodium carbonate, seaweed was burned and the ash washed with water. The remaining waste was destroyed by adding sulfuric acid. Courtois once added excessive sulfuric acid and a cloud of purple vapor rose. He noted that the vapor crystallized on cold surfaces, making dark crystals. Courtois suspected that this was a new element but lacked funding to pursue it further.

Courtois gave samples to his friends, Charles Bernard Desormes (17771862) and Nicolas Clment (17791841), to continue research. He also gave some of the substance to chemist Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac (17781850), and to physicist Andr-Marie Ampre (17751836). On 29 November 1813, Desormes and Clment made public Courtois's discovery. They described the substance to a meeting of the Imperial Institute of France. Desormes and Clment made their announcement at the Institut imprial de France on November 29, 1813; a summary of their announcement appeared in the Gazette nationale ou Le Moniteur Universel of December 2, 1813. See: F. D. Chattaway (April 23, 1909) "The discovery of iodine," The Chemical News ..., 99 (2578) : 193-195. On December 6, Gay-Lussac announced that the new substance was either an element or a compound of oxygen. It was Gay-Lussac who suggested the name "iode", from the Greek word  (iodes) for violet (because of the color of iodine vapor). Ampre had given some of his sample to English chemist Humphry Davy (17781829). Davy did some experiments on the substance and noted its similarity to chlorine. Davy sent a letter dated December 10 to the Royal Society of London stating that he had identified a new element. Arguments erupted between Davy and Gay-Lussac over who identified iodine first, but both scientists acknowledged Courtois as the first to isolate the element.

==Applications==
The production of ethylenediamine dihydroiodide, provided as a nutritional supplement for livestock, consumes a large fraction of available iodine. Another significant use is as a co-catalyst for the production of acetic acid by the Monsanto and Cativa processes. In these technologies, which support the world's demand for acetic acid, hydroiodic acid converts the methanol feedstock into methyl iodide, which undergoes carbonylation. Hydrolysis of the resulting acetyl iodide regenerates hydroiodic acid and gives acetic acid. 

===Disinfectants===
Elemental iodine is used as a disinfectant in various forms. The iodine exists as the element, or as the water-soluble triiodide anion I3 generated in situ by adding iodide to poorly water-soluble elemental iodine (the reverse chemical reaction makes some free elemental iodine available for antisepsis). In alternative fashion, iodine may come from iodophors, which contain iodine complexed with a solubilizing agent (iodide ion may be thought of loosely as the iodophor in triiodide water solutions). Examples of such preparations include: 
* Tincture of iodine: iodine in ethanol, or iodine and sodium iodide in a mixture of ethanol and water.
* Lugol's iodine: iodine and iodide in water alone, forming mostly triiodide. Unlike tincture of iodine, Lugol's has a minimized amount of the free iodine (I2) component.
* Povidone iodine (an iodophor).

===Analysis===

Testing a seed for starch with a solution of iodine
Iodine is useful in analytical chemistry because of its reactions with alkenes, starch and oxidizing and reducing agents. The highly colored species involved in these reactions make it easy to detect the endpoints in many analytical determinations.
Iodine is a common general stain used in thin-layer chromatography.
Iodine forms an intense blue complex with the glucose polymers starch and glycogen. Several analytical methods rely on this property:
* Iodometry. The concentration of an oxidant can be determined by adding it to an excess of iodide, to destroy elemental iodine/triiodide as a result of oxidation by the oxidant. A starch indicator is then used as the indicator close to the end-point, in order to increase the visual contrast (dark blue becomes colorless, instead of the yellow of dilute triiodide becoming colorless).
* An Iodine test may be used to test a sample substance for the presence of starch. The Iodine clock reaction is an extension of the techniques in iodometry.
* Iodine solutions are used in counterfeit banknote detection pens; the premise being that counterfeit banknotes are made using commercially available paper containing starch.
* Starch-iodide paper are used to test for the presence of oxidants such as peroxides. The oxidants convert iodide to iodine, which shows up as blue. A solution of starch and iodide can perform the same function. 
* During colposcopy, Lugol's iodine is applied to the vagina and cervix. Normal vaginal tissue stains brown owing to its high glycogen content (a color-reaction similar to that with starch), while abnormal tissue suspicious for cancer does not stain, and thus appears pale compared to the surrounding tissue. Biopsy of suspicious tissue can then be performed. This is called a Schiller's Test.
Iodine value or iodine number is used to indicate the number of carbon-carbon double bonds in vegetable oils and fatty acids.

===Medical applications===
Potassium iodide has been used as an expectorant, although this use is increasingly uncommon. In medicine, potassium iodide is usually used to treat acute thyrotoxicosis, usually as a saturated solution of potassium iodide called SSKI. It is also used to block uptake of iodine-131 in the thyroid gland (see isotopes section above), when this isotope is used as part of radiopharmaceuticals (such as iobenguane) that are not targeted to the thyroid or thyroid-type tissues.

Iodine-131 (usually in the chemical form of iodide) is a component of nuclear fallout, and is particularly dangerous owing to the thyroid gland's propensity to concentrate ingested iodine, where it is kept for periods longer than this isotope's radiological half-life of eight days. For this reason, if people are expected to be exposed to a significant amount of environmental radioactive iodine (iodine-131 in fallout), they may be instructed to take non-radioactive potassium iodide tablets. The typical adult dose is one 130 mg tablet per 24 hours, supplying 100 mg (100,000 micrograms) iodine, as iodide ion. (Typical daily dose of iodine to maintain normal health is of order 100 micrograms; see "Dietary Intake" below.) By ingesting this large amount of non-radioactive iodine, radioactive iodine uptake by the thyroid gland is minimized. See the article on potassium iodide for more on this topic. U.S. Centers for Disease Control "CDC Radiation Emergencies", U.S. Centers for Disease Control, October 11, 2006, accessed November 14, 2010. 

Diatrizoic acid, an iodine-containing radiocontrast agent
Iodine, as an element with high electron density and atomic number, absorbs X-rays well. Therefore, it may be used as a radiocontrast agent by filtering out imaging X-rays weaker than 33.3 keV, where iodine's innermost electrons begin absorbing X-rays strongly due to the photoelectric effect. Lancaster, Jack L. Chapter 4: Physical Determinants of Contrast, in Physics of Medical X-Ray Imaging. The University of Texas Health Science Center. Organic compounds of a certain type (typically iodine-substituted benzene derivatives) are thus used in medicine as X-ray radiocontrast agents for intravenous injection. This is often in conjunction with advanced X-ray techniques such as angiography and CT scanning. At present, all water-soluble radiocontrast agents rely on iodine. It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines, a list of the most important medication needed in a basic health system. 

===Other uses===
Inorganic iodides find specialized uses. Hafnium, zirconium, titanium are purified by the van Arkel Process, which involves the reversible formation of the tetraiodides of these elements. Silver iodide is a major ingredient to traditional photographic film. Thousands of kilograms of silver iodide are consumed annually for cloud seeding. 

The organoiodine compound erythrosine is an important food coloring agent. Perfluoroalkyl iodides are precursors to important surfactants, such as perfluorooctanesulfonic acid. 

Iodine was also used by the police, especially forensics, Iodine fuming was an effective way of revealing latent fingerprints on paper and other similar surfaces. It is still used mildly today.

In the United States, the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) regards iodine and compounds containing iodine (ionic iodides, iodoform, ethyl iodide, and so on) as reagents useful for the clandestine manufacture of methamphetamine. 

Iodine can be used to stabilize the wavelength of a heliumneon laser. Sam's Laser FAQ 

==Biological role==

Iodine is an essential trace element for life, the heaviest element commonly needed by living organisms. Only tungsten, a component of a few bacterial enzymes, has a higher atomic number and atomic weight.
Thyroxines are iodine-containing hormones that justify the widespread use of iodised salt.

Iodine's main role in animal biology is as a constituent of the thyroid hormones thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3). These are made from addition condensation products of the amino acid tyrosine, and are stored prior to release in an iodine-containing protein called thyroglobulin. T4 and T3 contain four and three atoms of iodine per molecule, respectively. The thyroid gland actively absorbs iodide from the blood to make and release these hormones into the blood, actions that are regulated by a second hormone TSH from the pituitary. Thyroid hormones are phylogenetically very old molecules that are synthesized by most multicellular organisms, and that even have some effect on unicellular organisms.

Thyroid hormones play a basic role in biology, acting on gene transcription to regulate the basal metabolic rate. Total deficiency of thyroid hormones can reduce basal metabolic rate up to 50%. Excessive production of thyroid hormones can increase the basal metabolic rate by 100%. T4 acts largely as a precursor to T3, which is (with minor exceptions) the biologically active hormone. In amphibian metamorphosis iodine and thyroid hormones exert a well-studied experimental model of apoptosis on the cells of gills, tail, and fins of tadpoles. 

Iodine has a nutritional relationship with selenium. A family of selenium-dependent enzymes called deiodinases converts T4 to T3 (the active hormone) by removing an iodine atom from the outer tyrosine ring. These enzymes also convert T4 to reverse T3 (rT3) by removing an inner ring iodine atom, and convert T3 to 3,3'-diiodothyronine (T2) also by removing an inner ring atom. Both of the latter are inactivated hormones that are ready for disposal and have, in essence, no biological effects. A family of non-selenium-dependent enzymes then further deiodinates the products of these reactions.

Iodine accounts for 65% of the molecular weight of T4 and 59% of the T3. Fifteen to 20 mg of iodine is concentrated in thyroid tissue and hormones, but 70% of the body's iodine is distributed in other tissues, including mammary glands, eyes, gastric mucosa, fetal thymus, cerebro-spinal fluid and coroid plexus, arterial walls, the cervix, and salivary glands. In the cells of these tissues, iodide enters directly by sodium-iodide symporter (NIS). Its role in mammary tissue is related to fetal and neonatal development, but its role in the other tissues is partially unknown. 
Sequence of 123-iodide total-body scintiscans of a woman after intravenous injection of 123-iodide (half-life: 13 hours); (from left) respectively at 30 minutes, and at 6, 20 and 48 hours. High and rapid concentration of radio-iodide (in white) in extra-thyroidal organs is evident in gastric mucosa of the stomach, epidermis, salivary glands, periencephalic and cerebro-spinal fluid, choroid plexus and oral mucosa. In gastric mucosa 131-iodide (half-life: 8 days) persists in scintiscans for more than 72 hours. In the thyroid, iodide-concentration is more progressive, as in a reservoir 1% (after 30 minutes) to 5.8% (after 48 hours) of the total injected dose. High iodide-concentration by the mammary gland is evident only in pregnancy and lactation. High excretion of radio-iodide is observed in the urine. (Venturi, 2011)

===Dietary intake===
The daily Dietary Reference Intake recommended by the United States Institute of Medicine is between 110 and 130 g for infants up to 12 months, 90 g for children up to eight years, 130 g for children up to 13 years, 150 g for adults, 220 g for pregnant women and 290 g for lactating mothers. The Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL) for adults is 1,100 g/day (1.1 mg/day). The tolerable upper limit was assessed by analyzing the effect of supplementation on thyroid-stimulating hormone. 

The thyroid gland needs no more than 70 g/day to synthesize the requisite daily amounts of T4 and T3. The higher recommended daily allowance levels of iodine seem necessary for optimal function of a number of body systems, including lactating breast, gastric mucosa, salivary glands, oral mucosa, and arterial walls. 

Natural sources of dietary iodine include seafood, such as fish, kelp and shellfish, dairy products such as milk, cheese and eggs and plants grown on iodine-rich soil. Iodized salt is fortified with iodine. 

As of 2000, the median intake of iodine from food in the United States was 240 to 300 g/day for men and 190 to 210 g/day for women. In Japan, consumption was considered much higher, ranging between 5,280 g/day to 13,800 g/day, this owing to the frequent consumption of seaweed or kombu kelp. However, new studies suggest that Japan's consumption is closer to 1,0003,000 g/day. 

After iodine fortification programs (e.g., iodized salt) have been implemented, some cases of iodine-induced hyperthyroidism have been observed (so-called Jod-Basedow phenomenon). The condition seems to occur mainly in people over forty, and the risk appears higher when iodine deficiency is severe and the initial rise in iodine intake is high. 

Information processing, fine motor skills, and visual problem solving are improved by iodine repletion in moderately iodine-deficient children. 

===Deficiency===

In an estimated two-thirds of households on Earth, table salt is iodized. However, this still leaves an estimated two billion people iodine-deficient. Iodine is required for the essential thyroxin hormones produced by and concentrated in the thyroid gland.

Disability-adjusted life year for iodine deficiency per 100,000 inhabitants in 2002. 

In areas where there is little iodine in the diet, typically remote inland areas and semi-arid equatorial climates where no marine foods are eaten, iodine deficiency gives rise to hypothyroidism, symptoms of which are extreme fatigue, goitre, mental slowing, depression, weight gain, and low basal body temperatures. Iodine deficiency is the leading cause of preventable intellectual disability, a result that occurs primarily when babies or small children are rendered hypothyroidic by a lack of the element. The addition of iodine to table salt has largely eliminated this problem in the wealthier nations, but, as of March 2006, iodine deficiency remained a serious public health problem in the developing world. Iodine deficiency is also a problem in certain areas of Europe.

Other possible health effects being investigated as being related to deficiency include: 
* Breast cancer. The breast strongly and actively concentrates iodine into breast-milk for the benefit of the developing infant, and may develop a goiter-like hyperplasia, sometimes manifesting as fibrocystic breast disease, when iodine levels are low.
* Stomach cancer. Some researchers have found an epidemiologic correlation between iodine deficiency, iodine-deficient goitre and gastric cancer. A decrease of the incidence of death rate from stomach cancer after implementation of the effective iodine-prophylaxis has been reported also. 
* Autism. Although there is not a definitive answer for the cause of autism in children, research has shown that mothers with low levels of iodine are more likely to have an autistic child. 

===Toxicity===
Elemental iodine (I2) is toxic if taken orally. The lethal dose for an adult human is 30 mg/kg, which is about 2.12.4 grams (even if experiments on rats demonstrated that these animals could survive after eating a 14000 mg/kg dose). Excess iodine can be more cytotoxic in the presence of selenium deficiency. Iodine supplementation in selenium-deficient populations is, in theory, problematic, partly for this reason. Its toxicity derives from its oxidizing properties, which make it able to denaturate proteins (including enzymes).

Elemental iodine is also a skin irritant, and direct contact with skin can cause damage, so iodine crystals should be handled with care. Solutions with high elemental iodine concentration such as tincture of iodine and Lugol's solution are capable of causing tissue damage if their use for cleaning and antisepsis is prolonged; similarly, cases have been reported where liquid Povidone-iodine (Betadine) trapped against the skin resulted in chemical burns. 

===Allergic reactions===
Some people develop a hypersensitivity to iodine-containing products and foods. Applications of tincture of iodine or Betadine can cause rashes, sometimes severe. Parenteral use of iodine-based contrast agents (see above) can cause reactions ranging from a mild rash to fatal anaphylaxis. Such reactions have led to the misconception (widely held, even among physicians) that some people are allergic to iodine itself; even allergies to iodine-rich seafood have been so construed. In fact, there has never been a confirmed report of a true iodine allergy, and an allergy to elemental iodine or simple iodide salts is theoretically impossible. Hypersensitivity reactions to iodine-containing products and foods are apparently related to their other molecular components; thus, a person who has demonstrated an allergy to one iodine-containing food or product should not be assumed to have an allergy to another one. Still, as with all medications, the potential severity of reactions to medical iodine-containing products should prompt questions about a patient's allergy history before they are administered. 

==See also==
* Chemical oxygen iodine laser
* Inadine
* Iodide as an antioxidant
* Nutrition facts label
* Starch indicator

==References==

==External links==
* Iodine at The Periodic Table of Videos (University of Nottingham)
* "Micronutrient Research for Optimum Health", Linus Pauling Institute, OSU Oregon State University
* CDC - NIOSH Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards - Iodine
* ATSDR  CSEM: Radiation Exposure from Iodine 131 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (public domain)
* who.int, WHO Global Database on Iodine Deficiency
* Oxidizing Agents > Iodine
* Seaweed. A chemical industry in Brittany, in the past and today.

 



[[IKEA]]

IKEA (; ) is a Swedish company registered in the Netherlands that designs and sells ready-to-assemble furniture (such as beds, chairs and desks), appliances and home accessories. As of January 2008, the company is the world's largest furniture retailer. Founded in Sweden in 1943 by then-17-year-old Ingvar Kamprad, who was listed as one of the world's richest people in 2013, the company's name is an acronym that consists of the initials of Ingvar Kamprad, Elmtaryd (the farm where he grew up), and Agunnaryd (his hometown in Smland, south Sweden). "Ingvar Kamprad and IKEA". Harvard Business School Publishing, Boston, MA, 02163. 1996 The company is known for its modern architectural designs for various types of appliances and furniture, and its interior design work is often associated with an eco-friendly simplicity. In addition, the firm is known for its attention to cost control, operational details, and continuous product development, corporate attributes that allowed IKEA to lower its prices by an average of two to three percent over the decade to 2010 during a period of global expansion.

As of January 2014, IKEA owns and operates 349 stores in 43 countries. http://franchisor.ikea.com/FranchisingtheIKEAway/Pages/All-IKEA-stores.aspx In fiscal year 2010, US$23.1 billion worth of goods were sold, a total that represented a 7.7 percent increase over 2009. The IKEA website contains about 12,000 products and is the closest representation of the entire IKEA range. There were over 470 million visitors to IKEA's websites in the year from September 2007 to September 2008. Inter IKEA Systems B.V. November 2008 The company uses approximately 1% of the Earth's wood supply, making it one of the largest users of wood in the retail sector. IKEA Group Sustainability Report FY13, Page 23. Retrieved February 13, 2014 

==History==

A map of IKEA stores around Earth.
The first IKEA store, located in lmhult in Sweden, not far from where the founder was born.
The world's largest IKEA store, situated at Kungens Kurva in Huddinge Municipality, Sweden. This IKEA store was opened in 1965.
IKEA store in Shenzhen, China.
IKEA store in Frisco, Texas, United States.
IKEA store at Port Island in Kobe, Japan, one of the very few IKEA stores with direct mass transit access.
Entrance to an IKEA store at the 4th floor of MegaBox in Kowloon Bay, Hong Kong.
An IKEA 4.5 Museum display at the outer precinct of the Meiji Shrine in Tokyo, Japan.

Ingvar Kamprad founded IKEA in 1943 as a mostly mail-order sales business. It began to sell furniture five years later. The first Mbel-IKA store was opened in lmhult, Smland, in 1958, while the first stores outside Sweden were opened in Norway (1963) and Denmark (1969). The stores spread to other parts of Europe in the 1970s, with the first store outside Scandinavia opening in Switzerland (1973), followed by Germany (1974).

Amid a high level of success, the company's German executives accidentally opened a store in Konstanz in 1973 instead of Koblenz. Later that decade, stores opened in other parts of the world, such as Japan (1974), Australia and Hong Kong (1975), Canada (1976), and Singapore (1978). IKEA further expanded in the 1980s, opening stores in countries such as France and Spain (1981), Canada (1982), Belgium (1984), the United States (1985), the United Kingdom (1987), and Italy (1989). The company then expanded into more countries in the 1990s and 2000s. Germany, with 44 stores, is IKEA's biggest market, followed by the United States, with 37 stores. At the end of the 2009 financial year, the IKEA group operated 267 stores in 25 countries. The first IKEA store in Latin America opened on 17 February 2010 in Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic. As of July 2013, the company's presence in developing countries remains minimal.

The world's five largest IKEA stores are:
# Stockholm Kungens Kurva, Sweden: 55,200 m2
# Shanghai Baoshan, China: 55,032 m2
# Shanghai Pudong Beicai, China: 49,400 m2
# Wuxi, China: 49,117 m2
# Ningbo, China: 47,505 m2

The largest store in the Southern Hemisphere is located in Tempe, Sydney, Australia with a total area of 39,000 m2. The biggest store in North America is located in Montreal, in the province of Quebec, Canada. The store was opened in 1986 in the Ville-St-Laurent area, and was completely renovated and expanded in 2012-2013. Built in 1986, the store's initial area was 22,062 m2, while the renovated store now measures 43,636 m2.

By the end of 2013, IKEA planned to open its first warehouse in Croatia, near Zagreb. Due to problems with building permissions, the construction started on 28 August 2013 and is planned to be finished in mid-2014. The adjacent shopping centre, which will be completed in 2015, will be one of the 5 biggest in Europe and among the 10 biggest IKEA stores in the world. [http://www.iicg.hr/en-gb/shopping-centres/zagreb-east ] In 2013, IKEA opened its first shopping centre in Vilnius, Lithuania that is the biggest furniture-selling mall in the Baltic states. 

In March 2013, IKEA opened its first outlet in Qatar, after a delay of several months. Like others in the Gulf Cooperation Council, the Doha outlet is operated by the Al-Futtaim Group. In May 2013, the demolition of the vacant Merriam Village Shopping Center in Johnson County, Kansas was carried out in preparation for the construction of an IKEA store that will measure approximately 400000 sqftat the time of the demolition, the company claimed that 60,000 IKEA customers existed in the Kansas City area. 
In August 2013, the first store in the Baltic States was opened in the Vilnius region of Lithuania. Construction of the 26500 sqft store commenced in 2011 and the store employs over 200 people. 
On 4 December 2013, IKEA announced that a new 389,000 square foot store will begin construction in 2014 in St. Louis, Missouri in the city's Midtown District. http://www.stltoday.com/business/local/ikea-makes-it-official-st-louis-store-to-open-in/article_32bb8356-14f3-5667-8368-dfeb211e7254.html 

==Store design==
IKEA Showroom in Coquitlam, British Columbia, Canada.
IKEA Restaurant
The Warehouse

===Layout===
Older IKEA stores are usually very large blue buildings with yellow accents (also Sweden's national colours) and few windows. They are often designed in a one-way layout, leading customers counter clockwise along what IKEA calls "the long natural way" designed to encourage the customer to see the store in its entirety (as opposed to a traditional retail store, which allows a customer to go directly to the section where the desired goods and services are displayed). There are often shortcuts to other parts of the showroom. Newer IKEA stores, like the one in Mnchengladbach, Germany, make more use of glass, both for aesthetics and functionality. Skylights are also now common in the self-serve warehouses; natural lighting reduces energy costs, improves worker morale and gives a better impression of the products.

The sequence first involves going through furniture showrooms making note of selected items. The customer then collects a shopping cart and proceeds to an open-shelf "Market Hall" warehouse for smaller items, then visits the "Self Serve" furniture warehouse to collect previously noted showroom products in flat pack form. Sometimes, they are directed to collect products from an external warehouse on the same site or at a site nearby after purchase. Finally, customers pay for their products at a cash register.

Today, most stores follow the same layout of having the showroom upstairs with the marketplace and self-service warehouse downstairs. Some stores are single level, while others have separate warehouses to allow more stock to be kept on-site. Single-level stores are found predominantly in areas where the cost of land would be less than the cost of building a 2-level store, such as the Saarlouis, Germany and Haparanda, Sweden locations. Some stores have dual-level warehouses with machine-controlled silos to allow large quantities of stock to be accessed throughout the selling day.

Most IKEA stores offer an "as-is" area at the end of the warehouse, just before the cash registers. Returned, damaged and formerly showcased products are displayed here and sold with a significant discount, but also with a no-returns policy. Most IKEA stores communicate the IKEA policy on environmental issues in this part of the store. The area, which is painted red, is named according to local customs, in the United Kingdom this is referred to as "Bargain Corner", in Sweden "FYND" (Bargains) and in Denmark, "Rodebutikken" (Rummage boutique).

In Hong Kong, where shop space is limited and costly, IKEA has opened three outlets across the city, most of which have the one-way layout. They are part of shopping malls, and while being tiny compared to common store design, are huge by Hong Kong standards.

The vast majority of IKEA stores are located outside of city centres, primarily because of land cost and traffic access. Several smaller store formats have been unsuccessfully tested in the past (the "midi" concept in the early '90s, which was tested in Ottawa and Heerlen with 9,300 m2, or a "boutique" shop in Manhattan). A new format for a full-size, city centre store was introduced with the opening of the Coventry (United Kingdom) store in December 2007. The store has seven floors and a different flow from other Ikea stores. IKEA's Southampton store which opened in February 2009 is also in the city centre and built in an urban style similar to the Coventry store. IKEA built these stores in response to UK government restrictions blocking retail establishment outside city centres. http://www.ikea.com/ms/en_GB/about_ikea/press_room/press_release/national/southampton_opening.html 
 
Another feature of IKEA stores is their long opening hours. Many stores are in operation 24 hours a day with restocking and maintenance being carried out throughout the night. Public opening hours tend to be much longer than most other retailers, with stores open well into the evening in many countries. In the UK, almost all stores are open past 8pm and open around 9am to 10am. IKEA Saudi Arabia stores have some of the longest opening hours worldwide being open from 10am to midnight, 7 days a week. The IKEA in Paramus, USA is the only store not open on Sundays due to local laws. 

===Food markets===
Every store includes a restaurant serving traditional Swedish food, including potatoes with Swedish meatballs, cream sauce and lingonberry jam, although there are variations. In Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, the usual boiled potatoes have been substituted with French fries. Besides these Swedish foods, hot dogs and drinks are also sold, along with a few varieties of the local cuisine, and beverages such as lingonberry juice. Also items such as prinsesstrta (princess cake) are sold as desserts. IKEA stores in Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates serve chicken shawarma at the exit caf as well as beef hot dogs, while in United Kingdom, a Quorn hot dog is available in the exit caf. 

In many locations, the IKEA restaurants open daily before the rest of the store and serve an inexpensive breakfast. In Canada, this breakfast includes eggs, sausage and hash browns and various add-ons like bacon and pancakes at additional cost. In the United States, the local variation serves scrambled eggs, bacon, country potatoes and a choice of Swedish pancakes or French toast sticks. In the Netherlands, it consists of a croissant, a small bread roll, butter or margarine, jam, a slice of cheese, a boiled egg and coffee or tea. In Australia, it consists of a hash brown, bacon, scrambled eggs, a sausage and a tomato, with a vegetarian option with baked beans which omits the sausage and bacon. In Germany, this breakfast consists of two bread rolls, one slice of smoked salmon, one slice of cheese, one slice of salami, two portions of butter, one portion of jam, and coffee. Refills of coffee, tea, and soft drinks are, as is traditional in Sweden, free of charge, even in countries where this is uncommon. In Austria, IKEA restaurants offer a free refill policy for soft drinks, a practice that is otherwise unknown in the country.

Every store also has a Swedish Food Market that, until 2011, sold branded Swedish prepared specialist foods, such as meatballs, packages of gravy, lingonberry jam, various biscuits and crackers, and salmon and fish roe spread. Later IKEA replaced most of the branded foods together extended its product range with the introduction of the IKEA food label. The new label has a variety of items including chocolates, meatballs, jams, pancakes, salmon, along with various drinks. All IKEA food products are based on Swedish recipes and traditions. The majority of the food production still takes place in Sweden by small, medium and large manufacturers, like Gunnar Dafgrd AB, which make its meatballs.

===Smland===
Every store has a play area, named Smland (Swedish for small lands; it is also the Swedish province where Kamprad was born). Parents drop off their children at a gate to the playground, and pick them up after they arrive at another entrance. In some stores, parents are given free pagers by the on-site staff, which the staff can use to summon parents whose children need them earlier than expected; in others, staff summon parents through announcements over the in-store public address system.

==Products and services==

===Furniture===
Rather than being sold pre-assembled, much of IKEA's furniture is designed to be self-assembled. The company claims that this helps reduce costs and use of packaging by not shipping air; the volume of a bookcase, for example, is considerably less if it is shipped unassembled rather than assembled. This is also practical for many of the chain's European customers, where public transport is commonly used, because the flat-pack methods allow for easier transport via public transportation.

IKEA contends that it has been a pioneering force in sustainable approaches to mass consumer culture.. Kamprad calls this "democratic design," meaning that the company applies an integrated approach to manufacturing and design (see also environmental design). In response to the explosion of human population and material expectations in the 20th and 21st centuries, the company implements economies of scale, capturing material streams and creating manufacturing processes that hold costs and resource use down, such as the extensive use of MDF (medium-density fiberboard). MDF, often called "particle board", is engineered wood fibre glued under heat and pressure to create a building material of superior strength which is resistant to warp. IKEA uses cabinet-grade and furniture-grade MDF in all of its MDF products, such as PAX wardrobes and kitchen cupboards. IKEA also uses wood, plastic, and other materials for furniture and other products. The intended result is flexible, adaptable home furnishings, scalable both to smaller homes and dwellings as well as large houses.

Not all furniture is stocked at the store level, such as particular sofa colours needing to be shipped from a warehouse to the customer's home (for a delivery charge). The item can also be shipped from the warehouse to the store. Some stores charge an extra fee for this service, but not all.

===Houses and flats===
IKEA has also expanded its product base to include flat-pack houses, in an effort to cut prices involved in a first-time buyer's home. The product, named BoKlok was launched in Sweden in 1996 in a joint venture with Skanska. Now working in the Nordic countries and in the UK, sites confirmed in England include London, Ashton-under-Lyne, Leeds, Gateshead, Warrington and Liverpool. 

At the end of September 2013, the company announced that solar panel packages for houses will be sold at 17 UK stores by the end of July 2014. The decision followed a successful pilot project at the Lakeside IKEA store, whereby one photovoltaic (PV) system was sold almost every day. The panels are manufactured by a Chinese company named Hanergy Holding Group Ltd. 

===Family Mobile===

On 8 August 2008, IKEA UK launched Family Mobile, a virtual mobile phone network, running on T-Mobile.

===Manufacturing===
Although IKEA household products and furniture are designed in Sweden, they are largely manufactured in developing countries to keep costs down. China accounts for about 2 times as much supply as Sweden. For most of its products, the final assembly is performed by the end-user (consumer).

Swedwood, an IKEA subsidiary, handles production of all of the company's wood-based products, with the largest Swedwood factory located in Southern Poland. According to the subsidiary, over 16,000 employees across 50 sites in 10 countries manufacture the 100 million pieces of furniture that IKEA sells annually. IKEA furniture uses the hardwood alternative particle board and Hultsfred, a factory in southern Sweden, is the company's sole supplier. 

===Product names===
IKEA products are identified by one-word (rarely two-word) names. Most of the names are Scandinavian in origin. Although there are some exceptions, most product names are based on a special naming system developed by IKEA. 
* Upholstered furniture, coffee tables, rattan furniture, bookshelves, media storage, doorknobs: Swedish placenames (for example: Klippan)
* Beds, wardrobes, hall furniture: Norwegian place names
* Dining tables and chairs: Finnish place names
* Bookcase ranges: Occupations
* Bathroom articles: Scandinavian lakes, rivers and bays
* Kitchens: grammatical terms, sometimes also other names
* Chairs, desks: men's names
* Fabrics, curtains: women's names
* Garden furniture: Swedish islands
* Carpets: Danish place names
* Lighting: terms from music, chemistry, meteorology, measures, weights, seasons, months, days, boats, nautical terms
* Bedlinen, bed covers, pillows/cushions: flowers, plants, precious stones
* Children's items: mammals, birds, adjectives
* Curtain accessories: mathematical and geometrical terms
* Kitchen utensils: foreign words, spices, herbs, fish, mushrooms, fruits or berries, functional descriptions
* Boxes, wall decoration, pictures and frames, clocks: colloquial expressions, also Swedish place names
For example, DUKTIG (meaning: good, well-behaved) is a line of children's toys, OSLO is a name of a bed, BILLY (a Swedish masculine name) is a popular bookcase, DINERA (meaning: (to) dine) for tableware, KASSETT (meaning: cassette) for media storage. One range of office furniture is named EFFEKTIV (meaning: efficient, effective), SKRPT (meaning: sharp or clever) is a line of kitchen knives.

A notable exception is the IVAR shelving system, which dates back to the early 1970s. This item is named after the item's designer.

Some of IKEA's Swedish product names have amusing or unfortunate connotations in other languages, sometimes resulting in the names being withdrawn in certain countries. Notable examples for English include the "Jerker" computer desk (discontinued several years ago as of 2013), "Fukta" plant spray, "Fartfull" workbench, 'Fartfull' workbench, 'Jerker' desk: Is Ikea hiding a grin?Chicago Sun-Times, 17 August 2004 and "Lyckhem" (meaning bliss). Kitchen legs are called FAKTUM (called AKURUM in the United States). The latest addition is the new "Askholmen" outdoor suite. Similar blunders happen with other multinational companies. 

Company founder Kamprad, who is dyslexic, found that naming the furniture with proper names and words, rather than a product code, made the names easier to remember. IKEA uses a sales technique called "bulla bulla" in which a bunch of items are purposefully jumbled in bins, to create the impression of volume, and therefore, inexpensiveness. 

===Catalogue===

IKEA publishes an annual catalogue, first published in Swedish in 1951. IKEA published 197 million catalogues in 2010, in twenty languages and sixty-one editions. It is considered to be the main marketing tool of the retail giant, consuming 70% of the company's annual marketing budget. 

The catalogue is distributed both in stores and by mail, with most of it being produced by IKEA Communications AB in IKEA's hometown of lmhult, Sweden where IKEA operates the largest photo studio in northern Europe at 8000 sqm. The catalogue itself is printed on chlorine-free paper of 1015% post-consumer waste, and prints approximately 175 million copies worldwide annually, more than 3 times as much as the Bible. 

According to Canadian broadcaster, CTV, "IKEA's publications have developed an almost cult-like following online. Readers have found all kinds of strange tidbits, including mysterious cat pictures, apparent Mickey Mouse references and weird books wedged into the many shelves that clutter the catalogues."

The 2013 catalogue is smartphone compatible, containing videos and photo galleries that can be accessed via an app by scanning the catalogue's pages, while the 2014 catalog incorporates an augmented reality app that projects an item into a real-time photograph image of the user's room. The augmented reality app also provides an indication of the scale of IKEA objects in relation to the user's living environment. 

===IKEA Family loyalty card===
IKEA Family card, issued in Canada, ca. 2012
In common with some other retailers, IKEA has launched a loyalty card called "IKEA family". The card is free of charge and can be used to obtain discounts on a special range of products found in each IKEA store. In conjunction with the card, IKEA also publishes and sells a printed quarterly magazine titled IKEA Family Live which supplements the card and catalogue. The magazine is already printed in thirteen languages and an English edition for the United Kingdom was launched in February 2007. It is expected to have a subscription of over 500,000. 

IKEA Family, as other loyalty cards allow for lower prices. The main, generally unusual difference is that it allow for free tea or coffee (from Monday to Friday at most locations) at Ikea restaurant. 

==Corporate structure==

Flowchart showing the structure and ownership of IKEA companies.
IKEA in Athens, Greece
IKEA Anagnina in Rome, Italy

IKEA in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia
IKEA Twin Cities in Bloomington, Minnesota, USA
IKEA is owned and operated by a complicated array of not-for-profit and for-profit corporations. The corporate structure is divided into two main parts: operations and franchising. Most of IKEA's operations, including the management of the majority of its stores, the design and manufacture of its furniture, and purchasing and supply functions are overseen by INGKA Holding, a private, for-profit Dutch company. Of the IKEA stores in 36 countries, 301 are run by the INGKA Holding. The remaining 47 stores are run by franchisees outside of the INGKA Holding, with the exception of IKEA Delft which is not franchised. 

INGKA Holding is not an independent company, but is wholly owned by the Stichting Ingka Foundation, which Kamprad established in 1982 in the Netherlands as a tax-exempt, not-for-profit foundation. The Ingka Foundation is controlled by a five-member executive committee that is chaired by Kamprad and includes his wife and attorney. 

While most IKEA stores operate under the direct purview of Ingka Holding and the Ingka Foundation, the IKEA trademark and concept is owned by an entirely separate Dutch company Inter IKEA Systems. Every IKEA store, including those run by Ingka Holding, pays a franchise fee of 3% of revenue to Inter IKEA Systems. The ownership of Inter IKEA Systems is exceedingly complicated and not publicly known. Inter IKEA Systems is owned by Inter IKEA Holding, a company registered in Luxembourg. Inter IKEA Holding, in turn, belongs to an identically named company in the former Netherlands Antilles that is run by a trust company based in Curaao. In 2009 the company in Curaao was liquidated and the company responsible for this liquidation traces back to the Interogo Foundation in Liechtenstein Ingvar Kamprad has confirmed that this foundation owns Inter IKEA Holding S.A. in Luxembourg and is controlled by the Kamprad family. The IKEA food concessions that operate in IKEA stores are still directly owned by the Kamprad family and represent a major part of the family's income.

In Australia, IKEA is operated by two companies. Stores located on the East Coast including Queensland, New South Wales and Victoria are owned by INGKA Holding. Stores elsewhere in the country including South Australia and Western Australia are owned by Cebas Pty Ltd. Like elsewhere, all stores are operated under a franchise agreement with Inter IKEA Systems. The Economist, "The secret of IKEA's success", 24 February 2011, pp. 6768. 

In June 2013, Ingvar Kamprad resigned from the board of Inter IKEA Holding SA and his youngest son Mathias Kamprad replaced Per Ludvigsson as the chairman of the holding company. Following his decision to step down, the 87-year-old founder explained, "I see this as a good time for me to leave the board of Inter IKEA Group. By that we are also taking another step in the generation shift that has been ongoing for some years." Mathias and his two older brothers, who also have leadership roles at IKEA, work on the corporation's overall vision and long-term strategy. 

===Profits===
The net profit of IKEA Group (which does not include Inter IKEA systems) in fiscal year 2009 (after paying franchise fees to Inter IKEA systems) was 2.538 billion on sales of 21.846 billion. Because INGKA Holding is owned by the nonprofit INGKA Foundation, none of this profit is taxed. The foundation's nonprofit status also means that the Kamprad family cannot reap these profits directly, but the Kamprads do collect a portion of IKEA sales profits through the franchising relationship between INGKA Holding and Inter IKEA Systems.

Inter IKEA Systems collected 631 million of franchise fees in 2004, but reported pre-tax profits of only 225 million in 2004. One of the major pre-tax expenses that Inter IKEA systems reported was 590 million of "other operating charges". IKEA has refused to explain these charges, but Inter IKEA Systems appears to make large payments to I.I. Holding, another Luxembourg-registered group that, according to The Economist, "is almost certain to be controlled by the Kamprad family." I.I. Holding made a profit of 328 million in 2004.

In 2004, the Inter IKEA group of companies and I.I. Holding reported combined profits of 553m and paid 19m in taxes, or approximately 3.5 percent. In 2013 the Daily Mail media publication reported that the IKEA subsidiary Swedwood had grown between 20-25% per year since its inception in 1991. 

The Berne Declaration, a non-profit organisation in Switzerland that promotes corporate responsibility, has formally criticised IKEA for its tax avoidance strategies. In 2007, the Berne Declaration nominated IKEA for one of its Public Eye "awards", which highlight corporate irresponsibility and are announced during the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland. www.evb.ch/en/index.cfm 

In a company statement emailed on 14 October 2013, Ikea's full-year sales rose 3.1 percent due in part to growth in Russia and China. Ikea's revenue total rose to US$37.9 billion (27.9 billion euros), with significant growth also recorded in North America. 

===Control by Kamprad===
Along with helping IKEA make non-taxable profit, IKEA's complicated corporate structure allows Kamprad to maintain tight control over the operations of Ingka Holding, and thus the operation of most IKEA stores. The Ingka Foundation's five-person executive committee is chaired by Kamprad. It appoints the board of Ingka Holding, approves any changes to Ingka Holding's bylaws, and has the right to preempt new share issues. If a member of the executive committee quits or dies, the other four members appoint his or her replacement.

In Kamprad's absence the foundation's bylaws include specific provisions requiring it to continue operating the Ingka Holding group and specifying that shares can be sold only to another foundation with the same objectives as the Ingka Foundation. 

===Charitable giving===
The INGKA Foundation is officially dedicated to promoting "innovations in architecture and interior design." With an estimated net worth of $36 billion, the foundation is unofficially the world's largest charitable organisation, ahead of the much better known Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, which has a net worth of approximately $33 billion. However, most of the Group's profit is spent on investment; the foundation expects to spend 45 million on charitable giving in 2010 (compare the Gates Foundation, which made gifts of more than $1.5 billion in 2005. )

IKEA is involved in several international charitable causes, particularly in partnership with UNICEF, including:
* In the wake of the 2004 Boxing Day tsunami, IKEA Australia agreed to match dollar for dollar co-workers' donations and donated all sales of the IKEA Blue Bag to the cause.
* After the 2005 Kashmir earthquake, IKEA gave 500,000 blankets to the relief effort in the region. 
* IKEA has provided furniture for over 100 "bridge schools" in Liberia. 
* In the 2008 Sichuan earthquake in China, IKEA Beijing sold an alligator toy for 40 yuan (US$5.83, 3.70) with all income going to the children in the earthquake struck area.

IKEA also supports American Forests to restore forests and reduce pollution. 

==IKEA Social Initiative==
In September 2005, IKEA Social Initiative was formed to manage the company's social involvements on a global level. IKEA Social Initiative is headed by Marianne Barner.

The main partners of IKEA Social Initiative are UNICEF and Save the Children. International Save the Children Alliance 

On 23 February 2009, at the ECOSOC event in New York, UNICEF announced that IKEA Social Initiative has become the agency's largest corporate partner, with total commitments of more than US$180 million. UNICEF (23 February 2009) IKEA social initiative adds $48 million to UNICEF's child health programme Reuters India (23 February 2009) Ikea gives UNICEF $48 mln to fight India child labour 

Examples of involvements:
* IKEA through IKEA Social Initiative contribute 1 to UNICEF and Save the Children from each soft toy sold during the holiday seasons, raising a total of 16.7 million so far. In 2013, an IKEA soft toy, Lufsig, created a storm and sold out in Hong Kong and in Southern China because it had been misnamed in Chinese. McBain, Sophie (10 December 2013). "How Lufsig the cuddly wolf became a Hong Kong protest symbol  A short lesson in the art of mistranslating names into Chinese." The New Statesman. 
* IKEA Social Initiative provided soft toys to children in Burma after Cyclone Nargis. 
* Starting in June 2009, for every Sunnan solar-powered lamp sold in IKEA stores worldwide, IKEA Social Initiative will donate one Sunnan with the help of UNICEF. 
* In September 2011, the IKEA Foundation pledged to donate $62 million to help Somali refugees in Kenya. 
* According to The Economist, however, IKEA's charitable giving is meager, "barely a rounding error in the foundation's assets." 

In 2009, Sweden's largest television station, SVT, revealed that IKEA's moneythe three per cent collection from each storedoes not actually go to a charitable foundation in the Netherlands, as IKEA has said. Inter IKEA is owned by a foundation in Liechtenstein, called Interogo, which has amassed twelve billion dollars, and is controlled by the Kamprad family. 

==Environmental performance==
After initial environmental issues like the highly publicized formaldehyde scandals in the early 1980s and 1992, IKEA took a proactive stance on environmental issues and tried to prevent future incidents through a variety of measures. See Bartlett, Dessain, Sjman (2006)  IKEA's Global Sourcing Challenge: Indian Rugs and Child Labour (A) in Harvard Business School In 1990, IKEA invited Karl-Henrik Robrt, founder of the Natural Step, to address its board of directors. Robert's system conditions for sustainability provided a strategic approach to improving the company's environmental performance. In 1990, IKEA adopted the Natural Step framework as the basis for its environmental plan. Owens, Heidi (1998) IKEA: A Natural Step Case Study. Oregon Natural Step Network. Retrieved on: 6 April 2008. This led to the development of an Environmental Action Plan, which was adopted in 1992. The plan focused on structural change, allowing IKEA to "maximize the impact of resources invested and reduce the energy necessary to address isolated issues." The environmental measures taken include the following:

# Replacing polyvinylchloride (PVC) in wallpapers, home textiles, shower curtains, lampshades and furniturePVC has been eliminated from packaging and is being phased out in electric cables;
# minimizing the use of formaldehyde in its products, including textiles;
# eliminating acid-curing lacquers;
# producing a model of chair (OGLA) made from 100% post-consumer plastic waste;
# introducing a series of air-inflatable furniture products into the product line. Such products reduce the use of raw materials for framing and stuffing and reduce transportation weight and volume to about 15% of that of conventional furniture;
# reducing the use of chromium for metal surface treatment;
# limiting the use of substances such as cadmium, lead, PCB, PCP, and Azo pigments;
# using wood from responsibly managed forests that replant and maintain biological diversity;
# using only recyclable materials for flat packaging and "pure" (non-mixed) materials for packaging to assist in recycling. 
# introducing rental bicycles with trailers for customers in Denmark. 

In 2000 IKEA introduced its code of conduct for suppliers, called the IKEA way of purchasing.... shortened to IWAY. Today IWAY is a totally integrated part of IKEA's purchasing model. IWAY covers social, safety and environmental questions. Today IKEA has around 60 IWAY auditors that performs hundreds of supplier audits every year. The main purpose with IWAY is to make sure that the IKEA suppliers follows the law in each country where they are based. Most IKEA suppliers fulfill the law today with exceptions for some special issues, one being excessive working hours in Asia, in countries such as China and India.

More recently, IKEA has stopped providing plastic bags to customers, but offers reusable bags for sale. The IKEA restaurants also only offer reusable plates, knives, forks, spoons, etc. Toilets in some IKEA WC-rooms have been outfitted with dual-function flushers. IKEA has recycling bins for compact fluorescent lamps (CFLs), energy saving bulbs and batteries.
In 2001 IKEA was one of the first companies to operate its own cross-border goods trains through several countries in Europe. 

In August 2008, IKEA also announced that it had created IKEA GreenTech, a 50 million venture capital fund. Located in Lund (a college town in Sweden), it will invest in 810 companies in the coming five years with focus on solar panels, alternative light sources, product materials, energy efficiency and water saving and purification. The aim is to commercialise green technologies for sale in IKEA stores within 34 years. 

To make IKEA a more sustainable company, a product life cycle was created. For the idea stage, products should be flat-packed so that more items can be shipped at once; products should also be easier to dismantle and recycle. Raw materials are used, and since wood and cotton are two of IKEA's most important manufacturing products, the company works with environmentally friendly forests and cotton, whereby the excessive use of chemicals and water is avoided.

Manufacturing is third in the life cycle and includes IWAY, IKEA's code of conduct for manufactures and suppliers that formulates and enforces requirements for working conditions, social and environmental standards, and what suppliers can expect from IKEA in return. Marketing is another part of IKEA's life cycle and a portion of the paper used for its catalogues is sourced from responsibly managed forests. The catalogue is also smaller, so that less paper is required, less waste is produced and more catalogues can be shipped per load.

IKEA stores recycle waste and many run on renewable energy with the use of energy-saving bulbs and sensors. All employees are trained in environmental and social responsibility, while public transit is one of the priorities when the location of stores is considered. Also, the coffee served at IKEA stores is certified organic.

The last stage of the life cycle is the end of life. Most IKEA stores recycle light bulbs and drained batteries, and the company is also exploring the recycling of sofas and other home furnishing products. According to IKEA's 2012 "Sustainability Report", 23% of all wood that the company uses meets the standards of the Forest Stewardship Council, and the report states that IKEA aims to double this percentage by 2017. The report also states that IKEA does not accept illegally logged wood and supports 13 World Wide Fund For Nature (WWF) projects. 

On 17 February 2011, IKEA announced its plans to develop a wind farm in Dalarna County, Sweden, furthering its goal of using only renewable energy to fuel its operations. As of June 2012, 17 United States (US) IKEA stores are powered by solar panels, with 22 additional installations in progress. 

In 2011, the company examined its wood consumption and noticed that almost half of its global pine and spruce consumption was for the fabrication of pallets. The company consequently started a transition to the use of paper pallets and the "Optiledge system". The OptiLedge product is totally recyclable, made from 100% virgin high-impact copolymer polypropylene (PP). The system is a "unit load alternative to the use of a pallet. The system consists of the OptiLedge (usually used in pairs), aligned and strapped to the bottom carton to form a base layer upon which to stack more product. Corner boards are used when strapping to minimize the potential for package compression." The conversion began in Germany and Japan, before its introduction into the rest of Europe and North America. The system has been marketed to other companies, and IKEA has formed the OptiLedge company to manage and sell the product. 

IKEA has expanded its sustainability plan in the UK to include electric car charge points for customers at all locations by the end of 2013. The effort will include Nissan and Ecotricity and promise to deliver an 80% charge in 30 minutes. 

In February 2014, IKEA in the UK announced that from 2016 they will only sell energy-efficient LED lightbulbs, lamps and light fixtures. LED lightbulbs uses as much as only 15% of the power of a regular incandescent light bulb. 

==Negative community impact==

IKEA's goals of sustainability and environmental design in their merchandise have sometimes been at odds with the impact a new IKEA store can have on a community.
*As a teenager, IKEA founder Ingvar Kamprad was directly involved in the pro-Nazi New Swedish Movement (Nysvenska Rrelsen) until at least 1948, causing tensions when IKEA began opening stores in Israel, although one source has claimed that the movement was not pro-Nazi. Nilsson, Karl N. Alvar Svensk verklass och hgerextremism under 1900-talet ISBN 91-86474-34-0 pp. 155156. Kamprad devotes two chapters to his time in Nysvenska Rrelsen in his book, Leading By Design: The IKEA Story and, in a 1994 letter to IKEA employees, called his affiliation with the organisation the "greatest mistake of my life." After the revelations came to light, he pledged 1 billion to charity. 
* In September 2004, when IKEA offered a limited number of free $150 vouchers at the opening of a new store in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, three people were crushed to death in a stampede that followed the store's opening. IKEA at Atlantic Station in Atlanta, GA.
* IKEA has demolished historic buildings, in at least one case for a parking area. (At the College Park, Maryland, US, store there is an interactive digital display which tells the history of a tavern which used to exist where the store is currently located.)
* IKEA was refused planning permission for a future store in the UK in 2004 (to be based in Stockport, near Manchester) by the Office of the Deputy Prime Minister. It applied for judicial review but lost in 2005. However, they later received permission to build a store within the Manchester area a few miles from the originally planned site in Ashton-under-Lyne. An estimated 10,000 was spent on traffic policing, and even more on rerouting traffic from the M60 motorway around Ashton.
* In 2004, there was controversy about an Irish law restricting the maximum size of a retail outlet to 6000 sqm. IKEA's plan to build a much larger store in Dublin caused the law to be put up for debate. The law was changed to remove the size limit for retail outlets selling durable goods in designated areas. The Minister for the Environment was criticised for allegedly changing the law to suit one company and other agencies protested the law change as damaging to small businesses while the government defended their decision stating that the move was a positive one for Irish consumers. IKEA Dublin has since opened on 27 July 2009. 
* After viewing the 100 ft sign of an IKEA under construction near Portland International Airport, Randy Leonard, the city commissioner in charge of sign permits in Portland, Oregon, placed a moratorium on all pending and future sign permits in the area. 
* In 2007 several ancient tombs were destroyed while building an IKEA store in Nanjing, southeastern China. Archaeologists asked whether the building company could stop working for some days to allow archaeologists to work on the sight, but they did not receive the necessary permission. The Heritage Trust, 5 Incredibly Valuable Artifacts That Were Destroyed 
* In June 2007 the designated nationalist Social Democratic and Labour Party complained about an artist's rendering of IKEA Belfast that included both the Union Flag and the Ulster Banner flag as two of the three flags in front of the store. After being labelled "an upmarket Orange hall" by the party, IKEA assured customers and co-workers that only the Swedish flag would be seen outside the actual store. 

==Criticisms==

===Accusation of price gouging===
The company has also been criticised by Citytv in Canada for charging as much as twice the price in their Canadian stores for the same items sold in their American stores, despite the Canadian dollar reaching parity with the U.S. dollar. 

===Biased branding and advertising accusations===
* Former Norwegian prime minister Kjell Magne Bondevik has criticized IKEA for not depicting women assembling furniture in its instruction booklets. IKEA denied this claim in a statement. 
* In June 2007, The BRUNKRISSLA bedding notes said, "Brightens up your grad's dorm. Unlike a creepy gothic room-mate, who can be a bad influence." Members of the goth subculture took offence at the stereotype. 
* A researcher from the University of Copenhagen pointed out that for years, IKEA has named their cheap rugs after Danish places, while the more expensive and luxurious furniture was named after Swedish places. The researcher, Klaus Kjller, who is well known for tongue-in-cheek statements, accused IKEA of imperialism. 
* In October 2012, IKEA was criticized for airbrushing women out of pictures in catalogues which were used in Saudi Arabia. 

===Errors and recalls===
* In 2008, IKEA sent an email to their British customers advising that "IKEA Shop Online is open everywhere", even though this only applied to England and Wales. , Scottish residents are able to shop online, but not Northern Irish residents. 
* In February 2013, IKEA announced it had pulled 17,000 portions of Swedish meatballs containing beef and pork from stores in Europe after testing in the Czech Republic found traces of horse in the product. The company actually removed the Swedish meatballs from stores' shelves on 25 February 2013, but only made the announcement public after Swedish newspaper Svenska Dagbladet uncovered what happened. In a March 2013 media report, an Ikea representative stated that the corporation had forced Familjen Dafgard, its main meatball supplier, to cease business with eight of its 15 suppliers and would reduce the number of purchasing countries. The discovered horsemeat was traced to a Polish abattoir. 

===Labor issues===
* In 2011, IKEA and its Swedwood affiliate came under criticism for its treatment of workers at a US factory in Danville, Virginia and its decision to hire the law firm Jackson Lewis, which is often employed by companies to counter labor demands, to consult with IKEA on attempts to form a union at Danville. A petition on Change.org has received more than 70,000 signatures urging IKEA to respect workers' rights. 
* In 2012, IKEA in France was accused by the independent newspaper Le Canard enchan and the investigative website Mediapart of spying on its employees and clients by illegally accessing French police records. The head of risk management at IKEA feared his employees were anti-globalists or potential ecoterrorists. 
* In October 2012, Glendal Foods  a major supplier to IKEA Store Restaurants in Australia  was the subject of bullying allegations by about 50% of staff at the company and the National Union of Workers. Claims included self-harm by a worker, retention of wages & a significant long-term pattern of staff-abuse and the complaints are under investigation by WorkSafe Victoria. IKEA Australia have not yet made a formal comment. 

====Use of forced labor, 1980s====

During the 1980s, IKEA kept its costs down by using production facilities in East Germany. A portion of the workforce at the factories used consisted of political prisoners. This fact, revealed in a report by Ernst & Young commissioned by the company, resulted from intermingling of criminals and political dissidents in the state-owned production facilities IKEA contracted with, a practice which was generally known in West Germany. IKEA was one of a number of companies, including West German firms, which benefited from this practice. The investigation resulted from attempts by former political prisoners to obtain compensation. In November 2012, IKEA admitted being aware at the time of the possibility of use of forced labor and failing to exercise sufficient rigor to identify and avoid it. A summary of the Ernst & Young report was released on 16 November 2012. 

===Verdana typeface===
In 2009 IKEA caused a flap in the graphic design world when it changed the typeface used in its catalogue from Futura to Verdana, expressing a desire to unify its branding between print and web media. The controversy has been attributed to the perception of Verdana as a symbol of homogeneity in popular typography.  "Verdanagate," by "Armin" in "Brand New" blog, 31 August 2009 

Time magazine and The Associated Press ran articles on the controversy including a brief interview with an IKEA representative, focusing on the opinions of typographers and designers.  The Font War: Ikea Fans Fume over Verdana. Time, (28 August 2009) Design and advertising industry-focused publications such as Business Week joined the fray of online posts. The branding critic blog, Brand New, was one of those using the "Verdanagate" name. The Australian online daily news site Crikey also published an article on the controversy. Mel Campbell and Jeremy Wortsman, "The Full Fonty: Why Type Nerds Went Mental Over Ikea", Crikey, 1 September 2009 The Guardian ran an article asking "IKEA is changing its font to Verdana  causing outrage among typomaniacs. Should the rest of us care? Absolutely." Verdana: Ikea's flat-pack font, Simon Garfield, The Guardian, 2 September 2009 The New York Times said the change to Verdana "is so offensive to many because it seems like a slap at the principles of design by a company that has been hailed for its adherence to them." "Typography Fans Say Ikea Should Stick to Furniture", Edward Rothstein, The New York Times, 4 September 2009 

==Advertising==
German-Turkish advertisement in Berlin-Neuklln

In 1994, IKEA ran a commercial in the United States widely thought to be the first to feature a homosexual couple; it aired for several weeks before being pulled due to terrorist threats directed at IKEA stores. Other IKEA commercials appeal to the wider GLBTQ community, one featuring a transgender woman. 

In 2002, the inaugural television component of the "Unbring" campaign, titled Lamp, went on to win several awards, including a Grand Clio, Eastwood, Allison; "MINI missing but "Lamp" shines at Clios", Boards, 22 May 2003. Retrieved 22 April 2010. Golds at the London International Awards and the ANDY Awards, and the Grand Prix at the Cannes Lions International Advertising Festival, Mutel, Glen; "Surprise at Cannes as 'lamp' wins Grand Prix", Campaign, 27 June 2003. Retrieved 22 April 2010. the most prestigious awards ceremony in the advertising community.

IKEA launched a UK-wide "Home is the Most Important Place in the World" advertising campaign in September 2007 using estate agent signs with the term "Not For Sale" written on them as part of the wider campaign. After the campaign appeared in the Metro newspaper London the business news website www.mad.co.uk remarked that the IKEA campaign had amazing similarities with the marketing activity of UK home refurbishment company Onis living who had launched their own Not For Sale advertising campaign two years prior and was awarded the Interbuild 2006 Construction Marketing Award for best campaign under 25,000. http://www.constructionmarketingawards.com/testimonials.html 

Onis's Not For Sale sign.
A debate ensued between Fraser Patterson, Chief Executive of Onis and Andrew McGuinness, partner at Beattie McGuinness Bungay (BMB), the advertising and PR agency awarded the 12m IKEA account. The essence of the debate was that BMB claimed to be unaware of Onis's campaign as Onis were not an advertising agency. Onis's argument was that their advertising could be seen in prominent landmarks throughout London, having been already accredited, showing concern about the impact IKEA's campaign would have on the originality of their own.

After some negotiations BMB and IKEA agreed to provide Onis with a feature page on the IKEA campaign site linking through to Onis's .co.uk site, for a period of 1 year. Onis is possibly the only company to have ever been advertised by IKEA in such a fashion. In 2008, Onis Homes limited was placed into voluntary liquidation and the website www.onishome.com closed.

The Intellectual Property and trading rights of Onis Homes Limited were later purchased by new shareholders with the strategy to grow the Onis brand throughout the UK as a one stop shop home refurbishment franchise using the trading name Onis living.

In 2008, IKEA paired up with the makers of popular video game The Sims 2 to make a stuff pack called The Sims 2 IKEA Home Stuff, featuring many IKEA products. It was released on 24 June 2008 in North America and 26 June 2008 in Europe. It is the second stuff pack with a major brand, the first being The Sims 2 H&M Fashion Stuff, which are both coincidentally companies of Swedish origin.

IKEA took over the title sponsorship of Philadelphia's annual Thanksgiving Day parade in 2008, replacing Boscov's, who filed for bankruptcy in August 2008.

In November 2008, a subway train decorated in IKEA style was introduced in Novosibirsk, Russia. Four cars were turned into a mobile showroom of the Swedish design. The redesigned train, which features colourful seats and fancy curtains, carried passengers until 6 June 2009.

Oyster cards (the ticket-free system for the London Underground) were for given with wallets sponsored by IKEA in 2008-09. IKEA also sponsored the tube map. 

The Isle of Wight ferry Red Osprey in her IKEA livery.
In January 2009, just before the new store opened in Southampton, of Red Funnel was re-painted in an entirely yellow and blue livery to celebrate the opening of the new IKEA store in Southampton. This is the first time a Red Funnel ferry has been re-painted out of its own red and white colour scheme. It stayed in these colours for 12 months as part of a deal between Red Funnel and IKEA to provide home delivery services to the Isle of Wight. It was repainted with Red Funnel's red and white livery when the deal ended in January 2010.

In March 2010, IKEA developed an event in four important Metro stations in Paris, in which furniture collections are displayed in high-traffic spots, giving potential customers a chance to check out the brand's products. The Metro walls were also filled with prints that showcase IKEA interiors.

In September 2010, IKEA launched an advertisement for UK & Ireland called "Happy Inside" which had 100 cats lying on IKEA furniture in the flagship IKEA store in Wembley, London. 

In April 2011, an advertising campaign for which aims to discover whether men or women are messier in the home launched. Created by Mother, the campaign will begin with a TV advert shot in front of a live audience, featuring four stand-up comedians, two men and two women, having the debate over which gender is the messiest. The strategy behind the campaign is that domestic clutter leads to arguments, leading to an unhappy home, which IKEA wants to prove can be avoided with better storage. Viewers will be directed to a new Facebook page for the brand, where they are able to vote as to who they believe is the messiest, and submit proof using videos and photos through an app created especially for the campaign. Meanwhile, online display banners will allow off users the opportunity to vote, with online adverts promoting Ikea products also demonstrating the problems people have shared, and offering solutions.

Anna Crona, marketing director at IKEA United Kingdom and Ireland, explained: "We are committed to understanding how our customers live life at home so we can provide solutions to make life happier. Everybody has storage needs in the home and by encouraging debate and providing solutions we will show that IKEA is relevant to everybody, no matter what your home is like or how much money you have." Press adverts will also support the campaign, as will a handbook entitled "Peace, Love and Storage", which will be available through the Facebook site. 

==Other ventures==
In mid-August 2012, the company announced that it will establish a chain of 100 economy hotels in Europe but, unlike its few existing hotels in Scandinavia, they will not carry the IKEA name, nor will they use IKEA furniture and furnishings  they will be operated by an unnamed international group of hoteliers. 

==Awards==
IKEA was named one of the 100 Best Companies for Working Mothers in 2004 and 2005 by Working Mothers magazine. It ranked 80 in Fortune's 200 Best Companies to Work For in 2006 and in October 2008, IKEA Canada LP was named one of "Canada's Top 100 Employers" by Mediacorp Canada Inc., and was featured in Maclean's newsmagazine. Additionally, IKEA is the most popular store for college furnishings. 

==References==

==External links==

* Company home page
* TV show based on IKEA
* 
* "The miracle of lmhult" by Oliver Burkeman from the Guardian newspaper. The writer talks about his visit to IKEA's HQ in lmhult

 



[[Iridium]]

Iridium is the chemical element with symbol Ir and atomic number 77. A very hard, brittle, silvery-white transition metal of the platinum family, Iridium is generally credited with being the second densest element (after osmium) based on measured density, although calculations involving the space lattices of the elements show that iridium is denser Chemicool Periodic Table. Chemicool.com. 17 Oct. 2012. Web. 5/30/2014 , and is the most corrosion-resistant metal, even at temperatures as high as 2000C. Although only certain molten salts and halogens are corrosive to solid iridium, finely divided iridium dust is much more reactive and can be flammable.

Iridium was discovered in 1803 among insoluble impurities in natural platinum. Smithson Tennant, the primary discoverer, named iridium for the Greek goddess Iris, personification of the rainbow, because of the striking and diverse colors of its salts. Iridium is one of the rarest elements in the Earth's crust, with annual production and consumption of only three tonnes. 191Ir and 193Ir are the only two naturally occurring isotopes of iridium, as well as the only stable isotopes; the latter is the more abundant of the two.

The most important iridium compounds in use are the salts and acids it forms with chlorine, though iridium also forms a number of organometallic compounds used in industrial catalysis, and in research. Iridium metal is employed when high corrosion resistance at high temperatures is needed, as in high-performance spark plugs, crucibles for recrystallization of semiconductors at high temperatures, and electrodes for the production of chlorine in the chloralkali process. Iridium radioisotopes are used in some radioisotope thermoelectric generators.

Iridium is found in meteorites with an abundance much higher than its average abundance in the Earth's crust. For this reason the unusually high abundance of iridium in the clay layer at the CretaceousPaleogene boundary gave rise to the Alvarez hypothesis that the impact of a massive extraterrestrial object caused the extinction of dinosaurs and many other species 66 million years ago. It is thought that the total amount of iridium in the planet Earth is much higher than that observed in crustal rocks, but as with other platinum group metals, the high density and tendency of iridium to bond with iron caused most iridium to descend below the crust when the planet was young and still molten.

==Characteristics==
===Physical properties===
alt=A flattened drop of dark gray substance
A member of the platinum group metals, iridium is white, resembling platinum, but with a slight yellowish cast. Because of its hardness, brittleness, and very high melting point, solid iridium is difficult to machine, form, or work, thus powder metallurgy is commonly employed, instead. It is the only metal to maintain good mechanical properties in air at temperatures above 1600C (2912F). It has a very high boiling point (10th among all elements) and becomes a superconductor at temperatures below 0.14K. 

Iridium's modulus of elasticity is the second-highest among the metals, only being surpassed by osmium. This, together with a high shear modulus and a very low figure for Poisson's ratio (the relationship of longitudinal to lateral strain), indicate the high degree of stiffness and resistance to deformation that have rendered its fabrication into useful components a matter of great difficulty. Despite these limitations and iridium's high cost, a number of applications have developed where mechanical strength is an essential factor in some of the extremely severe conditions encountered in modern technology. 

The measured density of iridium is only slightly lower (by about 0.12%) than that of osmium, the densest element known. Some ambiguity occurred regarding which of the two elements was denser, due to the small size of the difference in density and difficulties in measuring it accurately, but, with increased accuracy in factors used for calculating density X-ray crystallographic data yielded densities of 22.56 g/cm3 for iridium and 22.59 g/cm3 for osmium. 

===Chemical properties===
Iridium is the most corrosion-resistant metal known: it is not attacked by almost any acid, aqua regia, molten metals, or silicates at high temperatures. It can, however, be attacked by some molten salts, such as sodium cyanide and potassium cyanide, as well as oxygen and the halogens (particularly fluorine) at higher temperatures. 

===Compounds===

 Oxidation states Most common oxidation states of iridium are in bold. The right column lists one representative compound for each oxidation state. 
 3 
 1 
 0 
 +1 
 +2 
 +3 
 +4 
 +5 
 +6 

Iridium forms compounds in oxidation states between 3 and +6; the most common oxidation states are +3 and +4. Well-characterized examples of the highest oxidation state are rare, but include fluoride|] and two mixed oxides and . In addition, it was reported in 2009 that iridium(VIII) oxide () was prepared under matrix isolation conditions (6 K in Ar) by UV irradiation of an iridium-peroxo complex. This species, however, is not expected to be stable as a bulk solid at higher temperatures. 

Iridium dioxide, , a brown powder, is the only well-characterized oxide of iridium. A sesquioxide, , has been described as a blue-black powder which is oxidized to by . The corresponding disulfides, diselenides, sesquisulfides, and sesquiselenides are known, and has also been reported. Iridium also forms iridates with oxidation states +4 and +5, such as and , which can be prepared from the reaction of potassium oxide or potassium superoxide with iridium at high temperatures. 

While no binary hydrides of iridium, are known, complexes are known that contain and , where iridium has the +1 and +3 oxidation states, respectively. The ternary hydride is believed to contain both the and the 18-electron anion. 

No monohalides or dihalides are known, whereas trihalides, , are known for all of the halogens. For oxidation states +4 and above, only the tetrafluoride, pentafluoride and hexafluoride are known. Iridium hexafluoride, , is a volatile and highly reactive yellow solid, composed of octahedral molecules. It decomposes in water and is reduced to , a crystalline solid, by iridium black. Iridium pentafluoride has similar properties but it is actually a tetramer, , formed by four corner-sharing octahedra. 

alt=Skeletal formula of a chemical compound with iridium atom in its center bonded to two P-PH3 groups, to a chlorine atom and to a C-O group.
Hexachloroiridic(IV) acid, , and its ammonium salt are the most important iridium compounds from an industrial perspective. They are involved in the purification of iridium and used as precursors for most other iridium compounds, as well as in the preparation of anode coatings. The ion has an intense dark brown color, and can be readily reduced to the lighter-colored and vice versa. Iridium trichloride, , which can be obtained in anhydrous form from direct oxidation of iridium powder by chlorine at 650 C, or in hydrated form by dissolving in hydrochloric acid, is often used as a starting material for the synthesis of other Ir(III) compounds. Another compound used as a starting material is ammonium hexachloroiridate(III), . Iridium(III) complexes are diamagnetic (low-spin) and generally have an octahedral molecular geometry. 

Organoiridium compounds contain iridiumcarbon bonds where the metal is usually in lower oxidation states. For example, oxidation state zero is found in tetrairidium dodecacarbonyl, , which is the most common and stable binary carbonyl of iridium. In this compound, each of the iridium atoms is bonded to the other three, forming a tetrahedral cluster. Some organometallic Ir(I) compounds are notable enough to be named after their discoverers. One is Vaska's complex, , which has the unusual property of binding to the dioxygen molecule, . Another one is Crabtree's catalyst, a homogeneous catalyst for hydrogenation reactions. These compounds are both square planar, d8 complexes, with a total of 16 valence electrons, which accounts for their reactivity. 

An iridium-based organic LED material has been documented, and found to be much brighter than DPA or PPV, so could be the basis for flexible OLED lighting in the future. http://www.furuyametals.co.jp/english/technology/technology02.html 

===Isotopes===

Iridium has two naturally occurring, stable isotopes, 191Ir and 193Ir, with natural abundances of 37.3% and 62.7%, respectively. At least 34 radioisotopes have also been synthesized, ranging in mass number from 164 to 199. 192Ir, which falls between the two stable isotopes, is the most stable radioisotope, with a half-life of 73.827 days, and finds application in brachytherapy and in industrial radiography, particularly for nondestructive testing of welds in steel in the oil and gas industries; iridium-192 sources have been involved in a number of radiological accidents. Three other isotopes have half-lives of at least a day188Ir, 189Ir, and 190Ir. Isotopes with masses below 191 decay by some combination of + decay,  decay, and proton emission, with the exceptions of 189Ir, which decays by electron capture, and 190Ir, which decays by positron emission. Synthetic isotopes heavier than 191 decay by  decay, although 192Ir also has a minor electron capture decay path. All known isotopes of iridium were discovered between 1934 and 2001; the most recent is 171Ir. 

At least 32 metastable isomers have been characterized, ranging in mass number from 164 to 197. The most stable of these is 192m2Ir, which decays by isomeric transition with a half-life of 241 years, making it more stable than any of iridium's synthetic isotopes in their ground states. The least stable isomer is 190m3Ir with a half-life of only 2 s. The isotope 191Ir was the first one of any element to be shown to present a Mssbauer effect. This renders it useful for Mssbauer spectroscopy for research in physics, chemistry, biochemistry, metallurgy, and mineralogy. 

==History==
alt=Photo of part of a black vase with brown picture on it: A woman with wings on her back hold an arrow with right hand and gives a jar to a man. A small deer is standing in front of the woman.
The discovery of iridium is intertwined with that of platinum and the other metals of the platinum group. Native platinum used by ancient Ethiopians and by South American cultures always contained a small amount of the other platinum group metals, including iridium. Platinum reached Europe as platina ("small silver"), found in the 17th century by the Spanish conquerors in a region today known as the department of Choc in Colombia. The discovery that this metal was not an alloy of known elements, but instead a distinct new element, did not occur until 1748. 

Chemists who studied platinum dissolved it in aqua regia (a mixture of hydrochloric and nitric acids) to create soluble salts. They always observed a small amount of a dark, insoluble residue. Joseph Louis Proust thought that the residue was graphite. The French chemists Victor Collet-Descotils, Antoine Franois, comte de Fourcroy, and Louis Nicolas Vauquelin also observed the black residue in 1803, but did not obtain enough for further experiments. 

In 1803, British scientist Smithson Tennant (17611815) analyzed the insoluble residue and concluded it must contain a new metal. Vauquelin treated the powder alternately with alkali and acids and obtained a volatile new oxide, which he believed to be of this new metalwhich he named ptene, from the Greek word ptns, "winged". Tennant, who had the advantage of a much greater amount of residue, continued his research and identified the two previously undiscovered elements in the black residue, iridium and osmium. He obtained dark red crystals (probably of ]n) by a sequence of reactions with sodium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid. He named iridium after Iris (), the Greek winged goddess of the rainbow and the messenger of the Olympian gods, because many of the salts he obtained were strongly colored. Iridium literally means "of rainbows". Discovery of the new elements was documented in a letter to the Royal Society on June 21, 1804. 

British scientist John George Children was the first to melt a sample of iridium in 1813 with the aid of "the greatest galvanic battery that has ever been constructed" (at that time). The first to obtain high-purity iridium was Robert Hare in 1842. He found it had a density of around 21.8 g/cm3 and noted the metal is nearly immalleable and very hard. The first melting in appreciable quantity was done by Henri Sainte-Claire Deville and Jules Henri Debray in 1860. They required burning more than 300 l of pure and for each kg of iridium. 

These extreme difficulties in melting the metal limited the possibilities for handling iridium. John Isaac Hawkins was looking to obtain a fine and hard point for fountain pen nibs, and in 1834 managed to create an iridium-pointed gold pen. In 1880, John Holland and William Lofland Dudley were able to melt iridium by adding phosphorus and patented the process in the United States; British company Johnson Matthey later stated they had been using a similar process since 1837 and had already presented fused iridium at a number of World Fairs. The first use of an alloy of iridium with ruthenium in thermocouples was made by Otto Feussner in 1933. These allowed for the measurement of high temperatures in air up to 2000C. 

In 1957 Rudolf Mssbauer, in what has been called one of the "landmark experiments in twentieth-century physics", discovered the resonant and recoil-free emission and absorption of gamma rays by atoms in a solid metal sample containing only 191Ir. This phenomenon, known as the Mssbauer effect (which has since been observed for other nuclei, such as 57Fe), and developed as Mssbauer spectroscopy, has made important contributions to research in physics, chemistry, biochemistry, metallurgy, and mineralogy. Mssbauer received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1961, at the age 32, just three years after he published his discovery. 

==Occurrence==
Iridium is one of the least abundant elements in the earth's crust.
alt=A large black egg-shaped boulder of porous structure standing on its top, tilted
Iridium is one of the least abundant elements in the Earth's crust, having an average mass fraction of 0.001 ppm in crustal rock; gold is 40 times more abundant, platinum is 10 times more abundant, and silver and mercury are 80 times more abundant. Tellurium is about as abundant as iridium, and only three naturally occurring stable elements are less abundant: rhenium, ruthenium, and rhodium, iridium being 10 times more abundant than the last two. In contrast to its low abundance in crustal rock, iridium is relatively common in meteorites, with concentrations of 0.5 ppm or more. The overall concentration of iridium on Earth is thought to be much higher than what is observed in crustal rocks, but because of the density and siderophilic ("iron-loving") character of iridium, it descended below the crust and into the Earth's core when the planet was still molten. 

Iridium is found in nature as an uncombined element or in natural alloys; especially the iridiumosmium alloys, osmiridium (osmium-rich), and iridosmium (iridium-rich). In the nickel and copper deposits, the platinum group metals occur as sulfides (i.e. (Pt,Pd)S), tellurides (i.e. PtBiTe), antimonides (PdSb), and arsenides (i.e. ). In all of these compounds, platinum is exchanged by a small amount of iridium and osmium. As with all of the platinum group metals, iridium can be found naturally in alloys with raw nickel or raw copper. 

Within the Earth's crust, iridium is found at highest concentrations in three types of geologic structure: igneous deposits (crustal intrusions from below), impact craters, and deposits reworked from one of the former structures. The largest known primary reserves are in the Bushveld igneous complex in South Africa, though the large coppernickel deposits near Norilsk in Russia, and the Sudbury Basin in Canada are also significant sources of iridium. Smaller reserves are found in the United States. Iridium is also found in secondary deposits, combined with platinum and other platinum group metals in alluvial deposits. The alluvial deposits used by pre-Columbian people in the Choc Department of Colombia are still a source for platinum-group metals. As of 2003, the world reserves had not been estimated. 

===CretaceousPaleogene boundary presence===
alt=A cliff with pronounced layered structure: yellow, gray, white, gray. A red arrow points between the yellow and gray layers.

The CretaceousPaleogene boundary of 66 million years ago, marking the temporal border between the Cretaceous and Paleogene periods of geological time, was identified by a thin stratum of iridium-rich clay. A team led by Luis Alvarez proposed in 1980 an extraterrestrial origin for this iridium, attributing it to an asteroid or comet impact. Their theory, known as the Alvarez hypothesis, is now widely accepted to explain the demise of the dinosaurs. A large buried impact crater structure with an estimated age of about 66 million years was later identified under what is now the Yucatn Peninsula (the Chicxulub crater). Dewey M. McLean and others argue that the iridium may have been of volcanic origin instead, as the Earth's core is rich in iridium, and active volcanoes such as Piton de la Fournaise, in the island of Runion, are still releasing iridium. 

==Production==

Year Consumption(tonnes) Price(USD/ozt) Platinum-Group Metals. U.S. Geological Survey Mineral Commodity Summaries 
 2001 2.6 415.25 
 2002 2.5 294.62 
 2003 3.3 93.02 
 2004 3.60 185.33 
 2005 3.86 169.51 
 2006 4.08 349.45 
 2007 3.70 444.43 
 2008 3.10 448.34 
 2009 2.52 420.4 
 2010 10.40 642.15 

Iridium is obtained commercially as a by-product from nickel and copper mining and processing. During electrorefining of copper and nickel, noble metals such as silver, gold and the platinum group metals as well as selenium and tellurium settle to the bottom of the cell as anode mud, which forms the starting point for their extraction. To separate the metals, they must first be brought into solution. Several methods are available depending on the separation process and the composition of the mixture; two representative methods are fusion with sodium peroxide followed by dissolution in aqua regia, and dissolution in a mixture of chlorine with hydrochloric acid. 

After it is dissolved, iridium is separated from the other platinum group metals by precipitating or by extracting with organic amines. The first method is similar to the procedure Tennant and Wollaston used for their separation. The second method can be planned as continuous liquidliquid extraction and is therefore more suitable for industrial scale production. In either case, the product is reduced using hydrogen, yielding the metal as a powder or sponge that can be treated using powder metallurgy techniques. 

Over the last decades iridium prices have spanned a considerable range. With a relatively small volume in the world market (compared to other industrial metals like aluminium or copper), the iridium price reacts strongly to instabilities in production, demand, speculation, hoarding, and politics in the producing countries.
As a substance with rare properties, its price has been particularly influenced by changes in modern technology:
The gradual decrease between 2001 and 2003 has been related to an oversupply of Ir crucibles used for industrial growth of large single crystals. 
Likewise the prices above 1000&#8239;USD/oz between 2010 and 2014 have been explained with the installation of production facilities for single crystal sapphire used in LED backlights for TVs. 
 
 

==Applications==
The demand for iridium surged from 2.5 tonnes in 2009 to 10.4 tonnes in 2010, mostly because of electronics-related applications that saw a rise from 0.2 to 6 tonnes  iridium crucibles are commonly used for growing large high-quality single crystals, demand for which has increased sharply. This increase in iridium consumption is predicted to saturate due to accumulating stocks of crucibles, as happened earlier in the 2000s. Other major applications include spark plugs that consumed 0.78 tonnes of Ir in 2007, electrodes for the chloralkali process (1.1 t in 2007) and chemical catalysts (0.75 t in 2007). 

===Industrial and medical===
alt=Skeletal formula of a chemical compound with iridium atom in its center, bonded to 6 benzol rings. The rings are pairwise connected to each other.
The high melting point, hardness and corrosion resistance of iridium and its alloys determine most of its applications. Iridium and especially iridiumplatinum alloys or osmiumiridium alloys have a low wear and are used, for example, for multi-pored spinnerets, through which a plastic polymer melt is extruded to form fibers, such as rayon. Osmiumiridium is used for compass bearings and for balances. 

Corrosion and heat resistance makes iridium an important alloying agent. Certain long-life aircraft engine parts are made of an iridium alloy and an iridiumtitanium alloy is used for deep-water pipes because of its corrosion resistance. Iridium is also used as a hardening agent in platinum alloys. The Vickers hardness of pure platinum is 56 HV while platinum with 50% of iridium can reach over 500 HV. 

Devices that must withstand extremely high temperatures are often made from iridium. For example, high-temperature crucibles made of iridium are used in the Czochralski process to produce oxide single-crystals (such as sapphires) for use in computer memory devices and in solid state lasers. The crystals, such as gadolinium gallium garnet and yttrium gallium garnet, are grown by melting pre-sintered charges of mixed oxides under oxidizing conditions at temperatures up to 2100 C. Its resistance to arc erosion makes iridium alloys ideal for electrical contacts for spark plugs. 

Iridium compounds are used as catalysts in the Cativa process for carbonylation of methanol to produce acetic acid. 

The radioisotope iridium-192 is one of the two most important sources of energy for use in industrial -radiography for non-destructive testing of metals. Additionally, 192Ir is used as a source of gamma radiation for the treatment of cancer using brachytherapy, a form of radiotherapy where a sealed radioactive source is placed inside or next to the area requiring treatment. Specific treatments include high dose rate prostate brachytherapy, bilary duct brachytherapy, and intracavitary cervix brachytherapy. 

===Scientific===
alt=NIST Library US Prototype meter bar
An alloy of 90% platinum and 10% iridium was used in 1889 to construct the International Prototype Metre and kilogram mass, kept by the International Bureau of Weights and Measures near Paris. The meter bar was replaced as the definition of the fundamental unit of length in 1960 by a line in the atomic spectrum of krypton, The definition of the meter was changed again in 1983. The meter is currently defined as the distance traveled by light in a vacuum during a time interval of of a second. but the kilogram prototype is still the international standard of mass. General section citations: Recalibration of the U.S. National Prototype Kilogram, R.S.Davis, Journal of Research of the National Bureau of Standards, 90, No. 4, JulyAugust 1985 (5.5MB PDF, here); and The Kilogram and Measurements of Mass and Force, Z.J.Jabbour et al., J. Res. Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol. 106, 2001, 2546 (3.5MB PDF, here) 

Iridium has been used in the radioisotope thermoelectric generators of unmanned spacecraft such as the Voyager, Viking, Pioneer, Cassini, Galileo, and New Horizons. Iridium was chosen to encapsulate the plutonium-238 fuel in the generator because it can withstand the operating temperatures of up to 2000 C and for its great strength. 

Another use concerns X-ray optics, especially X-ray telescopes. The mirrors of the Chandra X-ray Observatory are coated with a layer of iridium 60 nm thick. Iridium proved to be the best choice for reflecting X-rays after nickel, gold, and platinum were also tested. The iridium layer, which had to be smooth to within a few atoms, was applied by depositing iridium vapor under high vacuum on a base layer of chromium. 

Iridium is used in particle physics for the production of antiprotons, a form of antimatter. Antiprotons are made by shooting a high-intensity proton beam at a conversion target, which needs to be made from a very high density material. Although tungsten may be used instead, iridium has the advantage of better stability under the shock waves induced by the temperature rise due to the incident beam. 

alt=Skeletal formula presentation of a chemical transformation. The initial compounds have a C5H5 ring on their top and an iridium atom in the center, which is bonded to two hydrogen atoms and a P-PH3 group or to two C-O groups. Reaction with alkane under UV light alters those groups.
Carbonhydrogen bond activation (CH activation) is an area of research on reactions that cleave carbonhydrogen bonds, which were traditionally regarded as unreactive. The first reported successes at activating CH bonds in saturated hydrocarbons, published in 1982, used organometallic iridium complexes that undergo an oxidative addition with the hydrocarbon. 

Iridium complexes are being investigated as catalysts for asymmetric hydrogenation. These catalysts have been used in the synthesis of natural products and able to hydrogenate certain difficult substrates, such as unfunctionalized alkenes, enantioselectively (generating only one of the two possible enantiomers). 

Iridium forms a variety of complexes of fundamental interest in triplet harvesting. 

===Historical===
alt=Fountain pen tip made of yellowish metal
Iridiumosmium alloys were used to tip fountain pen nibs. The first major use of iridium was in 1834 in nibs mounted on gold. Since 1944, the famous Parker 51 fountain pen was fitted with a nib tipped by a ruthenium and iridium alloy (with 3.8% iridium). The tip material in modern fountain pens is still conventionally called "iridium", although there is seldom any iridium in it; other metals such as tungsten have taken its place. 

An iridiumplatinum alloy was used for the touch holes or vent pieces of cannon. According to a report of the Paris Exhibition of 1867, one of the pieces being exhibited by Johnson and Matthey "has been used in a Withworth gun for more than 3000 rounds, and scarcely shows signs of wear yet. Those who know the constant trouble and expense which are occasioned by the wearing of the vent-pieces of cannon when in active service, will appreciate this important adaptation". 

The pigment iridium black, which consists of very finely divided iridium, is used for painting porcelain an intense black; it was said that "all other porcelain black colors appear grey by the side of it". 

== Precautions ==

Iridium in bulk metallic form is not biologically important or hazardous to health due to its lack of reactivity with tissues; there are only about 20 parts per trillion of iridium in human tissue. Like most metals, finely divided iridium powder can be hazardous to handle, as it is an irritant and may ignite in air. 
Very little is known about the toxicity of iridium compounds because they are used in very small amounts, but soluble salts, such as the iridium halides, could be hazardous due to elements other than iridium or due to iridium itself. However, most iridium compounds are insoluble, which makes absorption into the body difficult. 

A radioisotope of iridium, , is dangerous like other radioactive isotopes. The only reported injuries related to iridium concern accidental exposure to radiation from used in brachytherapy. High-energy gamma radiation from can increase the risk of cancer. External exposure can cause burns, radiation poisoning, and death. Ingestion of 192Ir can burn the linings of the stomach and the intestines. 192Ir, 192mIr, and 194mIr tend to deposit in the liver, and can pose health hazards from both gamma and beta radiation. 

==Notes==
 

==References==

==External links==

* Iridium at The Periodic Table of Videos (University of Nottingham)
* Iridium in Encyclopdia Britannica

 



[[IOC (disambiguation)]]

IOC commonly refers to the International Olympic Committee.

IOC may also refer to:

==Computing==
*IBM Open Class
*I/O processor
*Inversion of control (IoC), a software design pattern
*Indicator of compromise, an artifact likely indicating a computer intrusion

==Game==
*Invasion of Chaos, a booster pack in the Yu-Gi-Oh! Trading Card Game

==Religion==
*Indian Orthodox Church (IOC) officially known as Indian (Malankara) Orthodox Church

==Other==
*Icon of Coil
*Immediate or cancel, a type of order used on some stock exchanges
*Indian Ocean Commission, generally COI, but according to World Bank as well IOC
*Indian Oil Corporation
*International Olive Council
*Initial operating capability
*Initiatives of Change
*Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission
*International Oil Company, as opposed to NOC, which stands for National Oil Company
*International Ornithological Committee
*International Ornithological Congress
*International Order of Characters
*Iron Ore Company of Canada
*Italian Organized Crime



[[International Phonetic Alphabet]]

The International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) "The acronym 'IPA' strictly refers to the 'International Phonetic Association'. But it is now such a common practice to use the acronym also to refer to the alphabet itself (from the phrase 'International Phonetic Alphabet') that resistance seems pedantic. Context usually serves to disambiguate the two usages." (Laver 1994:561)
 is an alphabetic system of phonetic notation based primarily on the Latin alphabet. It was devised by the International Phonetic Association as a standardized representation of the sounds of oral language. International Phonetic Association (IPA), Handbook. The IPA is used by lexicographers, foreign language students and teachers, linguists, speech-language pathologists, singers, actors, constructed language creators, and translators. 

The IPA is designed to represent only those qualities of speech that are part of oral language: phones, phonemes, intonation, and the separation of words and syllables. To represent additional qualities of speech, such as tooth gnashing, lisping, and sounds made with a cleft palate, an extended set of symbols called the Extensions to the IPA may be used. 

IPA symbols are composed of one or more elements of two basic types, letters and diacritics. For example, the sound of the English letter may be transcribed in IPA with a single letter, , or with a letter plus diacritics, , depending on how precise one wishes to be. The inverted bridge under the specifies it as apical (pronounced with the tip of the tongue), and the superscript h shows that it is aspirated (breathy). Both these qualities cause the English to sound different from the French or Spanish , which is a laminal (pronounced with the blade of the tongue) and unaspirated . and are thus two different IPA symbols for two different, though similar, sounds. Often, slashes are used to signal broad or phonemic transcription; thus, is less specific than, and could refer to, either or depending on the context and language.

Occasionally letters or diacritics are added, removed, or modified by the International Phonetic Association. As of the most recent change in 2005, there are 107 letters, 52 diacritics, and four prosodic marks in the IPA. These are shown in the current IPA chart, posted below in this article and at the website of the IPA. 

==History==

In 1886, a group of French and British language teachers, led by the French linguist Paul Passy, formed what would come to be known from 1897 onwards as the International Phonetic Association (in French, lAssociation phontique internationale). International Phonetic Association, Handbook, pp. 194196 Their original alphabet was based on a spelling reform for English known as the Romic alphabet, but in order to make it usable for other languages, the values of the symbols were allowed to vary from language to language. "Originally, the aim was to make available a set of phonetic symbols which would be given different articulatory values, if necessary, in different languages." (International Phonetic Association, Handbook, pp. 195196) For example, the sound (the sh in shoe) was originally represented with the letter in English, but with the letter in French. However, in 1888, the alphabet was revised so as to be uniform across languages, thus providing the base for all future revisions. 

Since its creation, the IPA has undergone a number of revisions. After major revisions and expansions in 1900 and 1932, the IPA remained unchanged until the IPA Kiel Convention in 1989. A minor revision took place in 1993 with the addition of four letters for mid-central vowels and the removal of letters for voiceless implosives. Pullum and Ladusaw, Phonetic Symbol Guide, pp. 152, 209 The alphabet was last revised in May 2005 with the addition of a letter for a labiodental flap. Apart from the addition and removal of symbols, changes to the IPA have consisted largely in renaming symbols and categories and in modifying typefaces. 

Extensions to the IPA for speech pathology were created in 1990 and officially adopted by the International Clinical Phonetics and Linguistics Association in 1994. International Phonetic Association, Handbook, p. 186 

==Description==
A chart of the full International Phonetic Alphabet, expanded and re-organized from the official chart. Only the black symbols are part of the IPA; additional symbols are in grey.

The general principle of the IPA is to provide one letter for each distinctive sound (speech segment) although this practice is not followed if the sound itself is complex. From its earliest days...the International Phonetic Association has aimed to provide a separate sign for each distinctive sound; that is, for each sound which, being used instead of another, in the same language, can change the meaning of a word. (International Phonetic Association, Handbook, p. 27) This means that:
*It does not normally use combinations of letters to represent single sounds, the way English does with , and , or single letters to represent multiple sounds the way represents or in English.
*There are no letters that have context-dependent sound values, as does in English and several other European languages.
*Finally, the IPA does not usually have separate letters for two sounds if no known language makes a distinction between them, a property known as "selectiveness". 
For instance, flaps and taps are two different kinds of articulation, but since no language has (yet) been found to make a distinction between, say, an alveolar flap and an alveolar tap, the IPA does not provide such sounds with dedicated letters. Instead, it provides a single letter (in this case, ) for both. Strictly speaking, this makes the IPA a partially phonemic alphabet, not a purely phonetic one.
 

Among the symbols of the IPA, 107 letters represent consonants and vowels, 31 diacritics are used to modify these, and 19 additional signs indicate suprasegmental qualities such as length, tone, stress, and intonation. 
There are five basic tone diacritics and five basic tone letters, both sets of which are compounded for contour tones.
 These are organized into a chart; the chart displayed here is an unofficial expansion and re-organization of the
official chart posted at the website of the IPA and below in this article.

===Letterforms===
The letters chosen for the IPA are meant to harmonize with the Latin alphabet. 
"The non-roman letters of the International Phonetic Alphabet have been designed as far as possible to harmonize well with the roman letters. The Association does not recognize makeshift letters; It recognizes only letters which have been carefully cut so as to be in harmony with the other letters." (IPA 1949)
 For this reason, most letters are either Latin or Greek, or modifications thereof. Some letters are neither: for example, the letter denoting the glottal stop, , has the form of a dotless question mark, and derives originally from an apostrophe. A few letters, such as that of the voiced pharyngeal fricative, , were inspired by other writing systems (in this case, the Arabic letter ain). 

Despite its preference for harmonizing with the Latin script, the International Phonetic Association has occasionally admitted other letters. For example, before 1989, the IPA letters for click consonants were , , , and , all of which were derived either from existing IPA letters, or from Latin and Greek letters. However, except for , none of these letters were widely used among Khoisanists or Bantuists, and as a result they were replaced by the more widespread symbols , , , , and at the IPA Kiel Convention in 1989. Laver, Principles of Phonetics,pp. 174175 
Although the IPA diacritics are fully featural, there is little systemicity in the letter forms. A retroflex articulation is consistently indicated with a right-swinging tail, as in , and implosion by a top hook, , but other pseudo-featural elements are due to haphazard derivation and coincidence. For example, all nasal consonants but uvular are based on the form : . However, the similarity between and is a historical accident, and are derived from ligatures of gn and ng, and is an ad hoc imitation of . In none of these is the form consistent with other letters that share these places of articulation.

Some of the new letters were ordinary Latin letters turned upside-down, such as (turned a c e f h m r t v w y) (the IPA symbol is an inverted, rather than turned, ). This was easily done in the era of mechanical typesetting, and had the advantage of not requiring the casting of special type for IPA symbols.

===Symbols and sounds===
The International Phonetic Alphabet is based on the Latin alphabet, using as few non-Latin forms as possible. The Association created the IPA so that the sound values of most consonant letters taken from the Latin alphabet would correspond to "international usage". Hence, the letters , , , (hard) , (non-silent) , (unaspirated) , , , , (unaspirated) , (voiceless) , (unaspirated) , , , and have the values used in English; and the vowel letters from the Latin alphabet (, , , , ) correspond to the (long) sound values of Latin: is like the vowel in machine, is as in rule, etc. Other letters may differ from English, but are used with these values in other European languages, such as , , and .

This inventory was extended by using capital or cursive forms, diacritics, and rotation. There are also several symbols derived or taken from the Greek alphabet, though the sound values may differ. For example, is a vowel in Greek, but an only indirectly related consonant in the IPA. For most of these subtly different glyph shapes have been devised for IPA, in particular , , , , and which are encoded in Unicode separately from their Greek "parent" letters, three of these (, and ) are often used unmodified in form as they have not been encoded separately. However, has been accepted for encoding as a separate character.

The sound values of modified Latin letters can often be derived from those of the original letters. . For example, letters with a rightward-facing hook at the bottom represent retroflex consonants; and small capital letters usually represent uvular consonants. Apart from the fact that certain kinds of modification to the shape of a letter generally correspond to certain kinds of modification to the sound represented, there is no way to deduce the sound represented by a symbol from its shape (as for example in Visible Speech) nor even any systematic relation between signs and the sounds they represent (as in Hangul).

Beyond the letters themselves, there are a variety of secondary symbols which aid in transcription. Diacritic marks can be combined with IPA letters to transcribe modified phonetic values or secondary articulations. There are also special symbols for suprasegmental features such as stress and tone that are often employed.

===Brackets and phonemes===
There are two principal types of brackets used to set off IPA transcriptions:
*brackets are used with phonetic notations, possibly including details of the pronunciation that may not be used for distinguishing words in the language being transcribed, but which the author nonetheless wishes to document.
*/slashes/ are used for phonemic notations, which note only features that are distinctive in the language, without any extraneous detail.
For example, while the sounds of pin and spin are pronounced slightly differently in English (and this difference would be meaningful in some languages), the difference is not meaningful in English. Thus phonemically the words are and , with the same phoneme. However, to capture the difference between them (the allophones of ), they can be transcribed phonetically as and .

Other conventions are less commonly seen:
*Double slashes //...//, pipes |...|, double pipes ||...||, or braces {...} may be used around a word to denote its underlying structure, more abstract even than that of phonemes. See morphophonology for examples.
*Angle brackets are used to clarify that the letters represent the original orthography of the language, or sometimes an exact transliteration of a non-Latin script, not the IPA; or, within the IPA, that the letters themselves are indicated, not the sound values that they carry. For example, and would be seen for those words, which do not contain the ee sound of the IPA letter . Italics are perhaps more commonly used for this purpose when full words are being written (as pin, spin above), but may not be sufficiently clear for individual letters and digraphs. True angle brackets, (U+27E8 and U+27E9), have only recently been supported by many non-mathematical fonts. Therefore chevrons ... (U+2039, U+203A) are sometimes used in substitution, as are the less-than and greater-than signs (U+003C, U+003E). See for how they display in a selection of fonts. 
*{Braces} are used for prosodic notation. See Extensions to the International Phonetic Alphabet for examples in that system.
*(Parentheses) are used for indistinguishable utterances. They are also seen for silent articulation (mouthing), where the expected phonetic transcription is derived from lip-reading, and with periods to indicate silent pauses, for example (...).
*Double parentheses indicate obscured or unintelligible sound, as in ((2 syll.)), two audible but unidentifiable syllables.

===Handwritten forms===
An example of a printed text with IPA letters filled in by hand. The two words at the beginning of line 1 are and . The  has a cursive form that looks somewhat like a 2 or a small-capital Q in some cursive hands.

IPA letters have handwritten forms designed for use in manuscripts and when taking field notes; they are occasionally seen in publications when the printer did not have fonts that supported IPA, and the IPA was therefore filled in by hand.

==IPA chart==
The official chart of the IPA as of 2005, displaying the alphabet in simplified form. The proper symbols for upstep and downstep are not available in this font, and have been substituted.
The International Phonetic Alphabet is occasionally modified by the Association. After each modification, the Association provides an updated simplified presentation of the alphabet in the form of a chart. (See History of the IPA.) The most recent official chart, from 2005, is presented at right. Not all aspects of the alphabet can be accommodated in a chart. The indefinitely large number of tone letters, for example, make a full accounting impractical, and only a few examples are shown.

The procedure for modifying the alphabet or the chart is to propose the change in the Journal of the IPA. (See, for example, August 2008 on a low central vowel and August 2011 on central approximants.) Reactions to the proposal may be published in the same or subsequent issues of the Journal (as in August 2009 on the low central vowel). A formal proposal is then put to the Council of the IPA (which is elected by the membership)
 for further discussion and a formal vote. 

Only changes to the alphabet or chart that have been approved by the Council can be considered part of the official IPA. Nonetheless, many users of the alphabet, including the leadership of the Association itself, make personal changes or additions in their own practice, either for convenience in working on a particular language (see "Illustrations of the IPA" for individual languages in the Handbook, which for example may use for ), IPA Handbook (1999) or because they object to some aspect of the official version. For example, the chart displayed above is reorganized in response to perceived shortcomings of the official version, and in places reflects the organization of the 1979 chart.

==Usage==

bauche is a French term meaning outline or blank.
Although the IPA offers over 160 symbols for transcribing speech, only a relatively small subset of these will be used to transcribe any one language. It is possible to transcribe speech with various levels of precision. A precise phonetic transcription, in which sounds are described in a great deal of detail, is known as a narrow transcription. A coarser transcription which ignores some of this detail is called a broad transcription. Both are relative terms, and both are generally enclosed in square brackets. Broad phonetic transcriptions may restrict themselves to easily heard details, or only to details that are relevant to the discussion at hand, and may differ little if at all from phonemic transcriptions, but they make no theoretical claim that all the distinctions transcribed are necessarily meaningful in the language.
Phonetic transcriptions of the word international in two English dialects. The square brackets indicate that the differences between these dialects are not necessarily sufficient to distinguish different words in English.

For example, the English word little may be transcribed broadly using the IPA as , and this broad (imprecise) transcription is a more or less accurate description of many pronunciations. A narrower transcription may focus on individual or dialectical details: in General American, in Cockney, or in Southern US English.

It is customary to use simpler letters, without many diacritics, in phonemic transcriptions. The choice of IPA letters may reflect the theoretical claims of the author, or merely be a convenience for typesetting. For instance, in English, either the vowel of pick or the vowel of peak may be transcribed as (for the pairs or ), and neither is identical to the vowel of the French word pique which is also generally transcribed . That is, letters between slashes do not have absolute values, something true of broader phonetic approximations as well. A narrow transcription may, however, be used to distinguish them: .

===Linguists===
Although IPA is popular for transcription by linguists, American linguists often alternate use of the IPA with Americanist phonetic notation or use the IPA together with some nonstandard symbols, for reasons including reducing the error rate on reading handwritten transcriptions or avoiding perceived awkwardness of IPA in some situations. The exact practice may vary somewhat between languages and even individual researchers, so authors are generally encouraged to include a chart or other explanation of their choices. 

===Language study===

A page from an English language textbook used in Russia. The IPA is used to teach the different pronunciations of the digraph () and to show the pronunciation of newly introduced words polite, everything, always, forget.
Some language study programs use the IPA to teach pronunciation. For example, in Russia (and earlier in the Soviet Union) and mainland China, textbooks for children For example, the English school textbooks by I. N. Vereshagina, K. A. Bondarenko and T. A. Pritykina. and adults For example, "Le Franais  la porte de tous" by K. K. Parchevsky and E. B. Roisenblit (1995) and "English Through Eye and Ear" by L.V. Bankevich (1975). for studying English and French consistently use the IPA. English teachers and textbooks in Taiwan tend to use the Kenyon and Knott system instead.

===Dictionaries===

====English====
Many British dictionaries, including the Oxford English Dictionary and some learner's dictionaries such as the Oxford Advanced Learner's Dictionary and the Cambridge Advanced Learner's Dictionary, now use the International Phonetic Alphabet to represent the pronunciation of words. However, most American (and some British) volumes use one of a variety of pronunciation respelling systems, intended to be more comfortable for readers of English. For example, the respelling systems in many American dictionaries (such as Merriam-Webster) use for IPA and for IPA , reflecting common representations of those sounds in written English, Pronunciation respelling for English has detailed comparisons. using only letters of the English Roman alphabet and variations of them. (In IPA, represents the sound of the French (as in tu), and represents the pair of sounds in grasshopper.)

====Other languages====
The IPA is also not universal among dictionaries in languages other than English. Monolingual dictionaries of languages with generally phonemic orthographies generally do not bother with indicating the pronunciation of most words, and tend to use respelling systems for words with unexpected pronunciations. Dictionaries produced in Israel use the IPA rarely and sometimes use the Hebrew script for transcription of foreign words. Monolingual Hebrew dictionaries use pronunciation respelling for words with unusual spelling; for example, Even-Shoshan Dictionary respells as because this word uses kamatz katan. Bilingual dictionaries that translate from foreign languages into Russian usually employ the IPA, but monolingual Russian dictionaries occasionally use pronunciation respelling for foreign words; for example, Ozhegov's dictionary adds  in brackets for the French word  (pince-nez) to indicate that the  does not iotate the .

The IPA is more common in bilingual dictionaries, but there are exceptions here too. Mass-market bilingual Czech dictionaries, for instance, tend to use the IPA only for sounds not found in the Czech language. 

===Standard orthographies and capital variants===

IPA letters have been incorporated into the alphabets of various languages, notably via the Africa Alphabet in sub-Saharan Africa: Hausa, Fula, Akan, Gbe languages, Manding languages, Lingala, etc. This has created the need for capital variants. For example, Kabiy of northern Togo has :
: .

These, and others, are supported by Unicode, but appear in Latin ranges other than the IPA extensions.

In the IPA itself, only lower-case letters are used. The 1949 edition of the IPA handbook indicated that an asterisk may be prefixed to indicate that a word is a proper name, Principles of the International Phonetic Association, 1949:17. but this convention has not been included in recent editions.

===Classical singing===
IPA has widespread use among classical singers for preparation, especially among English-speaking singers who are expected to sing in a variety of foreign languages. Opera librettos are authoritatively transcribed in IPA, such as Nico Castel's volumes and Timothy Cheek's book Singing in Czech. Opera singers' ability to read IPA was recently used by the Visual Thesaurus, which employed several opera singers "to make recordings for the 150,000 words and phrases in VT's lexical database. ...for their vocal stamina, attention to the details of enunciation, and most of all, knowledge of IPA." 

===Product names===
It is relatively common to find IPA used in Japanese product names, either as an adjunct to indicate the pronunciation, or as the only form of the name apart from a possible katakana gloss. An example of IPA used on its own is the former Mazda brand . IPA is also common in Japan for decoration on T-shirts and other garments and accessories.

==Letters==
The International Phonetic Association organizes the letters of the IPA into three categories: pulmonic consonants, non-pulmonic consonants, and vowels. "Segments can usefully be divided into two major categories, consonants and vowels." (International Phonetic Association, Handbook, p. 3) International Phonetic Association, Handbook, p. 6. 

Pulmonic consonant letters are arranged singly or in pairs of voiceless (tenuis) and voiced sounds, with these then grouped in columns from front (labial) sounds on the left to back (glottal) sounds on the right. In official publications by the IPA, Reproduced here two columns are omitted to save space, with the letters listed among 'other symbols', "for presentational convenience because of rarity and the small number of types of sounds which are found there." (IPA Handbook, p 18) and with the remaining consonants arranged in rows from full closure (occlusives: stops and nasals), to brief closure (vibrants: trills and taps), to partial closure (fricatives) and minimal closure (approximants), again with a row left out to save space. In the table below, a slightly different arrangement is made: All pulmonic consonants are included in the pulmonic-consonant table, and the vibrants and laterals are separated out so that the rows reflect the common lenition pathway of stop  fricative  approximant, as well as the fact that several letters pull double duty as both fricative and approximant; affricates may be created by joining stops and fricatives from adjacent cells. Shaded cells are judged to be implausible.

Vowel letters are also grouped in pairsof unrounded and rounded vowel soundswith these pairs also arranged from front on the left to back on the right, and from maximal closure at top to minimal closure at bottom. No vowel letters are omitted from the chart, though in the past some of the mid central vowels were listed among the 'other symbols'.

Each character is assigned a number, to prevent confusion between similar letters (such as and , and , or and ) in such situations as the printing of manuscripts. The categories of sounds are assigned different ranges of numbers. A chart of IPA numbers can be found on the IPA website.IPA number chart 

===Consonants===

;Notes
*Asterisks (*) indicate unofficial IPA symbols for attested sounds. See the respective articles for ad hoc symbols found in the literature.
*In rows where some letters appear in pairs (the obstruents), the letter to the right represents a voiced consonant (except breathy-voiced ). However, cannot be voiced, and the voicing of is ambiguous. Ladefoged and Maddieson, 1996, Sounds of the World's Languages, 2.1. In the other rows (the sonorants), the single letter represents a voiced consonant.
*Although there is a single letter for the coronal places of articulation for all consonants but fricatives, when dealing with a particular language, the letters may be treated as specifically dental, alveolar, or post-alveolar, as appropriate for that language, without diacritics.
*Shaded areas indicate articulations judged to be impossible.
*The letters represent either voiced fricatives or approximants.
*In many languages, such as English, and are not actually glottal, fricatives, or approximants. Rather, they are bare phonation. Ladefoged and Maddieson, 1996, Sounds of the World's Languages, 9.3. 
*It is primarily the shape of the tongue rather than its position that distinguishes the fricatives , , and .
*The labiodental nasal is not known to exist as a phoneme in any language. p 18 

====Pulmonic consonants====
A pulmonic consonant is a consonant made by obstructing the glottis (the space between the vocal cords) or oral cavity (the mouth) and either simultaneously or subsequently letting out air from the lungs. Pulmonic consonants make up the majority of consonants in the IPA, as well as in human language. All consonants in the English language fall into this category. 

The pulmonic consonant table, which includes most consonants, is arranged in rows that designate manner of articulation, meaning how the consonant is produced, and columns that designate place of articulation, meaning where in the vocal tract the consonant is produced. The main chart includes only consonants with a single place of articulation.

====Co-articulated consonants====
Co-articulated consonants are sounds that involve two simultaneous places of articulation (are pronounced using two parts of the vocal tract). In English, the in "went" is a coarticulated consonant, because it is pronounced by rounding the lips and raising the back of the tongue. Other languages, such as French and Swedish, have different coarticulated consonants.
;Note
* is described as a "simultaneous and ". However, this analysis is disputed. (See voiceless palatal-velar fricative for discussion.)

====Affricates and double articulated consonants====
Affricates and doubly articulated stops are represented by two letters joined by a tie bar, either above or below the letters. The six most common affricates are optionally represented by ligatures, though this is no longer official IPA usage, because a great number of ligatures would be required to represent all affricates this way. Alternatively, a superscript notation for a consonant release is sometimes used to transcribe affricates, for example for , paralleling ~ . The letters for the palatal plosives , are often used as a convenience for or similar affricates, even in official IPA publications, so they must be interpreted with care.

 View this table as an image 
 Tie bar Ligature Description 
 voiceless alveolar affricate 
 voiced alveolar affricate 
 voiceless postalveolar affricate 
 voiced postalveolar affricate 
 voiceless alveolo-palatal affricate 
 voiced alveolo-palatal affricate 
  voiceless alveolar lateral affricate 
  voiceless labial-velar plosive 
  voiced labial-velar plosive 
  labial-velar nasal stop 
  voiced velar affricate 

;Note
* On browsers that use Arial Unicode MS to display IPA characters, the following incorrectly formed sequences may look better due to a bug in that font: .

====Non-pulmonic consonants====
Non-pulmonic consonants are sounds whose airflow is not dependent on the lungs. These include clicks (found in the Khoisan languages of Africa), implosives (found in languages such as Sindhi, Swahili and Vietnamese), and ejectives (found in many Amerindian and Caucasian languages).

 View this table as an image 
 Clicks Implosives Ejectives 
 Bilabial Bilabial For example: 
 Laminal alveolar (\"dental\") Alveolar Bilabial 
 Apical (post-) alveolar (\"retroflex\") Palatal Alveolar 
 Laminal postalveolar (\"palatal\") Velar Velar 
 Lateral coronal (\"lateral\") Uvular Alveolar fricative 

;Notes
*Clicks are double articulated and have traditionally been described as having a forward 'release' and a rear 'accompaniment', with the click letters representing the release. Therefore all clicks would require two letters for proper notation: etc., or . When the dorsal articulation is omitted, a may usually be assumed. However, recent research disputes the concept of 'accompaniment'. Amanda L. Miller et al., "Differences in airstream and posterior place of articulation among Nuu lingual stops". Submitted to the Journal of the International Phonetic Association. Retrieved 2007-05-27. In these approaches, the click letter represents both articulations, with the different letters representing different click 'types', there is no velar-uvular distinction, and the accompanying letter represents the manner, phonation, or airstream contour of the click: etc.
*Letters for the voiceless implosives are no longer supported by the IPA, though they remain in Unicode. Instead, the IPA typically uses the voiced equivalent with a voiceless diacritic: , etc..
*Although not confirmed as contrastive in any language, and therefore not explicitly recognized by the IPA, a letter for the retroflex implosive, , is supported in the Unicode Phonetic Extensions Supplement, added in version 4.1 of the Unicode Standard, or can be created as a composite .
*The ejective diacritic often stands in for a superscript glottal stop in glottalized but pulmonic sonorants, such as . These may also be transcribed as creaky .

===Vowels===

Tongue positions of cardinal front vowels with highest point indicated. The position of the highest point is used to determine vowel height and backness.
An X-ray film shows the sounds 

The IPA defines a vowel as a sound which occurs at a syllable center. International Phonetic Association, Handbook, p. 10. Below is a chart depicting the vowels of the IPA. The IPA maps the vowels according to the position of the tongue.

The vertical axis of the chart is mapped by vowel height. Vowels pronounced with the tongue lowered are at the bottom, and vowels pronounced with the tongue raised are at the top. For example, (the first vowel in father) is at the bottom because the tongue is lowered in this position. However, (the vowel in "meet") is at the top because the sound is said with the tongue raised to the roof of the mouth.

In a similar fashion, the horizontal axis of the chart is determined by vowel backness. Vowels with the tongue moved towards the front of the mouth (such as , the vowel in "met") are to the left in the chart, while those in which it is moved to the back (such as , the vowel in "but") are placed to the right in the chart.

In places where vowels are paired, the right represents a rounded vowel (in which the lips are rounded) while the left is its unrounded counterpart.

====Diphthongs====
Diphthongs are typically specified with a non-syllabic diacritic, as in . However, sometimes a tie bar is used, especially if it is difficult to tell if the vowel is characterized by an on-glide or an off-glide: or .

;Notes
* officially represents a front vowel, but there is little distinction between front and central open vowels, and is frequently used for an open central vowel. However, if disambiguation is required, the retraction diacritic or the centralized diacritic may be added to indicate an open central vowel, as in or .

==Diacritics ==
Diacritics are small markings which are placed around the IPA letter in order to show a certain alteration or more specific description in the letter's pronunciation. International Phonetic Association, Handbook, pp. 1415. Subdiacritics (markings normally placed below a letter) may be placed above a letter having a descender (informally called a tail), e.g. . 

The dotless i, , is used when the dot would interfere with the diacritic. Other IPA letters may appear as diacritic variants to represent phonetic detail: (fricative release), (breathy voice), (glottal onset), (epenthetic schwa), (diphthongization). Additional diacritics were introduced in the Extensions to the IPA, which were designed principally for speech pathology.

 View the diacritic table as an image 
 Syllabicity diacritics 
 Syllabic Non-syllabic 
 Consonant-release diacritics 
 Aspirated No audible release 
 
 Nasal release Lateral release 
 Phonation diacritics 
 Voiceless Voiced 
 Breathy voiced Creaky voiced 
 Articulation diacritics 
 Dental Linguolabial 
 Apical Laminal 
 Advanced Retracted 
 Centralized Mid-centralized 
 Raised ( = voiced alveolar nonsibilant fricative) 
 
 Lowered ( = bilabial approximant) 
 
 Co-articulation diacritics 
 More rounded Less rounded 
 Labialized or labio-velarized Palatalized 
 Velarized Pharyngealized 
 Labio-palatalized Velarized or pharyngealized 
 Advanced tongue root Retracted tongue root 
 Nasalized Rhotacized 

;Notes
:aWith aspirated voiced consonants, the aspiration is also voiced. Many linguists prefer one of the diacritics dedicated to breathy voice.
:bSome linguists restrict this breathy-voice diacritic to sonorants, and transcribe obstruents as .

The state of the glottis can be finely transcribed with diacritics. A series of alveolar plosives ranging from an open to a closed glottis phonation are:

 Open glottis voiceless 
 breathy voice, also called murmured 
 slack voice 
 Sweet spot modal voice 
 stiff voice 
 creaky voice 
 Closed glottis glottal closure 

===Suprasegmentals===
These symbols describe the features of a language above the level of individual consonants and vowels, such as prosody, tone, length, and stress, which often operate on syllables, words, or phrases: that is, elements such as the intensity, pitch, and gemination of the sounds of a language, as well as the rhythm and intonation of speech. International Phonetic Association, Handbook, p. 13. Although most of these symbols indicate distinctions that are phonemic at the word level, symbols also exist for intonation on a level greater than that of the word. 

 View this table as an image 
 Length, stress, and rhythm 
 Primary stress (symbol goes before stressed syllable) Secondary stress (symbol goes before stressed syllable) 
 Long (long vowel orgeminate consonant) Half-long 
 Extra-short 
 Syllable break Linking (absence of a break) 
 Intonation 
 Minor (foot) break Major (intonation) break 
 The global rise and fall arrows come before the affected syllable or prosodic unit, like stress and upstep/downstep. This contrasts with the Chao tone letters, which come after. Global rise Global fall 
 Tone diacritics and tone letters 
 Extra high / top Upstep 
 High Generic rise 
 Mid 
 Low Generic fall 
 Extra low / bottom Downstep 

Finer distinctions of tone may be indicated by combining the tone diacritics and letters shown here, though not many fonts support this. The primary examples are high (mid) rising ; low rising ; high falling ; low (mid) falling ; peaking (etc.); and dipping (etc.). The correspondence between the diacritics and tone letters is only approximate; for example, diacritics only indicate generic peaking or dipping tones, while the tone letters can convey fine phonetic detail, with over a hundred peaking and hundred dipping tone contours that correspond to these two diacritics, or even approximately to the six rising and falling diacritics. Various combinations are used in the IPA Handbook despite not being found on the simplified official IPA chart. However, although it is theoretically possible to combine the three diacritics in any permutation, in practice only the six combinations given here are actually used.

A work-around for diacritics sometimes seen when a language has more than one rising or falling tone, and the author does not wish to completely abandon the IPA, is to restrict generic rising and falling for the higher-pitched of the rising and falling tones, and , and to use the non-standard subscript diacritics and for the lower-pitched rising and falling tones, and . When a language has four or six level tones, the two mid tones are sometimes transcribed as high-mid (non-standard) and low-mid .

As with other IPA diacritics, such as length, aspiration, and rhoticity, the stress mark may be doubled to indicate an extra degree of stress. An example in French, with a single stress mark for normal prosodic stress at the end of each prosodic unit (marked as a minor prosodic break), and a double stress mark for contrastive/emphatic stress: Entrez monsieur, voil madame. (Passy, 1958, Conversations franaises en transcription phontique. 2nd ed.) 

==Obsolete and nonstandard symbols==

The IPA inherited alternate symbols from various traditions, but eventually settled on one for each sound. The other symbols are now considered obsolete. An example is which has been standardized to . Several letters indicating secondary articulation have been dropped altogether, with the idea that such things should be indicated with diacritics: for is one. In addition, the rare voiceless implosive series has been dropped; they are now written or . A rejected competing proposal for transcribing clicks, , is still sometimes seen, as the official letters may cause problems with legibility, especially when used with brackets ([ ] or / /), the letter , or the prosodic marks (for this reason, some publications which use standard IPA click letters disallow IPA brackets). 

There are also unsupported or ad hoc letters from local traditions that find their way into publications that otherwise use the standard IPA. This is especially common with affricates such as the "barred lambda" for .

==IPA extensions==

The "Extensions to the IPA", often abbreviated as "extIPA", and sometimes called "Extended IPA", are symbols whose original purpose was to accurately transcribe disordered speech. At the IPA Kiel Convention in 1989, a group of linguists drew up the initial extensions, "At the 1989 Kiel Convention of the IPA, a sub-group was established to draw up recommendations for the transcription of disordered speech." ("Extensions to the IPA: An ExtIPA Chart" in International Phonetic Association, Handbook, pp. 186.) which were based on the previous work of the PRDS (Phonetic Representation of Disordered Speech) Group in the early 1980s. The extensions were first published in 1990, then modified, and published again in 1994 in the Journal of the International Phonetic Association, when they were officially adopted by the ICPLA. "Extensions to the IPA: An ExtIPA Chart" in International Phonetic Association, Handbook, pp. 186187. While the original purpose was to transcribe disordered speech, linguists have used the extensions to designate a number of unique sounds within standard communication, such as hushing, gnashing teeth, and smacking lips. The extensions have also been used to record certain peculiarities in an individual's voice, such as nasalized voicing. 

The Extensions to the IPA do not include symbols used for voice quality (VoQS), such as whispering.

==Segments without letters==
The remaining blank cells on the IPA chart can be filled without too much difficulty if the need arises. Some ad hoc letters have appeared in the literature for the retroflex lateral flap, the voiceless lateral fricatives, the epiglottal trill, and the labiodental plosives. (See the grey letters in the PDF chart.) Diacritics can supply much of the remainder, which would indeed be appropriate if the sounds were allophones. "Diacritics may also be employed to create symbols for phonemes, thus reducing the need to create new letter shapes." (International Phonetic Association, Handbook, p. 27) If a sound cannot be transcribed, an asterisk may be used, either as a letter or as a diacritic (as in sometimes seen for the Korean 'fortis' velar).

===Consonants===
Representations of consonant sounds outside of the core set are created by adding diacritics to letters with similar sound values. The Spanish bilabial and dental approximants are commonly written as lowered fricatives, and respectively. Similarly, voiced lateral fricatives would be written as raised lateral approximants, . A few languages such as Banda have a bilabial flap as the preferred allophone of what is elsewhere a labiodental flap. It has been suggested that this be written with the labiodental flap letter and the advanced diacritic, . Olson, Kenneth S.; & Hajek, John. (1999). The phonetic status of the labial flap. Journal of the International Phonetic Association, 29 (2), pp. 101114. 

Similarly, a labiodental trill would be written (bilabial trill and the dental sign), and labiodental stops rather than with the ad hoc letters sometimes found in the literature. Other taps can be written as extra-short plosives or laterals, e.g. , though in some cases the diacritic would need to be written below the letter. A retroflex trill can be written as a retracted , just as retroflex fricatives sometimes are. The remaining consonants, the uvular laterals ( etc.) and the palatal trill, while not strictly impossible, are very difficult to pronounce and are unlikely to occur even as allophones in the world's languages.

===Vowels===
The vowels are similarly manageable by using diacritics for raising, lowering, fronting, backing, centering, and mid-centering. "The diacrtics...can be used to modify the lip or tongue position implied by a vowel symbol." (International Phonetic Association, Handbook, p. 16) For example, the unrounded equivalent of can be transcribed as mid-centered , and the rounded equivalent of as raised . True mid vowels are lowered , while centered and are near-close and open central vowels, respectively. The only known vowels that cannot be represented in this scheme are vowels with unexpected roundedness, which would require a dedicated diacritic, such as and (or and ).

==Symbol names==

An IPA symbol is often distinguished from the sound it is intended to represent, since there is not necessarily a one-to-one correspondence between letter and sound in broad transcription, making articulatory descriptions such as 'mid front rounded vowel' or 'voiced velar stop' unreliable. While the Handbook of the International Phonetic Association states that no official names exist for its symbols, it admits the presence of one or two common names for each. "...the International Phonetic Association has never officially approved a set of names..." (International Phonetic Association, Handbook, p. 31) The symbols also have nonce names in the Unicode standard. In some cases, the Unicode names and the IPA names do not agree. For example, IPA calls "epsilon", but Unicode calls it "small letter open E".

The traditional names of the Latin and Greek letters are usually used for unmodified letters. 
For example, is called "Lower-case P" and is "Chi." (International Phonetic Association, Handbook, p. 171)
 Letters which are not directly derived from these alphabets, such as , may have a variety of names, sometimes based on the appearance of the symbol, and sometimes based on the sound that it represents. In Unicode, some of the letters of Greek origin have Latin forms for use in IPA; the others use the letters from the Greek section.

For diacritics, there are two methods of naming. For traditional diacritics, the IPA notes the name in a well known language; for example, is acute, based on the name of the diacritic in English and French. Non-traditional diacritics are often named after objects they resemble, so is called bridge.

Pullum and Ladusaw list a variety of names in use for IPA symbols, both current and retired, in addition to names of many other non-IPA phonetic symbols. Their collection is extensive enough that the Unicode Consortium used it in the development of Unicode.

==ASCII and keyboard transliterations==
Several systems have been developed that map the IPA symbols to ASCII characters. Notable systems include Kirshenbaum, Arpabet, SAMPA, and X-SAMPA. The usage of mapping systems in on-line text has to some extent been adopted in the context input methods, allowing convenient keying of IPA characters that would be otherwise unavailable on standard keyboard layouts.

==See also==

*Articulatory phonetics
*Luciano Canepari
*Pronunciation respelling for English
*ICAO spelling alphabet
*Index of phonetics articles
*International Alphabet of Sanskrit Transliteration
*IPA chart for English dialects
*List of international common standards
*Phonetic transcription
*Semyon Novgorodov  inventor of IPA-based Yakut alphabet
*TIPA provides IPA support for LaTeX
*Unicode Phonetic Symbols

==Notes==

==References==

==Further reading==

*
*
*
*
* (hb); ISBN 0-521-63751-1 (pb).
* 
*
*
* (hb); ISBN 0-521-45655-X (pb).
*
*

==External links==

*
*International Phonetic Alphabet Chart with Sounds
*Linguistics IPA LAB (with chart and audio files)

 



[[Inspector Morse]]

Inspector Endeavour Morse is a fictional character in the eponymous series of detective novels by British author Colin Dexter. On television, he appears in the 33-episode 19872000 drama series Inspector Morse, in which John Thaw played the character; as well as the 2012 series Endeavour, portrayed by Shaun Evans. Morse originally is described as a senior CID (Criminal Investigation Department) officer with the Thames Valley Police force in Oxford, England. With a Jaguar car (a Lancia in the early novels), a thirst for English real ale and a penchant for music (especially opera and Wagner), poetry, art, classics, classic cars, and cryptic crossword puzzles, Morse presents a likeable persona, despite his sullen temperament.

==Name and family==
Morse's first name, "Endeavour", was kept a secret until the end of Death Is Now My Neighbour (traditionally, Morse claimed that he should be called "Morse", or joked that his first name was "Inspector"). Two-thirds of the way through the episode he gives the cryptic clue of "My whole life's effort has revolved around Eve". http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0611637/ In the series, it is noted that his reticence about his Christian name led to his being nicknamed "Pagan" while he attended Stamford School; the school is an alma mater of the author of the Morse novels, Colin Dexter, and Dexter's brother. The origin of Morse's first name is the vessel HMS Endeavour, as Morse's mother was a Quaker (Quakers have a tradition of "virtue names"), and his father was a fan of Captain James Cook. Morse's father was, by trade, a taxi driver, The Dead of Jericho, chapter 21 and Morse likes to explain the origin of his additional private income by saying that he "used to drive the Aga Khan". The Dead of Jericho, chapter 21 Colin Dexter is a fan of cryptic crosswords, and Morse is named after champion setter Jeremy Morse, one of Dexter's arch-rivals as a clue-writer in the crossword world. Colin Dexter in Super Sleuths: Inspector Morse. Director: Katie Kinnaird 

Dexter used to walk along the bank of the River Thames at Oxford, opposite the boathouse belonging to 22nd Oxford Sea Scout Group; the building is named "T.S. Endeavour."

During the episode "Cherubim and Seraphim", it is learned that Morse's parents divorced when he was 12. He remained with his mother until her death three years later, when he had to return to his father. He had a dreadful relationship with his stepmother, Gwen, Inspector Morse, "Cherubim and Seraphim", YouTube. and claimed he only read poetry to annoy her, and that her petty bullying almost drove him to suicide. He has a half-sister, Joyce, with whom he is on better terms, and was devastated when Joyce's daughter, Marilyn, took her own life.

==Habits and personality==
Morse is ostensibly the embodiment of white, male, middle-class Englishness, with a set of prejudices and assumptions to match. He may thus be considered a late example of the gentleman detective, a staple of British detective fiction. This background is in sharp juxtaposition to the working class origins of his assistant, Lewis (named after another rival clue-writer, Mrs. B. Lewis); in the novels, Lewis is Welsh, but this was altered to a northern English (Geordie) background in the TV series. He is also middle-aged in the books.

Morse's relationships with authoritythe establishment, bastions of power, and the status quoare markedly ambiguous, as sometimes are his relations with women. Morse is frequently portrayed in the act of patronising female characters, to the extent that some critics have argued that Morse is a misogynist. Val McDermid, Review: Death Is Now My Neighbour 

Morse's appearance of being patronising might have been misleading; he habitually showed empathy towards women, once opining that the female sex is not naturally prone to crime, being caring and non-violent. He was also never shy of showing his liking for attractive women, and often had dates with those involved in cases.

Morse is extremely intelligent. He dislikes spelling and grammatical errors, demonstrated by the fact that, in every personal or private document he receives, he manages to point out at least one mistake. He claims his approach to crime-solving is deductive, and one of his key tenets is that "there is a 50 per cent chance that the last person to see the victim alive was the murderer". In reality, it is the pathologists who deduce; Morse uses immense intuition and his fantastic memory to get to the killer.

==Career==
Although details of Morse's career are deliberately kept vague, it is hinted that he won a scholarship to study at St John's College, Oxford. He lost the scholarship as the result of poor academic performance resulting from a failed love affair, which is mentioned in the series in Season 3, Episode 2, "The Last Enemy", and recounted in detail in the novel The Riddle of the Third Mile, chapter 7. Forced to leave the University, he entered the Army and, on leaving it, joined the police. He often reflects on such renowned scholars as A. E. Housman who, like himself, failed to get an academic degree from Oxford.

==Novels==
The novels in the series are:
* Last Bus to Woodstock (1975)
* Last Seen Wearing (1976)
* The Silent World of Nicholas Quinn (1977)
* Service of All the Dead (1979)
* The Dead of Jericho (1981)
* The Riddle of the Third Mile (1983)
* The Secret of Annexe 3 (1986)
* The Wench is Dead (1989)
* The Jewel That Was Ours (1991)
* The Way Through the Woods (1992)
* The Daughters of Cain (1994)
* Death is Now My Neighbour (1996)
* The Remorseful Day (1999)

Inspector Morse also appears in several stories in Dexter's short story collection, Morse's Greatest Mystery and Other Stories (1993, expanded edition 1994).

In Dexter's last book, The Remorseful Day, Morse dies in hospital from a heart attack.

== Television ==

The Inspector Morse novels were made into a TV series (also called Inspector Morse) for the British TV channel ITV. The series was made by Zenith Productions for Central (a company later acquired by Carlton) and comprises 33 two-hour episodes (100 minutes excluding commercials)20 more episodes than there are novelsproduced between 1987 and 2000. The last episode was adapted from the final novel, The Remorseful Day, in which, as previously stated, Morse dies.

A spin-off series, titled Lewis, started airing in 2006. The series is based on the television incarnation of Lewis.

In August 2011, ITV announced plans to film a prequel drama, Endeavour, with author Colin Dexter's participation. English actor Shaun Evans was cast as a young Morse in his university days and early career, Inspector Morse set for TV comeback as young man, Oxford Mail, 4 May 2011 Inspector Morse is an enigma  let's keep him that way, The Telegraph, 5 August 2011 The drama was broadcast on 2 January 2012 on ITV 1. Four new episodes were televised from 14 April 2013, showing Morse's early cases working for DI Fred Thursday and with Jim Strange, his later boss and Max De Bryn the pathologist. A second series of four episodes followed, screening in March and April 2014.

== Radio ==
An occasional BBC Radio 4 series (for the Saturday Play) was made starring the voices of John Shrapnel as Morse and Robert Glenister as Lewis. The series was written by Guy Meredith and directed by Ned Chaillet. Episodes included: The Wench is Dead (23 March 1992); Last Seen Wearing (28 May 1994); and The Silent World of Nicholas Quinn (10 February 1996).

== Theatre ==

A new Inspector Morse stage play appeared in 2010, written by Alma Cullen (author of four Morse screenplays for ITV). The part of Morse was played by Colin Baker. The play, entitled MorseHouse of Ghosts, saw the inscrutable Detective Chief Inspector Morse looking to his past, when an old acquaintance becomes the lead suspect in a murder case that involves the on-stage death of a young actress. The play toured the UK from August to December 2010. 

==References==

== Further reading ==
* Allen, Paul and Jan, Endeavoring to Crack the Morse Code (Inspector Morse) Exposure Publishing (2006)
* Bishop, David, The Complete Inspector Morse: From the Original Novels to the TV Series London: Reynolds & Hearn (2006) ISBN 1-905287-13-5
* Bird, Christopher, The World of Inspector Morse: A Complete A-Z Reference for the Morse Enthusiast Foreword by Colin Dexter London: Boxtree (1998) ISBN 0-7522-2117-5
* Goodwin, Cliff, Inspector Morse Country : An Illustrated Guide to the World of Oxford's famous detective London: Headline (2002) ISBN 0-7553-1064-0
* Leonard, Bill, The Oxford of Inspector Morse: Films Locations History Location Guides, Oxford (2004) ISBN 0-9547671-1-X
* Richards, Antony and Philip Attwell, The Oxford of Inspector Morse
* Richards, Antony, Inspector Morse On Location
* Sanderson, Mark, The Making of Inspector Morse Pan Macmillan (1995) ISBN 0-330-34418-8

==External links==
*Inspector Morse Tour from Oxford Official Guided Walking Tours 
*Morse's Oxford Online Tour (created by Oxford University)
*Morse's Oxford Tour

 Morse, Endeavour



[[History of the Isle of Man]]

The Isle of Man became separated from Britain and Ireland by about 8000 BC. It appears that colonisation took place by sea sometime before 6500 BC. Richard Bradley The prehistory of Britain and Ireland, Cambridge University Press, 2007, ISBN 0-521-84811-3 p. 8 The island has been visited by various raiders and trading peoples over the years. After being settled by people from Ireland in the first millennium, the Isle of Man was converted to Christianity and then suffered raids by Vikings from Norway. After becoming subject to suzerainty to Norway as part of the Kingdom of Mann and the Isles, the Isle of Man later became a possession of the Scottish and then English crowns.

Since 1866, the Isle of Man has been a Crown Dependency and has democratic self-government.
Old House of Keys, Castletown

==Prehistory==
Cross-section of the Irish Sea through Man, showing sea levels.
Ogham stone from the Isle of Man showing the droim in centre. Text reads BIVAIDONAS MAQI MUCOI CUNAVA; in English: Of Bivaidonas, son of the tribe Cunava.

===Mesolithic===
The Isle of Mann effectively became an island around 8,500 years ago when rising sea levels caused by the melting glaciers cut Mesolithic Britain off from continental Europe for the last time. A land bridge had existed between the Isle of Man and Cumbria prior to this date, although the location and opening of the land-bridge remains poorly understood. A New History of the Isle of Man Volume 1 - The Evolution of the Natural Landscape. edited by Richard Hiverrell and Geoffrey Thomas pp295-296 (1st Edition)(2006) Liverpool University Press ISBN 0-85323-587-2 

The earliest traces of people on the Isle of Man date back to the Mesolithic Period, also known as the Middle Stone Age. The first residents lived in small natural shelters, hunting, gathering and fishing for their food. They used small tools made of flint or bone, examples of which have been found near the coast. Representatives of these artifacts are kept at the Manx National Heritage museum.

===Neolithic to Bronze Age===
The Neolithic Period marked the coming of knowledge of farming, improved stone tools and pottery. It was during this period that megalithic monuments began to appear around the island. Examples are found at Cashtal yn Ard near Maughold, King Orry's Grave in Laxey, Meayll Circle near Cregneash, and Ballaharra Stones in St John's. The Megaliths were not the only culture during this time; there were also the local Ronaldsway and Bann cultures.

During the Bronze Age, the large communal tombs of the Megaliths were replaced with smaller burial mounds. Bodies were put in stone lined graves along with ornamental containers. The Bronze Age burial mounds created long lasting markers about the countryside.

===Iron Age===
The Iron Age marked the beginning of Celtic cultural influence. Large hill forts appeared on hill summits and smaller promontory forts along the coastal cliffs, whilst large timber-framed roundhouses were built.

It is likely that the first Celts to inhabit the Island were Brythonic tribes from mainland Britain. The secular history of the Isle of Man during the Brythonic period remains mysterious. It is not known if the Romans ever made a landing on the island; if they did they certainly never conquered it. It has been speculated that the island may have become a haven for Druids and other refugees from Anglesey after the Sacking of Mona in 60AD. The best record of any event before the incursions of the Northmen is attributed to Betn mac Cairill, king of Ulster, at the end of the 6th century (though some have thought this event may refer to Manau Gododdin between the Firths of Clyde and Forth). Even if the supposed conquest of the Menavian islands  Mann and Anglesey  by Edwin of Northumbria, in 616, did take place, it could not have led to any permanent results, for when the English were driven from the coasts of Cumberland and Lancashire, soon afterwards, they could not well have retained their hold on the island to the west of these coasts. One can speculate, however, that when Ecfrid's Northumbrians laid Ireland waste from Dublin to Drogheda in 684, they temporarily occupied Mann.

It is generally assumed that Irish invasion or immigration formed the basis of the modern Manx language; Irish migration to the island probably began in the 5th century AD. This is evident in the change in language used in Ogham inscriptions. The transition between Manx Brythonic (like Welsh) and Manx Gaelic (a Goidelic language which remains closely related to Irish Gaelic and Scottish Gaelic) may have been gradual. One question is whether present-day Manx language survives from pre-Norse days or reflects a linguistic reintroduction after the Norse invasion.

Tradition attributes the island's conversion to Christianity to St Maughold (Maccul), an Irish missionary who gives his name to a parish. The island lends its name to Manannn, the Brythonic and Gaelic sea god who is said in myth to have once ruled the island.

==Middle Ages==

===Viking Age and Norse kingdom===

During the period of Scandinavian domination there are two main epochs  one before the conquest of Mann by Godred Crovan in 1079, and the other after it. Warfare and unsettled rule characterize the earlier epoch; the later saw comparatively more peace.
The Kingdom of Mann and the Isles about the year 1100. Sodor and Mann in red.
Between about AD 800 and 815 the Vikings came to Mann chiefly for plunder; between about 850 and 990, when they settled in it, the island fell under the rule of the Scandinavian Kings of Dublin; and between 990 and 1079, it became subject to the powerful Earls of Orkney.

There was a mint producing coins on Mann between c.1025 and c.1065. These Manx coins were minted from an imported type 2 Hiberno-Norse penny die from Dublin. Hiberno-Norse coins were first minted under Sihtric, King of Dublin. This illustrates that Mann may have in fact been under the thumb of Dublin at this time.

The conqueror Godred Crovan was evidently a remarkable man, though little information about him is attainable. According to the Chronicon Manniae he subdued Dublin, and a great part of Leinster, and held the Scots in such subjection that no one who built a vessel dared to insert more than three bolts. The memory of such a ruler would be likely to survive in tradition, and it seems probable therefore that he is the person commemorated in Manx legend under the name of King Gorse or Orry. He created the Kingdom of Mann and the Isles in around 1079; it included the south-western islands of Scotland (Sodor) until 1164, when two separate kingdoms were formed from it. In 1154, the Diocese of Sodor and Man was formed under the Church of England.

The islands which were under his rule were called the Sur-eyjar (Sudreys or the south isles, in contradistinction to the Norr-eyjar, or the "north isles," i.e. Orkney and Shetland), and they consisted of the Hebrides, and of all the smaller western islands of Scotland, with Mann. At a later date his successors took the title of (King of Mann and the Isles). The kingdom's capital was on St Patrick's Isle, where Peel Castle was built on the site of a Celtic monastery.

Olaf, Godred's son, exercised considerable power, and according to the Chronicle, maintained such close alliance with the kings of Ireland and Scotland that no one ventured to disturb the Isles during his time (11131152). In 1156, his son, Godred (reigned 11531158), who for a short period ruled over Dublin also, lost the smaller islands off the coast of Argyll as a result of a quarrel with Somerled (the ruler of Argyll). An independent sovereignty thus appeared between the two divisions of his kingdom.

In the 1130s the sent a small mission to establish the first bishopric on the Isle of Man, and appointed Wimund as the first bishop. He soon after embarked with a band of followers on a career of murder and looting throughout Scotland and the surrounding islands.

During the whole of the Scandinavian period, the Isles remained nominally under the suzerainty of the Kings of Norway, but the Norwegians only occasionally asserted it with any vigour. The first such king to assert control over the region was likely Magnus Barelegs, at the turn of the 12th century. It wasn't until Hakon Hakonarson's 1263 expedition that another king returned to the Isles.

===Decline of Norse rule===
11th century

From the middle of the 12th century till 1217 the suzerainty, because Norway had become a prey to civil dissensions, had remained of a very shadowy character. But after that date it became a reality and Norway consequently came into collision with the growing power of the kingdom of Scotland.

Early in the 13th century, when Ragnald (reigned 11871229) paid homage to King John of England (reigned 11991216), we hear for the first time of English intervention in the affairs of Mann. But a period of Scots domination would precede the establishment of full English control.

Finally, in 1261, Alexander III of Scotland sent envoys to Norway to negotiate for the cession of the isles, but their efforts led to no result. He therefore initiated hostilities which terminated in the indecisive Battle of Largs against the Norwegian fleet in 1263. However, the Norwegian king Haakon Haakonsson died the following winter, and this allowed King Alexander to bring the war to a successful conclusion. Magnus Olafsson, King of Mann and the Isles (reigned 12521265), who had campaigned on the Norwegian side, had to surrender all the islands over which he had ruled, except Mann, for which he did homage. Two years later Magnus died and in 1266 King Magnus VI of Norway ceded the islands, including Mann, to Scotland in the Treaty of Perth in consideration of the sum of 4,000 marks (known as in Scotland) and an annuity of 100 marks. But Scotland's rule over Mann did not become firmly established till 1275, when the Manx suffered defeat in the decisive Battle of Ronaldsway, near Castletown.

===English dominance===
In 1290 King Edward I of England sent Walter de Huntercombe to take possession of Mann, and it remained in English hands until 1313, when Robert Bruce took it after besieging Castle Rushen for five weeks. Then, until 1346, when the Battle of Neville's Cross decided the long struggle between England and Scotland in England's favour, there followed a confused period when Mann sometimes experienced English rule and sometimes Scottish.

About 1333 King Edward III of England granted Mann to William de Montacute, 3rd Baron Montacute, (later the 1st Earl of Salisbury), as his absolute possession, without reserving any service to be rendered to him. In 1388 the Island was "ravaged" by Sir William Douglas of Nithsdale on his way home from the destruction of the town of Carlingford. The Douglas book In 1392 his son sold the island including sovereignty to Sir William le Scrope. In 1399 King Henry IV brought about the beheading of Le Scrope, who had taken the side of Richard II. The island then came into the possession of the Crown, which granted it to Henry Percy, 1st Earl of Northumberland, but following his attainder, Henry IV, in 1405, made a lifetime grant of it, with the patronage of the bishopric, to Sir John Stanley. In 1406 this grant was extended  on a feudatory basis under the English Crown  to Sir John's heirs and assigns, the feudal fee being the service of rendering homage and two falcons to all future Kings of England on their coronations.

==Early Modern period==
With the accession of the Stanleys to the throne there begins a more settled epoch in Manx history. Though the island's new rulers rarely visited its shores, they placed it under governors, who, in the main, seem to have treated it with the justice of the time. Of the thirteen members of the family who ruled in Mann, the second Sir John Stanley (14141432), James, the 7th Earl (16271651), and the 10th Earl of the same name (17021736) had the most important influence on it. The first curbed the power of the spiritual barons, introduced trial by jury, instead of trial by battle, and ordered the laws to be written. The second, known as the Great Stanley, and his wife, Charlotte de la Tremoille (or Tremouille), are probably the most striking figures in Manx history.

===English Civil War and Interregnum===
In 1643 Charles I ordered James Stanley, 7th Earl of Derby to go to Mann, where the people, who were no doubt influenced by what was taking place in England, threatened to revolt.

Stanley's arrival, with English soldiers, soon put a stop to anything of this kind. He conciliated the people by his affability, brought in Englishmen to teach various handicrafts and tried to help the farmers by improving the breed of Manx horses, and, at the same time, he restricted the exactions of the Church. But the Manx also lost much of their liberty under his rule: they were heavily taxed; troops were quartered upon them; and they also had the more lasting grievance of being compelled to accept leases for three lives instead of holding their land by the straw tenure which they considered to be equivalent to a customary inheritance.

Six months after the death of Charles I (30 January 1649), Stanley received a summons from General Ireton to surrender the island, which he declined. In August 1651 Stanley went to England with some of his troops, among whom were 300 Manxmen, to join King Charles II. Charles was decisively defeated at the Battle of Worcester and Stanley was captured, imprisoned in Chester Castle and then tried by court-martial and executed at Bolton.

===Rebellion===
Soon after Stanley's death, the Manx Militia, under the command of William Christian (known by his Manx name of Illiam Dhone), rose against the Countess and captured all the insular forts except Rushen and Peel. They were then joined by a Parliamentary force under Colonel Duckenfield, to whom the Countess surrendered after a brief resistance.

Oliver Cromwell had appointed Thomas Fairfax Lord of Mann and the Isles in September 1651, so that Mann continued under a monarchical government and remained in the same relation to England as before.

===Restoration of the Stanleys===
The restoration of Stanley government in 1660 therefore caused as little friction and alteration as its temporary cessation had. One of the first acts of the new Lord, Charles Stanley, 8th Earl of Derby, was to order Christian to be tried. He was found guilty and executed. Of the other persons implicated in the rebellion only three were excepted from the general amnesty. But by Order in Council, Charles II pardoned them, and the judges responsible for the sentence on Christian were punished.

Charles Stanley's next act was to dispute the permanency of the tenants' holdings, which they had not at first regarded as being affected by the acceptance of leases, a proceeding which led to an almost open rebellion against his authority and to the neglect of agriculture, in lieu of which the people devoted themselves to the fisheries and to contraband trade.

Charles Stanley, who died in 1672, was succeeded firstly by his son William Richard George Stanley, 9th Earl of Derby until his death in 1702.

The agrarian question subsided only in 1704, when James, William's brother and successor, largely through the influence of Bishop Wilson, entered into a compact with his tenants, which became embodied in an act, called the Act of Settlement. Their compact secured the tenants in the possession of their estates in perpetuity on condition of a fixed rent, and a small fine on succession or alienation. From the great importance of this act to the Manx people it has been called their Magna Carta. As time went on, and the value of the estates increased, the rent payable to the Lord became so small in proportion as to be almost nominal, being extinguished by purchase in 1916.

===Revestment===
James died in 1736, and the suzerainty of the isle passed to James Murray, 2nd Duke of Atholl, his first cousin and heir-male. In 1764 he was succeeded by his only surviving child Charlotte, Baroness Strange, and her husband, John Murray, who (in right of his wife) became Lord of Mann. About 1720 the contraband trade greatly increased. In 1726 Parliament checked it somewhat for a time, but during the last ten years of the Atholl regime (17561765) it assumed such proportions that, in the interests of the Imperial revenue, it became necessary to suppress it. With a view to so doing, Parliament passed the Isle of Man Purchase Act 1765 (commonly called the Revestment Act by the Manx), under which it purchased the rights of the Atholls as Lords of Mann including the customs revenues of the Island for the sum of 70,000 sterling, and granted an annuity to the Duke and Duchess. The Atholls still retained their manorial rights, the patronage of the bishopric, and certain other perquisites, until they sold them for the sum of 417,144 in 1828.

Up to the time of the revestment, Tynwald had passed laws concerning the government of the island in all respects and had control over its finances, subject to the approval of the Lord of Mann. After the revestment, or rather after the passage of the Smuggling Act 1765 (commonly called the Mischief Act by the Manx), the Parliament at Westminster legislated with respect to customs, harbours and merchant shipping, and, in measures of a general character, it occasionally inserted clauses permitting the enforcement in the island of penalties in contravention of the acts of which they formed part. It also assumed the control of the insular customs duties. Such changes, rather than the transference of the full suzerainty to the King of Great Britain and Ireland, modified the (unwritten) constitution of the Isle of Man. Its ancient laws and tenures remained untouched, but in many ways the revestment affected it adversely. The hereditary Lords of Mann seldom, if ever, functioned as model rulers, but most of them had taken some personal share in its government, and had interested themselves in the well-being of its inhabitants. But now the whole direction of its affairs became the work of officials who regarded the island as a pestilent nest of smugglers, from which it seemed their duty to extract as much revenue as possible.

Some alleviation of this state of things happened between 1793 and 1826 when John Murray, 4th Duke of Atholl served as Governor, since, though he quarrelled with the House of Keys and unduly cared for his own pecuniary interests, he did occasionally exert himself to promote the welfare of the island. After his departure the English officials resumed their sway, but they showed more consideration than before. Moreover, since smuggling, which the Isle of Man Purchase Act had only checked  not suppressed  had by that time almost disappeared, and since the Manx revenue had started to produce a large and increasing surplus, the authorities looked more favourably on the Isle of Man, and, thanks to this fact and to the representations of the Manx people to British ministers in 1837, 1844 and 1853, it obtained a somewhat less stringent customs tariff and an occasional dole towards erecting its much neglected public works.

==Modern period==
After 1866, when the Isle of Man obtained a nominal measure of Home Rule, the Manx people have made remarkable progress, and currently form a prosperous community, with a thriving offshore financial centre, a tourist industry (albeit smaller than in the past) and a variety of other industries.

The Isle of Man was a base for alien civilian internment camps in both the First World War (191418) and the Second World War (193945). During the First World War there were two camps, one a requisitioned holiday camp in Douglas and the other a purpose built camp at Knockaloe near Peel in the parish of Patrick. During the Second World War there were a number of smaller camps in Douglas, Peel, Port Erin and Ramsey. The (now disbanded) Manx Regiment was raised in 1938 and saw action during the Second World War.

On 2 August 1973, a flash fire killed 51 people at the Summerland amusement centre in Douglas. 1973: Dozens die in resort fire, BBC News item 

===Greater autonomy===
The early 20th century saw a revival of music, dance, and a limited revival of the Manx language, although the last "native" speaker of Manx Gaelic died in the 1970s. In the middle of the 20th century, the Taoiseach, amon de Valera, visited, and was so dissatisfied with the lack of support for Manx that he immediately had two recording vans sent over. During the 20th century the Manx tourist economy declined, as the English and Irish started flying to Spain for package holidays. The Manx Government responded to this by successfully promoting the island, with its low tax rates, as an offshore financial centre, although it has avoided being placed on a recent UK black list of tax havens. BBC NEWS | Europe | Isle of Man | UK praises Manx tax list status The financial centre has had its detractors who have pointed to the potential for money laundering. INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS: Undercurrents at a Safe Harbor; Isle of Man (and Corporations) Is an Enclave of Intrigue - New York Times 

In 1949 an Executive Council, chaired by the Lieutenant-Governor and including members of Tynwald, was created. This was the start of a transfer of executive power from the unelected Lieutenant Governor to democratically elected Manx politicians. Finance and the police passed to Manx control between 1958 and 1976. Finance Act 1958, Finance Act 1962, Police (Isle of Man) Act 1962, Governor's Financial and Judicial Functions (Transfer) Act 1976: Statutes of the Isle of Man In 1980 the Lieutenant Governor was replaced as Chairman of the Executive Council by a chairman elected by Tynwald. Constitution (Executive Council) (Amendment) Act 1980 Following legislation in 1984, the Executive Council was reconstituted in 1985 to include the chairmen of the eight principal Boards; Constitution (Executive Council) Act 1984 in 1986 they were given the title of Minister and the chairman was retitled Chief Minister. Constitution (Executive Council) (Amendment) Act 1986 In 1986 Sir Miles Walker CBE became the first Chief Minister of the Isle of Man. In 1990 the Executive Council was renamed the Council of Ministers. Council of Ministers Act 1990 

The 1960s also saw a rise in Manx nationalism, spawning the parties Mec Vannin and the Manx National Party, as well as the now defunct (literally "Underground"), which mounted a direct-action campaign of spray-painting and attempted house-burning.

On 5 July 1973, control of the postal service passed from the UK General Post Office to the new Isle of Man Post, which began to issue its own postage stamps.

The 1990s and early 21st century have seen a greater recognition of indigenous Manx culture, including the opening of the first Manx language primary school, as well as a general re-evaluation of the island's economy.

==See also==

* King of Mann and the Isles (10791164)
* King of Mann (1164 - 1504)
* Lord of Mann (15041765)
* Act of Settlement 1703
* Governor of the Isle of Man (16961828)
* Lieutenant Governor of the Isle of Man (1773present)
* Wimund - 12th century, first Bishop of the Isle of Man, warlord
* Internment camps in the Isle of Man
* Extinct animals from the Isle of Man

== References ==
* 

==Sources==

==External links==
* The Story of Mann &ndash; Government site with a collections of links on Isle of Man history.
* The History of the Courts on the Isle of Man &ndash; Government site with a summary on the history of rulers on the Isle of Man.
* Isle of Man Genealogy &ndash; information about the geneaology of the Isle of Man from isleofman.com
* the manx notebook &ndash; A vast electronic compendium of all matters, past and present regarding the Isle of Man at isleofman.com
* Place-Names Of The Isle of Man &ndash; George Broderick Tbingen: Niemeyer. 7 vols. 1994-2004

 

[[Geography of the Isle of Man]]

The Isle of Man is an island in the Irish Sea, between Great Britain and Ireland in Western Europe, with a population of over 75,000. It is a British Crown dependency. It has a small islet, the Calf of Man, to its south. It is located at .

==Dimensions==
Satellite image

Area:
total:
572 km
land:
572 km
water:
0 km

This makes it:
*slightly more than three times the size of Washington, DC
*slightly more than one third the size of Hertfordshire
*slightly smaller than Saint Lucia.

==Coast==
The Isle of Man has a coastline of 160 km, and claims 12 nm of territorial waters, but only holds exclusive fishing rights in the first 3 miles.

Raad ny Foillan long distance footpath runs 95 miles around the Manx coast.

==Climate==
The Isle of Man enjoys a temperate climate, with cool summers and mild winters. Average rainfall is high compared to the majority of the British Isles, due to its location to the western side of Great Britain and sufficient distance from Ireland for moisture to be accumulated by the prevailing south-westerly winds. Average rainfall is highest at Snaefell, where it is around 1900 mm a year. At lower levels it can fall to around 800 mm a year.

Temperatures remain fairly cool, with the recorded maximum being 28.9 C at Ronaldsway.

== Terrain ==

Some of the island's mountainous terrain as viewed from Snaefell, the island's highest peak.
The island's terrain is varied. There are two mountainous areas divided by a central valley which runs between Douglas and Peel. The highest point in the Isle of Man, Snaefell, is in the northern area and reaches 620 m above sea level. The northern end of the island is a flat plain, consisting of glacial tills and marine sediments. To the south the island is more hilly, with distinct valleys. There is no land below sea level.

== Land use ==
*Arable land: 43.86%
*Permanent crops: 0%
*Other: 56.14% (includes permanent pastures, forests, mountain and heathland) (2011)

==Natural hazards and environmental issues==
There are few severe natural hazards, the most common being high winds, rough seas and dense fog. In recent years there has been a marked increase in the frequency of high winds, heavy rains, summer droughts and flooding both from heavy rain and from high seas. Snow fall has decreased significantly over the past century while temperatures are increasing year round with rainfall decreasing.

Air pollution, marine pollution and waste disposal are issues in the Isle of Man.

Global warming and a sea level rise potentially pose a great threat to the Isle of Man. All of the Island's towns are at threat from rising sea levels while the Northern Plain, a large, flat and low-lying plain composed of soft marine sediments and glacial material, which makes up about a quarter of the Island's landmass, is in danger of being lost to the sea over the next two centuries. The same is true for the considerably smaller Southern Plain surrounding the settlements of Castletown and Ballasalla and including Ronaldsway Airport.

===Protected Sites for Nature Conservation===
In order of importance, international first, non-statutory last.

====Ramsar Sites====
A view up a glen with Snaefell at the head

*Ballaugh Curraghs (2006, 183.86 ha)
Shares an identical boundary to the Ballaugh Curraghs ASSI.

====National Nature Reserves====
*The Ayres (2000, 272 ha)

====Areas of Special Scientific Importance====
There are 14 ASSIs on the Isle of Man as of 01/01/09.

*The Ayres (1996, 272 ha)
*Ballaugh Curraghs (2005, 183.86 ha)
*Rosehill Quarry, Billown
*Dhoon Glen (2007)
*Jurby Airfield
*Glen Maye
*Derbyhaven, Langness, Sandwick

====Marine Nature Reserves====
A Marine Nature Reserve was designated in Ramsey Bay in Oct 2011. 
Official notification, 
 Satutory instrument. 

====Areas of Special Protection====
*Point of Ayre

====Bird Sanctuaries====
*Calf of Man 616ac
*Tynwald Arboretum

====Nature Reserves and Wildlife Sites====
The Isle of Man now has forty-five non-statutory Wildlife Sites as of 30 January 2009, covering approximately 195ha of land and an additional 10.5 km of inter-tidal coast. The Manx Wildlife Trust also manage 20 nature reserves.

*Ballachurry
*Ballalough Reedbeds 1.4ha
*Ballamooar
*Ballanette
*Barnell Reservoir
*Breagle Glen (0.75 ac)
*Clay Head Brooghs
*Close-e-Quayle
*Close Sartfield (31 ac) (part of the Ballaugh Curraghs Ramsar Site)
*Close Umpson
*Cooildarry
*Cronk-y-Bing
*Curragh Feeagh
*Curragh Kionedroghad 1ha
*Curraghs Wildlife Park (26 ac)
*Dalby Mountain & Fields 28ha
*Earystane
*Fell's Field
*Gob ny Silvas
*Goshen (28 ac)(part of Ballaugh Curraghs Ramsar Site)
*Glen Dhoo (24.5 ac)
*Lough Cranstal
*Miss Gyler's Meadow
*Moaney & Crawyn's Meadows
*The Purt/Glen Dhoo

==== Marine No-take Zones ====
*Bradda Head
*Douglas Bay L.G. Murray, H. Hinz and M.J. Kaiser, University of Wales, Bangor, Marine Fisheries Research Report to DAFF 2007/2008 p.12 

== Geology ==
The larger part of the island is formed from highly faulted and folded sedimentary rocks of Ordovician age. There is a belt of younger Silurian rocks along the west coast between Niarbyl and St Patrick's Isle and a small area of Devonian sandstones around Peel. 
A band of Carboniferous age rocks underlies part of the northern plain but is nowhere seen at the surface however similar age rocks do outcrop in the south between Castletown, Silverdale and Port St Mary. Permo-Triassic age rocks are known to lie beneath Point of Ayre but, as with the rest of the northern plain, these rocks are concealed by substantial thicknesses of superficial deposits. British Geological Survey 1:50,000 scale Special map sheet Isle of Man BGS 2001 

The island has significant deposits of copper, lead and silver, zinc, iron, and plumbago (a mix of graphite and clay). Mines There are also quarries of black marble, limestone flags, clay schist, and granite. Quarries These are all modern, and there was no noticeable exploitation of metals or minerals prior to the modern era.

== Demographics ==
The island has a preliminary census estimated population of 79 805, as of September 2006. This is up on the government's last census in 2001, which recorded 76 315 people, itself a rise of 9.1% on the previous 1991 census.

The island's largest town and administrative centre is Douglas, the population of which is 23 000, nearly a third of the entire population of the island. Neighbouring Onchan, Ramsey in the north, Peel in the west and the three southern ports of Castletown, Port Erin and Port St Mary are the island's other main settlements. Almost all its population lives on or very near to the coast.

== See also ==
* Towns in the Isle of Man
* List of rivers of the Isle of Man
* Climate change and the Isle of Man

== Citations ==

==References==

*
*Isle of Man Government
*http://www.gov.im/dlge/enviro/climatechange.xml

*



[[Demographics of the Isle of Man]]

This article is about the demographic features of the population of the Isle of Man, including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.

==Vital statistics United Nations Demographic Yearbooks ==

 Average population Live births Deaths Natural change Crude birth rate (per 1000) Crude death rate (per 1000) Natural change (per 1000) 
 1934 51 000 664 768 - 104 13.0 15.1 -2.0 
 1935 51 000 666 772 - 106 13.1 15.1 -2.1 
 1936 51 000 668 807 - 139 13.1 15.8 -2.7 
 1937 51 000 644 821 - 177 12.6 16.1 -3.5 
 1942 53 000 883 820 63 16.7 15.5 1.2 
 1948 54 000 821 801 20 15.2 14.8 0.4 
 1949 54 000 840 790 50 15.6 14.6 0.9 
 1950 55 000 849 762 87 15.4 13.9 1.6 
 1951 55 000 837 867 - 30 15.2 15.8 -0.5 
 1952 54 000 806 803 3 14.9 14.9 0.1 
 1953 54 000 719 764 - 45 13.3 14.1 -0.8 
 1954 53 000 625 829 - 204 11.8 15.6 -3.8 
 1955 52 000 615 772 - 157 11.8 14.8 -3.0 
 1956 51 000 632 836 - 204 12.4 16.4 -4.0 
 1957 51 000 632 748 - 116 12.4 14.7 -2.3 
 1958 50 000 662 735 - 73 13.2 14.7 -1.5 
 1959 49 000 641 760 - 119 13.1 15.5 -2.4 
 1960 48 000 683 808 - 125 14.2 16.8 -2.6 
 1961 47 200 663 859 - 196 13.8 17.9 -4.1 
 1962 47 600 675 795 - 120 14.1 16.6 -2.5 
 1963 48 000 708 848 - 140 14.8 17.7 -2.9 
 1964 48 500 687 768 - 81 14.3 16.0 -1.7 
 1965 48 900 712 844 - 132 14.5 17.2 -2.7 
 1966 49 300 642 842 - 200 12.8 16.8 -4.0 
 1967 50 100 702 867 - 165 13.7 16.9 -3.2 
 1968 50 900 686 868 - 182 13.2 16.7 -3.5 
 1969 51 700 760 905 - 145 14.4 17.1 -2.7 
 1970 52 400 840 909 - 69 15.6 16.8 -1.3 
 1971 53 200 804 924 - 120 14.7 16.9 -2.2 
 1972 54 700 843 1 056 - 213 15.1 18.9 -3.8 
 1973 56 100 807 921 - 114 14.0 16.0 -2.0 
 1974 57 600 748 1 079 - 331 12.7 18.3 -5.6 
 1975 59 000 692 992 - 300 11.5 16.5 -5.0 
 1976 60 500 721 977 - 256 11.7 15.8 -4.1 
 1977 61 300 672 1 007 - 335 10.8 16.2 -5.4 
 1978 62 200 694 1 038 - 344 11.1 16.6 -5.5 
 1979 63 000 758 972 - 214 12.0 15.4 -3.4 
 1980 63 800 741 1 015 - 274 11.7 16.0 -4.3 
 1981 64 700 752 979 - 227 11.8 15.4 -3.6 
 1982 64 600 724 983 - 259 11.4 15.4 -4.1 
 1983 64 500 680 943 - 263 10.7 14.8 -4.1 
 1984 64 400 666 974 - 308 10.4 15.3 -4.8 
 1985 64 400 703 1 045 - 342 11.2 16.6 -5.4 
 1986 64 300 709 952 - 243 11.2 15.1 -3.8 
 1987 65 400 729 925 - 196 11.4 14.5 -3.1 
 1988 66 500 781 991 - 210 11.7 14.9 -3.1 
 1989 67 600 817 988 - 171 12.1 14.6 -2.5 
 1990 68 700 888 946 - 58 12.3 13.7 -1.4 
 1991 69 800 892 982 - 90 12.8 14.1 -1.3 
 1992 70 200 858 917 - 59 12.2 13.1 -0.8 
 1993 70 600 853 1 011 - 158 12.1 14.3 -2.2 
 1994 70 900 883 902 - 19 12.4 12.7 -0.3 
 1995 71 300 847 976 - 129 11.9 13.7 -1.8 
 1996 71 700 835 945 - 110 11.6 13.2 -1.5 
 1997 72 600 870 950 - 80 12.0 13.1 -1.1 
 1998 73 600 936 893 43 12.7 12.1 0.6 
 1999 74 500 894 983 - 89 12.0 13.2 -1.2 
 2000 75 400 831 897 - 66 11.0 11.9 -0.9 
 2001 76 400 863 955 - 92 11.3 12.5 -1.2 
 2002 77 100 903 877 26 11.7 11.4 0.3 
 2003 77 900 860 852 8 11.0 10.9 0.1 
 2004 78 600 862 798 64 11.0 10.2 0.8 
 2005 79 400 901 775 126 11.4 9.8 1.6 
 2006 80 100 905 768 137 11.3 9.6 1.7 
 2007 80 800 919 789 130 11.4 9.8 1.6 
 2008 81 600 979 843 136 12.0 10.3 1.7 
 2009 82 300 1 015 816 199 12.3 9.9 2.4 
 2010 

==Demographic statistics from the CIA World Factbook==

The following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.

===Age structure===

: 0-14 years: 18% (male 6,520; female 6,277)
: 15-64 years: 65% (male 23,904; female 23,674)
: 65 years and over: 17% (male 5,078; female 7,664) (2000 est.)

=== Population Density===

: 131 people/km (339 people/sq mi) (2005 est.)

===Sex ratio===
: at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
: under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
: 15-64 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
: 65 years and over: 0.66 male(s)/female
: total population: 0.94 male(s)/female (2000 est.)

===Infant mortality rate===

: 5.93 deaths/1,000 live births (2005 est.)

===Life expectancy at birth===
: total population: 78.34 years
: male: 74.98 years
: female: 81.87 years (2000 est.)
: Total fertility rate: 1.65 children born/woman (2000 est.)

===Nationality===
: noun: Manxman (men), Manxwoman (women)
: adjective: Manx

===Ethnic groups===

: Manx (Norse-Celtic descent), Briton

===Religions===

Anglican, Roman Catholic, Methodist, Baptist, Presbyterian, Religious Society of Friends, Jehovah's Witnesses, Atheism, Agnosticism.

The Church of England is the established church. http://www.lawsons.ca/isleoman/iom_003.html 

===Languages===

: Manx, English

==References==

==External links==
*2001 Manx Census, overview and details

Man


[[Politics of the Isle of Man]]

The government of the Isle of Man is a parliamentary representative democracy. As a Crown Dependency, it is not subordinate to the government of the United Kingdom. That government, however, is responsible for defence and external affairs and could intervene in the domestic affairs of the isle under its residual responsibilities to guarantee "good government" in all Crown Dependencies. The Monarch of the United Kingdom is also the head of state of the Isle of Man, and generally referred to as The Queen, Lord of Mann. http://www.gov.im/categories/business-and-industries/iom-key-facts-guide/ Legislation of the Isle of Man defines "the Crown in right of the Isle of Man" as being separate from the "Crown in right of the United Kingdom". The Air Navigation (Isle of Man) Order 2007 (No. 1115) Her representative on the isle is the Lieutenant Governor of the Isle of Man, but his role is mostly ceremonial, though he does have the power to grant Royal Assent (the withholding of which is the same as a veto).

Although the Isle of Man is not an integral part of the United Kingdom, its people are British citizens under UK law - there is no separate Manx citizenship. The United Kingdom has responsibility for all the island's external affairs, including citizenship, the isle's defence, good governance, and foreign relations. The isle has no representation at either the UK or EU parliaments.

The legislative power of the government is vested in a bicameral parliament called Tynwald (said to be the world's oldest continuously existing parliament), which consists of the directly elected House of Keys and the indirectly chosen Legislative Council. Following every House of Keys general election, the members of Tynwald elect from amongst themselves the Chief Minister of the Isle of Man, who serves as the head of government for five years (until the next general election). Executive power is vested in the Lieutenant Governor (as Governor-in-Council), the Chief Minister, and the Isle of Man's Council of Ministers. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.

Douglas, the largest town on the Isle of Man is its capital and seat of government, where the Government offices and the parliament chambers (Tynwald) are located.

==Executive branch==

The Head of State is the Lord of Mann, which is a hereditary position held by the British monarch (currently Queen Elizabeth II). The Lieutenant Governor is appointed by the Queen, on the advice of the UK's Secretary of State for Justice, for a five-year term and nominally exercises executive power on behalf of the Queen. The Chief Minister is elected by Tynwald following every House of Keys general election and serves for five years until the next general election.

When acting as Lord of Mann, the Queen acts on the advice of the Secretary of State for Justice and Lord Chancellor of the United Kingdom having prime responsibility as Privy Counsellor for Manx affairs. The Monarchy Today > Queen and State > Queen and Crown dependencies > Isle of Man 

The executive branch under the Chief Minister is referred to as "the government" or the "Civil Service", and consists of the Council of Ministers, nine Departments, ten Statutory Boards and three Offices. Each Department is run by a minister (of the Council of Ministers), who reports directly to the Council of Ministers. The Civil Service has more than 2000 employees and the total number of public sector employees including the Civil Service, teachers, nurses, police, etc. is about 9000 people. This is somewhat more than 10% of the population of the Island, and a full 23% of the working population. This does not include any military forces, as defence is the responsibility of the United Kingdom.

==Legislative branch==

The Manx legislature is Tynwald, which consists of two chambers. The House of Keys has 24 members, elected for a five-year term in multi- and single-seat constituencies by the whole island. The Legislative Council has eleven members, the President of Tynwald, Bishop of Sodor and Man, the Attorney General and eight other members who are elected from the general population (often they are already Members of the House of Keys, but must leave the Keys if selected) by the House of Keys for a five-year term. The voting age is 16.

===Political parties and elections===

In the 2011 Manx general election, of 29 September, the Liberal Vannin Party won three seats, up one since the last election, the remaining seats were won by independents. http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-isle-of-man-15001472 Three ministers lost their seats Anne Craine, Martyn Quayle, and Adrian Earnshaw as well as the former vice chairman of the Liberal Vannin Party Bill Malarkey. Voter turnout dropped from 64% to 54%.

Most Manx politicians stand for election as independents rather than as representatives of political parties. Though political parties do exist, their influence is not nearly as strong as is the case in mainland Britain. Consequently, much Manx legislation develops through consensus among the members of Tynwald, which contrasts with the much more adversarial nature of the British Parliament.

The largest political party is the recently established Liberal Vannin Party, which promotes greater Manx independence and more accountability in Government. In the 2011 Manx general election it won three seats in Tynwald including Leader Peter Karran MHK.

A Manx Labour Party also exists, unaffiliated to the British Labour Party.

A political pressure group Mec Vannin advocates the establishment of a sovereign republic.

The island also formerly had a Manx National Party. There are Manx members in the Celtic League, a political pressure group that advocates greater co-operation between and political autonomy for the Celtic nations.

The main political issues include the Island's relationship with the finance sector, housing prices and shortages, and the Manx language.

The vast majority of the members of the House of Keys are non-partisan (19), with two representatives from the Manx Labour Party and three from the Alliance for Progressive Government.

===Intervention of the United Kingdom===

The UK Parliament has paramount power to legislate for the Isle of Man on all matters but it is a long-standing convention that it does not do so on domestic ('insular') matters without Tynwald's consent. The Office of the Lieutenant Governor - Isle of Man Government Chief Secretary's Office 

Occasionally, the UK Parliament acts against the wishes of Tynwald  the most recent example being the Marine etc. Broadcasting (Offences) Act 1967, which banned pirate radio stations from operating in Manx waters. Legislation to accomplish this was defeated on its second reading in Tynwald, prompting Westminster to legislate directly.

The UK's secondary legislation (regulations and Statutory Instruments) cannot be extended to apply to the Isle of Man.

The Isle of Man is subject to certain European Union laws, by virtue of a being a territory for which the UK has responsibility in international law. These laws are those for areas not covered by the Protocol 3 opt-out that the UK included for the Isle of Man in its accession treaty  the areas excluded being free movement of persons, services and capital, and taxation and social policy harmonisation.

The Isle of Man has had several disputes with the European Court of Human Rights because it was late to change its laws concerning birching (corporal punishment) and sodomy.

==Judicial branch==
The lowest courts in the Isle of Man are presided over by the High Bailiff and the Deputy High Bailiff, along with lay Justices of the Peace. The High Court of Justice consists of three civil divisions and is presided over by a Deemster. Appeals are dealt with by the Staff of Government Division with final appeal to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in the United Kingdom. The head of the Judiciary is the First Deemster and Clerk of the Rolls. The other High and Appeal Court Judges are the Second Deemster, Deputy Deemster and Judge of Appeal, all of whom are appointed by the Lieutenant Governor.

The Court of General Gaol Delivery is the criminal court for serious offences (effectively the equivalent of a Crown Court in England). It is theoretically not part of the High Court, but is effectively the criminal division of the court. The Second Deemster normally sits as the judge in this court. In 1992, His Honour Deemster Callow passed the last-ever sentence of death in a court in the British Islands (which was commuted to life imprisonment). Capital punishment in the Isle of Man was formally abolished by Tynwald in 1993 (although the last execution on the island took place in 1872).

==See also==
*Royal Commission on the Constitution (United Kingdom)

==References==

==External links==
*Isle of Man Government
*Tynwald - The Parliament of the Isle of Man
*iomelections.com - 2006 General Election
* http://mhkstheyworkforyou.org/default.aspx Access to work & info of members of Tynwald

 
 

[[Economy of the Isle of Man]]

Offshore banking, manufacturing, and tourism form key sectors of the economy of the Isle of Man, a British Crown dependency in the Irish Sea.

The government's policy of offering incentives to high-technology companies and financial institutions to locate on the Island has expanded employment opportunities in high-income industries. As a result, agriculture and fishing, once the mainstays of the economy, now make declining contributions to the Island's Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Banking and other services now contribute the great bulk of GDP. The stability of the Government and openness for business make the Isle of Man an attractive alternative jurisdiction (DAW Index ranked 3).

Trade is mostly with the United Kingdom. The Isle of Man has free access to European Union markets for goods, but only has restricted access for services, people, or financial products.

The Isle of Man is a low tax economy with no capital gains tax, wealth tax, stamp duty, death duty or inheritance tax Direct Tax - Isle of Man Government Isle of Man Finance and income tax rates of 10% and 20%; corporation tax is at 0%. New Assessor Of Income Tax - Isle of Man Government 

==Gambling==
The Isle of Man has also recently entered the online gambling industry. In 2005 PokerStars, one of the world's largest online poker sites, relocated its headquarters to the Isle of Man from Costa Rica. In 2006, RNG Gaming a large gaming software developer of P2P tournaments and Get21, a multiplayer online blackjack site, based their corporate offices on the island. 

The Isle of Man Government Lottery operated from 1986 to 1997. Since 2 December 1999 the island has participated in the United Kingdom National Lottery. Can I Play The National Lottery On The Isle of Man? UK National Lottery Diary The island is the only jurisdiction outside the United Kingdom where it is possible to play the UK National Lottery. National Lottery FAQ:Can I play while overseas? Since 2010 it has also been possible for projects in the Isle of Man to receive national lottery Good Causes Funding. Manx charities to benefit from lottery APPENDIX 4: CORRESPONDENCE ON THE NATIONAL LOTTERY BILL Paliment.uk The good causes funding is distributed by the Manx Lottery Trust. Manx lottery Trust Tynwald receives the 12p lottery duty for tickets sold in the Island.

==Filmmaking==
The Manx government also promotes island locations for making films by contributing to the production costs. Among the most successful productions funded in part by the Isle of Man film industry were Waking Ned, where the Manx countryside stood in for rural Ireland, and films like Stormbreaker, Shergar, Tom Brown's Schooldays, I Capture the Castle, The Libertine, Island at War (TV series), Five Children and It, Colour Me Kubrick, Sparkle, and others. Other films that have been filmed on the Isle of Man include Thomas and the Magic Railroad, Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets, and Keeping Mum. Past Productions - Isle of Man Film 

==Radio and television==
The British television show Top Gear frequently tests high-powered cars on the island because many of the rural roads do not have speed limits.

==Electricity==
Since 1999, the Isle of Man has received electricity through the world's longest submarine AC cable, the 90 kV Isle of Man to England Interconnector, as well as from a natural gas power station in Douglas, an oil power station in Peel and a small hydro-electric power station in Sulby Glen.

== Tourism ==
Tourism in the Isle of Man developed from the advancement of transportation to the Isle. In 1819 the first steamship Robert Bruce came to the Isle, only seven years after the first steam-vessel in the UK. In the 1820s the tourist scene was growing due to betterment of transportation capabilities. Birch 1964: 32 

== Statistics ==

GDP:
purchasing power parity: $2.113 billion (2003 est.) 

GDPreal growth rate:
NA%

GDPper capita:
purchasing power parity: $28,500 (2003 est.) 

GDPcomposition by sector:
agriculture:
1%
industry:
13%
services:
86% (2000 est.)

Population below poverty line:
NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
lowest 10%:
NA%
highest 10%:
NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices):
3.6% (2003 est.)

Labor force:
39,690(2001)

Labour forceby occupation:
agriculture, forestry and fishing 3%, manufacturing 11%, construction 10%, transport and communication 8%, wholesale and retail distribution 11%, professional and scientific services 18%, public administration 6%, banking and finance 18%, tourism 2%, entertainment and catering 3%, miscellaneous services 10%

Unemployment rate:
0.6% (2004 est.)

Budget:
revenues:
$485 million
expenditures:
$463 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (FY00/01 est.)

Industries:
financial services, light manufacturing, tourism

Industrial production growth rate:
3.2% (1996/97)

Electricityproduction:
329 GWh (1999)

Electricityproduction by source:
fossil fuel:
100%
hydro:
0%
nuclear:
0%
other:
0% (1999)

Electricityconsumption:
287 GWh (1999)

Electricityexports:
NA kWh

Electricityimports:
NA kWh

Agricultureproducts:
cereals, vegetables, cattle, sheep, pigs, poultry

Exports:
$NA

Exportscommodities:
tweeds, herring, processed shellfish, beef, lamb

Exportspartners:
UK

Imports:
$NA

Importscommodities:
timber, fertilizers, fish

Importspartners:
UK

Debtexternal:
$NA

Economic aidrecipient:
$NA

Currency:
1 Isle of Man pound = 100 pence

Exchange rates:
Manx pounds per US$1: 0.6092 (January 2000), 0.6180 (1999), 0.6037 (1998), 0.6106 (1997), 0.6403 (1996), 0.6335 (1995); the Manx pound is at par with the British pound

Fiscal year:
1 April  31 March

==See also==
*Economy of Europe

== Notes ==

== References ==
* 

 

[[Communications in the Isle of Man]]

The Isle of Man has an extensive communications infrastructure. Consisting of Telegraphs, telephone wires, Submarine cables, and an array of Television and Mobile phone Transmitters and towers.

==Telecommunications==

===Telegraph===
The history of Manx telecommunications starts in 1859, when the Isle of Man Electric Telegraph Company was formed on the island with the intention of connecting across the island by telegraph, and allowing messages to be sent onwards to the UK. In August 1859, a 36 nmi long cable was commissioned from Glass, Elliot and Company of Greenwich and laid from Cranstal (north of Ramsey) to St Bees in Cumbria using the chartered cable ship Resolute. The St Bees - Isle of Man Submarine Telegraph The cable was single-core, with gutta-percha insulation.

Twenty miles of overhead cable were also erected from Cranstal south to Ramsey, and on to Douglas. In England, the telegraph was connected to Whitehaven and the circuits of the Electric Telegraph Company.

The telegraph offices were located at 64 Athol Street, Douglas (also the company's head office) and at East Quay, Ramsey (now Marina House). Thwaite's Directory 1863 

On 10 August 1860 the company was statutorily incorporated by an Act of Tynwald with a capital of 5,500.

The currents at Cranstal proved too strong, and in 1864 the cable was taken up and relaid further south, at Port-e-Vullen in Ramsey Bay. It was later relaid to land even further south at Port Cornaa.

Following the 1869 finalisation of UK telegraph nationalisation into a General Post Office monopoly, the Isle of Man Telegraph Company was nationalised in 1870 under the Telegraph Act 1870 (an Act of Parliament) at a cost to the British Government of 16,106 (paid in 1872 following arbitration proceedings over the value). Prior to nationalisation, the island's telegraph operations had been performing poorly and the company's share price valued it at around 100.

Subsequent to nationalisation, operations were taken over by the GPO. The internal telegraph system was extended within a year to Castletown and Peel, however by then the previous lack of modern communications in Castletown had already started the Isle of Man Government on its move to Douglas.

Due to increasing usage in the years following nationalisation, further cables between Port Cornaa and St Bees were laid in 1875 and 1885.

By 1883 Smith's Directory listed several telegraph offices operated by the Post Office, in addition to those at Douglas, Ramsey, Castletown and Peel the telegraph was also available at Laxey, Ballaugh, and Port St. Mary.

Throughout the First World War, the cable landing station at Port Cornaa was guarded by the Isle of Man Volunteer Corps.

The undersea telegraph cables have been disused since the 1950s, but remain in place.

===Telephones===
The main telephone provider on the Isle of Man today is Manx Telecom.

In 1889 George Gillmore, formerly an electrician for the GPO's Manx telegraph operations, was granted a licence by the Postmaster General to operate the Isle of Man's first telephone service. Based in an exchange in Athol Street, early customers of Gilbert's telephone service included the Isle of Man Steam Packet Company and the Isle of Man Railway. Not having the resources to fund expansion or a link to England, Gillmore sold his licence to the National Telephone Company and stayed on as their manager on the island.

By 1901 there were 600 subscribers, and the telephone system had been extended to Ramsey, Castletown, Peel, Port Erin, Port St. Mary and Onchan.

On 1 January 1912 the National Telephone Company was nationalised and merged into the General Post Office by the Telephone Transfer Act 1911. Only Guernsey, Portsmouth and Hull remained outside of the GPO.

In 1922, the General Post Office offered to sell the island's telephone service to the Manx government, but the offer was not taken up. A similar arrangement in Jersey for that island's telephone service was concluded in 1923.

The first off-island telephone link was established in 1929, with the laying of a cable by the CS Faraday between Port Erin and Ballyhornan in Northern Ireland, a distance of 57 km, and then between Port Grenaugh and Blackpool, primarily to provide a link to Northern Ireland. The cable was completed on 6 June 1929 and the first call between the Isle of Man and the outside world was made on 28 June 1929 by Lieutenant Governor Sir Claude Hill in Douglas to the Postmaster General in Liverpool. The cable initially carried only two trunk circuits.

In 1942, a pioneering VHF frequency-modulated radio-link was established between Creg-na-Baa and the UK to provide an alternative to the sub-sea cable. This has since been discontinued.

This was augmented on 24 June 1943 by a 74 km long cable between Cemaes Bay in Anglesea and Port Erin, which had the world's first submerged repeater, laid by HMCS Iris. The repeater doubled the possible number of circuits on the cable, and although it failed after only five months, its replacement worked for seven years.

In 1962 a further undersea cable was laid by HMTS Ariel between Colwyn Bay and the Island.

Historically, the telephone system on the Isle of Man had been run as a monopoly by the British General Post Office, and later British Telecommunications, and operated as part of the Liverpool telephone district.

By 1985 the privatised British Telecom had inherited the telephone operations of the GPO, including those on the Isle of Man. At this time the Manx Government announced that it would award a 20-year licence to operate the telephone system in a tender process. As part of this process, in 1986 British Telecom created a Manx-registered subsidiary company, Manx Telecom, to bid for the tender. It was believed that a local identity and management would be more politically acceptable in the tendering process as they competed with Cable & Wireless to win the licence. Manx Telecom won the tender, and commenced operations under the new identity from 1 January 1987.

On 28 March 1988 an 8,000 telephone circuit fibre optic cable, the longest unregenerated system in Europe, was inaugurated. In links Port Grenaugh to Silecroft in Cumbria, and was laid in September 1987. The cable was buried in the seabed along its entire length.

A further fibre optic cable, known as BT-MT1 was laid in October 1990 between Millom in Cumbria and Douglas, a distance of 43 nmi. Jointly operated by BT and Manx Telecom, it provides six channels each with a bandwidth of 140 Mbit/s. This cable remains in use today.

In July 1992, Mercury Communications laid the LANIS fibre-optic cables. LANIS-1 runs for 61 nmi between Port Grenaugh and Blackpool, and LANIS-2 runs for 36 nmi between the Isle of Man and Northern Ireland. They have six channels each with a bandwidth of 565 Mbit/s. The LANIS cables are now operated by Cable & Wireless. The LANIS-1 cable was damaged 600 m off Port Grenaugh on 27 November 2006, causing loss of the link and resulting in temporary Internet access issues for some Manx customers whilst it was awaiting repair.

On 17 November 2001 Manx Telecom became part of mmO2 following the demerger of BT Wireless's operations from BT Group, and the company was owned by Telefnica. On 4 June 2010 Manx Telecom was sold by Telefnica to UK private equity investor HgCapital (who were buying the majority stake), alongside telecoms management company CPS Partners

In December 2007, the Manx Electricity Authority and its telecoms subsidiary, e-llan Communications, commissioned the lighting of a new undersea fibre-optic link. It was laid in 1999 between Blackpool and Douglas as part of the Isle of Man to England Interconnector which connects the Manx electricity system to the UK's National Grid.

In March 2009, BlueWave Communications installed microwave links to Ireland and the UK. These were the first off-island microwave links. 

According to the CIA World Factbook, in 1999 there were 51,000 fixed telephone lines in use in the Isle of Man.

The Isle of Man is included within the UK telephone numbering system, and is accessed externally via UK area codes, rather than by its own country calling code. The area codes currently in use are: +44 1624 (landlines) and +44 7524 / +44 7624 / +44 7924 (mobiles).

====Submarine communications cables in service====

*BT-MT1 (BT/Manx Telecom, 1990 - UK)
* BT-MT1-NI (BT/Manx Telecom, 2000 - Northern Ireland (UK))
*LANIS-1 (Cable & Wireless, 1992 - UK)
*LANIS-2 (Cable & Wireless, 1992 - Northern Ireland (UK))
*Isle of Man to England Interconnector (Manx Electricity Authority, 2007 - UK)

Submarine cables in Manx waters are governed by the Submarine Cables Act 2003 (an Act of Tynwald).

====Telecoms service providers====
* Manx Telecom The incumbent provider offering all types of telecoms and owner of the national network. http://www.manx-telecom.com
* Sure (Mobiles only, Broadband and Home Phone is operated over Manx Telecom landlines). http://www.surecw.com
* Wi-Manx VoIP Services provider since 2007 operating over private microwave links along with (fibre,LES and DSL circuits provided by the incumbent). http://www.wimanx.net
* Domicilium Born out of Advanced Systems (One of the original service providers in Europe) Domicilium is primarily a business ISP providing network and hosting services. Domicilium was the first IOM provider to offer MPLS services to the UK. http://www.domicilium.com
* Continent 8 Hosting provider with locations all over the world. Continent 8 have a specific focus on the gaming industry but are a registered internet provider on the IOM. http://www.continent8.com
* Bluewave Communication A provider of wireless solutions to SME, corporate and residential consumers http://www.bwc.im

It is also rumoured that various online gaming companies operate their own networks outside of these providers, although they do not resell that service.

===Mobile telephones===
The mobile phone network operated by Manx Telecom has been used by O2 as an environment for developing and testing new products and services prior to wider rollout. In December 2001, the company became the first telecommunications operator in Europe to launch a live 3G network. In November 2005, the company became the first in Europe to offer its customers an HSDPA (3.5G) service. Manx Telecom website. Retrieved 16 May 2007. 

===Internet===
In 1996 the Isle of Man Government obtained permission to use the .im National Top Level Domain (TLD) and has ultimate responsibility for its use. The domain is managed on a daily basis by Domicilium (IOM) Limited, an island based internet service provider. Broadband internet services are available through five local providers which are BlueWave Communications, Wi-Manx, Domicilium, and Manx Telecom.

==Broadcasting==

===Radio===
The public-service commercial radio station for the island is Manx Radio. Manx Radio is part funded by government grant, and partly by advertising.

There are two other Manx-based FM radio stations, Energy FM and 3 FM. 3 FM 

BBC national radio stations are also relayed locally via a transmitter located to the south of Douglas, relayed from Sandale transmitting station in Cumbria, as well as a signal feed from the Holme Moss transmitting station in West Yorkshire. The Douglas transmitter also broadcasts the BBC's DAB digital radio services and Classic FM.

Manx Radio is the only local service to broadcast on AM medium wave. No UK services are relayed via local AM transmitters. No longwave stations operate from the Island, although one (Musicmann279) was proposed.

A Channel 4 operated DAB multiplex is proposed, but there are currently no proposals to broadcast any of the three insular FM stations on DAB.

====Transmitters====
* Snaefell - Manx Radio, Energy FM, 3FM
* Foxdale - Manx Radio (AM)
* Mull Hill (near Port St. Mary) - Energy FM
* Jurby - Energy FM, Manx Radio
* Ramsey - Energy FM, 3FM
* Ballasaig (Maughold) - Energy FM
* Carnane (Douglas) - Manx Radio, Energy FM, 3FM, Radio 1, Radio 2, Radio 3, Radio 4, Classic FM, BBC DAB multiplex
* Port St Mary - 3FM

===Television===
There is no Island-specific television service. Local transmitters retransmit UK Freeview broadcasts. The BBC region is BBC North West and the ITV region is Granada.

Many TV services are available by satellite, such as Sky, and Freesat from the Astra 2/Eurobird 1 group, as well as services from a range of other satellites around Europe such as Astra 1 and Hot Bird.

In some areas, terrestrial television directly from the United Kingdom or Republic of Ireland can also be received.

Analogue television transmission ceased between 2008 and 2009, when limited local transmission of digital terrestrial television commenced. The UK's television licence regime extends to the Island.

There is no Island-specific opt-out of the BBC regional news programme North West Tonight, in the way that the Channel Islands get their own version of Spotlight.

ITV television has been available on parts of the east of the Isle of Man on 3 May 1956 when Granada Television transmissions started from the Winter Hill transmitting station, and to parts of the west of the island on 1 October 1959 from the Black Mountain transmitting station in Northern Ireland which broadcast Ulster Television. Parts of the north of the island received Border Television since 1 September 1961, initially directly from the Caldbeck transmitting station in Cumberland. On 26 March 1965 Border Television commenced relay of their signal through a local transmitter on Richmond Hill, 542 ft above sea level and three miles (5 km) from the centre of Douglas. The site allowed reliable reception of the Caldbeck signal, which is rebroadcast on a different frequency. The 200 ft high transmission tower was re-sited from London, where it had been used for early ITV transmissions. Richmond Hill was decommissioned after the close of 405 line broadcasts, although the 200 ft tower remained in use for radio with Manx Radio transmitting on 96.9 MHz and then 97.3 MHz until 1989. Manx Radio moved their FM service to the Carnane site and the frequecny changed to the current 97.2 MHz.

The television broadcasts are now transmitted from a 195 ft high transmitter on a hill to the south of Douglas. The transmitter is operated by Arqiva and is directly fed using a Fibre Optic cable. There are further sub-relay transmitters across the island. Following a realignment of ITV regional services and the digital switchover, the Douglas relay switched ITV broadcasts to Granada Television on Thursday 17 July 2009.

The Broadcasting Act 1993 (An Act of Tynwald) Broadcasting Act 1993 allows for the establishment of local television services. Only one application for a licence to run such a service was received by the Communications Commission. That application was rejected. Application for TV Station Licence - Communications Commission News Release - Isle of Man Government 

According to the CIA World Factbook, as of 1999 there were 27,490 televisions in use in the Isle of Man.

====Transmitters====
* Kimmeragh (Bride)
* Beary (St Johns)
* Glen Maye
* Foxdale
* Port St. Mary
* Carnane (Douglas)
* Union Mills
* Laxey
* Jurby

==Post==
Isle of Man Post issues its own stamps for use within the island and for sending post off-island. Only Manx stamps are valid for sending mail using the postal system. The Isle of Man adopted postcodes in 1993 using the prefix IM to fit in with the already established UK postcode system.

==See also==
* Communications Commission
* Manx Telecom
* Isle of Man Post

==References==

==External links==
* Communications Commission
* Communications summary

 

[[Transport in the Isle of Man]]

There are a number of transport services around the Isle of Man, Mostly consisting of paved roads, public transport, rail services, ports and an airport.

==Roads==
Overview map of transport links in the Isle of Man

The island has a total of 688 mi Isle of Man - About the Island of public roads, all of which are paved. Roads are named using a numbering scheme similar to those used in the numbering of roads in Great Britain and Northern Ireland; each road is assigned a letter, which represents the road's category, and a subsequent 12 digit number. A roads constitute the main roads of the island whilst roads labelled B to D will decrease in size and or quality. U roads are yet smaller. There is no national speed limit - that is to say, the majority of roads one may drive at any speed which is safe and appropriate. Careless and dangerous driving laws still apply of course, so one may not travel at absolutely any speed. Nevertheless, sight lines are such that there are parts of the network where someone in an appropriate vehicle could approach 200mph - but local speed limits are prevalent in a similar manner to the UK. Nevertheless, measured travel speeds are often relatively low. One potential reason for this is that locals are permitted to start driving at the age of sixteen, when they are limited to 50mph for two years (indeed all drivers are limited to 50mph in the first two years after passing their driving test) and some are not used to having to make progress in the same way that drivers using a larger road network like in the UK are (even an awful driver can get from anywhere in the island to anywhere else in ninety minutes). Set against that is a strong culture of motor sport enthusiasm (pinaccled in the TT, but there are a huge number of events throughout the year) and the better locals are well used to traversing country roads at speeds illegal in roads of such low quality anywhere else on earth. This leads to a very diverse level of both driving competence and speed. It is probably safe to say the typical driver is both highly competent and relatively slow, rarely exceeding 75mph (121 km/h). Nevertheless it should be noted that in a referendum in the 2000s the introduction of blanket speed limits was refused by the population, suggesting that a large number appreciate the freedom.

There is a comprehensive bus network, operated by Bus Vannin, a department of the Isle of Man Government, with most routes originating or terminating in Douglas.

 Isle of Man travel speeds 
 Measurement site Speed limit(mph) 85% percentile Measurement dates 
 Eastbound Westbound 
 Ballafreer House, Main Road, Marown No limit 46 47 2005 (27 June  4 July) 
 Main Road, Baldrine 30 36 36 2005 (2128 November) 
 Glen Mona, Maughold (parish) No limit 38 42 2005 (26 Sept.  3 Oct.) 
 Ballamodha Straight, Malew 40 51 50 2006 (613 March) 
 Ballacobb, Ballaugh No limit 51 40 2006 (310 July) 
 Richmond Hill, Douglas (by bus stop) 50 55 50 2006 (24 April  1 May) 
 Shore Road, Outside Limekilns Farm No limit 49 50 2004 (28 August) 
 Windy Corner, Onchan No limit 54 57 2006 (1724 July) 

==Railways==

The island has a total of 68.5 km of railway, of which 43.5 km is electrified. There are six separate rail systems on the island:

*Isle of Man Steam Railway - operated by Isle of Man Heritage Railways
*Manx Electric Railway - operated by Isle of Man Heritage Railways
*Snaefell Mountain Railway - operated by Isle of Man Heritage Railways
*Douglas Horse Tram - operated by the Douglas Borough Council
*Groudle Glen Railway - operated by the Isle of Man Steam Railway Supporters' Association
*Great Laxey Mine Railway - operated by the Laxey & Lonan Heritage Trust

Beginning at Peel, on the west coast of the island, one can make a 'circular tour' of the Isle of Man railways - with a little bit of help from the buses. Taking Bus Route 8 from Peel to Port Erin, you pick up the Isle of Man Steam Railway for a journey to Douglas. A short walk from Douglas Railway Station to the promenade brings you to the Douglas Horse Tram line, which takes you to Derby Castle at the opposite end of the prom. At Derby Castle, the Manx Electric Railway begins its route northwards to Laxey and Ramsey. At Laxey, the MER interchanges with the Snaefell Mountain Railway - and a change of carriage will allow you to ride to the top of Snaefell. Upon returning to Laxey, the MER offers a route northwards to Ramsey. The final leg, from Ramsey back to Peel, is achieved by taking Bus Route 5. Leaving Peel at 8:10 am, and allowing time for a light lunch at the top of Snaefell, the total journey time is a little over 6 hours.

==Airports==
The only commercial airport on the island is the Isle of Man Airport at Ronaldsway. Scheduled services operate to and from various cities in the United Kingdom and Ireland, operated by several different airlines.

The island's other paved runways are at Jurby and Andreas. Jurby remains in Isle of Man Government ownership and is used for motorsport events and, previously, airshows, while Andreas is privately owned and used by a local glider club. The old Hall Caine Airport, a grass field near Ramsey, is no longer used.

==Aircraft Register==
The Isle of Man Aircraft Register became operational on 1 May 2007. The register is open to all non-commercial aircraft and is intended to be of particular interest to professionally flown corporate operators.
As of November 2012 a total of 537 corporate and private aircraft had been registered.

==Ports and harbours==
Isle of Man Sea Terminal at Douglas Harbour
Ports are located at Castletown, Douglas, Peel and Ramsey. Douglas is served by frequent ferries to and from United Kingdom and Ireland; the sole operator is the Isle of Man Steam Packet Company with exclusive use of the Isle of Man Sea Terminal, and the Douglas port linkspans under the conditions of the user agreement negotiated with the Isle of Man Government.

==Merchant marine==
The Isle of Man register comprises 226 ships of 1,000 GRT or over, totalling 6,055,436 GRT or . This figure includes some foreign-owned ships registered on the Island as a flag of convenience: Australia, 3; Cyprus, 4; Denmark, 30; Estonia, 3; France, 1; Germany, 57; Greece, 8; Hong Kong, 11; Iceland, 1; Italy, 6; Monaco, 4; Netherlands, 2; New Zealand, 1; Norway, 10; Singapore, 2; Sweden, 3; United Kingdom, 80; United States, 1.
 
A breakdown of ships by type: bulk, 25; cargo, 40; chemical tanker, 25; combination bulk, 2; container, 19; liquefied gas, 31; multi-functional large load carrier, 1; petroleum tanker, 59; refrigerated cargo, 1; roll on/roll off, 17; specialised tanker, 1; vehicle carrier, 5.

==References==

*

==External links==
*Isle of Man Transport (Arraghey Ellan Vannin)
*Isle of Man Steam Packet Company
*Isle of Man Airport
*Isle of Man Aircraft Registry
*Searchable Isle of Man Bus/Railway Timetables
*Manx Electric Railway Society

 AA


[[Information theory]]

Information theory is a branch of applied mathematics, electrical engineering, and computer science involving the quantification of information. Information theory was developed by Claude E. Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data. Since its inception it has broadened to find applications in many other areas, including statistical inference, natural language processing, cryptography, neurobiology, the evolution cf. Huelsenbeck, J. P., F. Ronquist, R. Nielsen and J. P. Bollback (2001) Bayesian inference of phylogeny and its impact on evolutionary biology, Science 294:2310-2314 and function Rando Allikmets, Wyeth W. Wasserman, Amy Hutchinson, Philip Smallwood, Jeremy Nathans, Peter K. Rogan, Thomas D. Schneider, Michael Dean (1998) Organization of the ABCR gene: analysis of promoter and splice junction sequences, Gene 215:1, 111-122 of molecular codes, model selection in ecology, Burnham, K. P. and Anderson D. R. (2002) Model Selection and Multimodel Inference: A Practical Information-Theoretic Approach, Second Edition (Springer Science, New York) ISBN 978-0-387-95364-9. thermal physics, Jaynes, E. T. (1957) Information Theory and Statistical Mechanics, Phys. Rev. 106:620 quantum computing, plagiarism detection Charles H. Bennett, Ming Li, and Bin Ma (2003) Chain Letters and Evolutionary Histories, Scientific American 288:6, 76-81 and other forms of data analysis. 

 

A key measure of information is entropy, which is usually expressed by the average number of bits needed to store or communicate one symbol in a message. Entropy quantifies the uncertainty involved in predicting the value of a random variable. For example, specifying the outcome of a fair coin flip (two equally likely outcomes) provides less information (lower entropy) than specifying the outcome from a roll of a (six equally likely outcomes).

Applications of fundamental topics of information theory include lossless data compression (e.g. ZIP files), lossy data compression (e.g. MP3s and JPEGs), and channel coding (e.g. for Digital Subscriber Line (DSL)). The field is at the intersection of mathematics, statistics, computer science, physics, neurobiology, and electrical engineering. Its impact has been crucial to the success of the Voyager missions to deep space, the invention of the compact disc, the feasibility of mobile phones, the development of the Internet, the study of linguistics and of human perception, the understanding of black holes, and numerous other fields. Important sub-fields of information theory are source coding, channel coding, algorithmic complexity theory, algorithmic information theory, information-theoretic security, and measures of information.

==Overview==
The main concepts of information theory can be grasped by considering the most widespread means of human communication: language. Two important aspects of a concise language are as follows: First, the most common words (e.g., "a", "the", "I") should be shorter than less common words (e.g., "roundabout", "generation", "mediocre"), so that sentences will not be too long. Such a tradeoff in word length is analogous to data compression and is the essential aspect of source coding. Second, if part of a sentence is unheard or misheard due to noise  e.g., a passing car  the listener should still be able to glean the meaning of the underlying message. Such robustness is as essential for an electronic communication system as it is for a language; properly building such robustness into communications is done by channel coding. Source coding and channel coding are the fundamental concerns of information theory.

Note that these concerns have nothing to do with the importance of messages. For example, a platitude such as "Thank you; come again" takes about as long to say or write as the urgent plea, "Call an ambulance!" while the latter may be more important and more meaningful in many contexts. Information theory, however, does not consider message importance or meaning, as these are matters of the quality of data rather than the quantity and readability of data, the latter of which is determined solely by probabilities.

Information theory is generally considered to have been founded in 1948 by Claude Shannon in his seminal work, "A Mathematical Theory of Communication". The central paradigm of classical information theory is the engineering problem of the transmission of information over a noisy channel. The most fundamental results of this theory are Shannon's source coding theorem, which establishes that, on average, the number of bits needed to represent the result of an uncertain event is given by its entropy; and Shannon's noisy-channel coding theorem, which states that reliable communication is possible over noisy channels provided that the rate of communication is below a certain threshold, called the channel capacity. The channel capacity can be approached in practice by using appropriate encoding and decoding systems.

Information theory is closely associated with a collection of pure and applied disciplines that have been investigated and reduced to engineering practice under a variety of rubrics throughout the world over the past half century or more: adaptive systems, anticipatory systems, artificial intelligence, complex systems, complexity science, cybernetics, informatics, machine learning, along with systems sciences of many descriptions. Information theory is a broad and deep mathematical theory, with equally broad and deep applications, amongst which is the vital field of coding theory.

Coding theory is concerned with finding explicit methods, called codes, for increasing the efficiency and reducing the net error rate of data communication over a noisy channel to near the limit that Shannon proved is the maximum possible for that channel. These codes can be roughly subdivided into data compression (source coding) and error-correction (channel coding) techniques. In the latter case, it took many years to find the methods Shannon's work proved were possible. A third class of information theory codes are cryptographic algorithms (both codes and ciphers). Concepts, methods and results from coding theory and information theory are widely used in cryptography and cryptanalysis. See the article ban (information) for a historical application.

Information theory is also used in information retrieval, intelligence gathering, gambling, statistics, and even in musical composition.

==Historical background==

The landmark event that established the discipline of information theory, and brought it to immediate worldwide attention, was the publication of Claude E. Shannon's classic paper "A Mathematical Theory of Communication" in the Bell System Technical Journal in July and October 1948.

Prior to this paper, limited information-theoretic ideas had been developed at Bell Labs, all implicitly assuming events of equal probability. Harry Nyquist's 1924 paper, Certain Factors Affecting Telegraph Speed, contains a theoretical section quantifying "intelligence" and the "line speed" at which it can be transmitted by a communication system, giving the relation (recalling Boltzmann's constant), where W is the speed of transmission of intelligence, m is the number of different voltage levels to choose from at each time step, and K is a constant. Ralph Hartley's 1928 paper, Transmission of Information, uses the word information as a measurable quantity, reflecting the receiver's ability to distinguish one sequence of symbols from any other, thus quantifying information as , where S was the number of possible symbols, and n the number of symbols in a transmission. The natural unit of information was therefore the decimal digit, much later renamed the hartley in his honour as a unit or scale or measure of information. Alan Turing in 1940 used similar ideas as part of the statistical analysis of the breaking of the German second world war Enigma ciphers.

Much of the mathematics behind information theory with events of different probabilities were developed for the field of thermodynamics by Ludwig Boltzmann and J. Willard Gibbs. Connections between information-theoretic entropy and thermodynamic entropy, including the important contributions by Rolf Landauer in the 1960s, are explored in Entropy in thermodynamics and information theory.

In Shannon's revolutionary and groundbreaking paper, the work for which had been substantially completed at Bell Labs by the end of 1944, Shannon for the first time introduced the qualitative and quantitative model of communication as a statistical process underlying information theory, opening with the assertion that
:"The fundamental problem of communication is that of reproducing at one point, either exactly or approximately, a message selected at another point."

With it came the ideas of
* the information entropy and redundancy of a source, and its relevance through the source coding theorem;
* the mutual information, and the channel capacity of a noisy channel, including the promise of perfect loss-free communication given by the noisy-channel coding theorem;
* the practical result of the ShannonHartley law for the channel capacity of a Gaussian channel; as well as
* the bita new way of seeing the most fundamental unit of information.

==Quantities of information==

Information theory is based on probability theory and statistics. The most important quantities of information are entropy, the information in a random variable, and mutual information, the amount of information in common between two random variables. The former quantity indicates how easily message data can be compressed while the latter can be used to find the communication rate across a channel.

The choice of logarithmic base in the following formulae determines the unit of information entropy that is used. The most common unit of information is the bit, based on the binary logarithm. Other units include the nat, which is based on the natural logarithm, and the hartley, which is based on the common logarithm.

In what follows, an expression of the form is considered by convention to be equal to zero whenever This is justified because for any logarithmic base.

===Entropy===
Entropy of a Bernoulli trial as a function of success probability, often called the binary entropy function, . The entropy is maximized at 1 bit per trial when the two possible outcomes are equally probable, as in an unbiased coin toss.
The entropy, , of a discrete random variable is a measure of the amount of uncertainty associated with the value of .

Suppose one transmits 1000 bits (0s and 1s). If these bits are known ahead of transmission (to be a certain value with absolute probability), logic dictates that no information has been transmitted. If, however, each is equally and independently likely to be 0 or 1, 1000 bits (in the information theoretic sense) have been transmitted. Between these two extremes, information can be quantified as follows. If is the set of all messages that could be, and is the probability of some , then the entropy, , of is defined: 

:

(Here, is the self-information, which is the entropy contribution of an individual message, and is the expected value.) An important property of entropy is that it is maximized when all the messages in the message space are equiprobable ,i.e., most unpredictablein which case .

The special case of information entropy for a random variable with two outcomes is the binary entropy function, usually taken to the logarithmic base 2:

:

===Joint entropy===
The joint entropy of two discrete random variables and is merely the entropy of their pairing: . This implies that if and are independent, then their joint entropy is the sum of their individual entropies.

For example, if represents the position of a chess piece  the row and the column, then the joint entropy of the row of the piece and the column of the piece will be the entropy of the position of the piece.

:

Despite similar notation, joint entropy should not be confused with cross entropy.

===Conditional entropy (equivocation)===
The conditional entropy or conditional uncertainty of given random variable (also called the equivocation of about ) is the average conditional entropy over : 

:

Because entropy can be conditioned on a random variable or on that random variable being a certain value, care should be taken not to confuse these two definitions of conditional entropy, the former of which is in more common use. A basic property of this form of conditional entropy is that:

: 

===Mutual information (transinformation)===
Mutual information measures the amount of information that can be obtained about one random variable by observing another. It is important in communication where it can be used to maximize the amount of information shared between sent and received signals. The mutual information of relative to is given by:

:
where (Specific mutual Information) is the pointwise mutual information.

A basic property of the mutual information is that
: 
That is, knowing Y, we can save an average of bits in encoding X compared to not knowing Y.

Mutual information is symmetric:
: 

Mutual information can be expressed as the average KullbackLeibler divergence (information gain) between the posterior probability distribution of X given the value of Y and the prior distribution on X:
: 
In other words, this is a measure of how much, on the average, the probability distribution on X will change if we are given the value of Y. This is often recalculated as the divergence from the product of the marginal distributions to the actual joint distribution:
: 

Mutual information is closely related to the log-likelihood ratio test in the context of contingency tables and the multinomial distribution and to Pearson's 2 test: mutual information can be considered a statistic for assessing independence between a pair of variables, and has a well-specified asymptotic distribution.

===KullbackLeibler divergence (information gain)===
The KullbackLeibler divergence (or information divergence, information gain, or relative entropy) is a way of comparing two distributions: a "true" probability distribution p(X), and an arbitrary probability distribution q(X). If we compress data in a manner that assumes q(X) is the distribution underlying some data, when, in reality, p(X) is the correct distribution, the KullbackLeibler divergence is the number of average additional bits per datum necessary for compression. It is thus defined

:

Although it is sometimes used as a 'distance metric', KL divergence is not a true metric since it is not symmetric and does not satisfy the triangle inequality (making it a semi-quasimetric).

===KullbackLeibler divergence of a prior from the truth===
Another interpretation of KL divergence is this: suppose a number X is about to be drawn randomly from a discrete set with probability distribution p(x). If Alice knows the true distribution p(x), while Bob believes (has a prior) that the distribution is q(x), then Bob will be more surprised than Alice, on average, upon seeing the value of X. The KL divergence is the (objective) expected value of Bob's (subjective) surprisal minus Alice's surprisal, measured in bits if the log is in base 2. In this way, the extent to which Bob's prior is "wrong" can be quantified in terms of how "unnecessarily surprised" it's expected to make him.

===Other quantities===
Other important information theoretic quantities include Rnyi entropy (a generalization of entropy), differential entropy (a generalization of quantities of information to continuous distributions), and the conditional mutual information.

==Coding theory==

A picture showing scratches on the readable surface of a CD-R. Music and data CDs are coded using error correcting codes and thus can still be read even if they have minor scratches using error detection and correction.

Coding theory is one of the most important and direct applications of information theory. It can be subdivided into source coding theory and channel coding theory. Using a statistical description for data, information theory quantifies the number of bits needed to describe the data, which is the information entropy of the source.

* Data compression (source coding): There are two formulations for the compression problem:
#lossless data compression: the data must be reconstructed exactly;
#lossy data compression: allocates bits needed to reconstruct the data, within a specified fidelity level measured by a distortion function. This subset of Information theory is called ratedistortion theory.

* Error-correcting codes (channel coding): While data compression removes as much redundancy as possible, an error correcting code adds just the right kind of redundancy (i.e., error correction) needed to transmit the data efficiently and faithfully across a noisy channel.

This division of coding theory into compression and transmission is justified by the information transmission theorems, or sourcechannel separation theorems that justify the use of bits as the universal currency for information in many contexts. However, these theorems only hold in the situation where one transmitting user wishes to communicate to one receiving user. In scenarios with more than one transmitter (the multiple-access channel), more than one receiver (the broadcast channel) or intermediary "helpers" (the relay channel), or more general networks, compression followed by transmission may no longer be optimal. Network information theory refers to these multi-agent communication models.

===Source theory===

Any process that generates successive messages can be considered a source of information. A memoryless source is one in which each message is an independent identically distributed random variable, whereas the properties of ergodicity and stationarity impose more general constraints. All such sources are stochastic. These terms are well studied in their own right outside information theory.

====Rate====
Information rate is the average entropy per symbol. For memoryless sources, this is merely the entropy of each symbol, while, in the case of a stationary stochastic process, it is

:

that is, the conditional entropy of a symbol given all the previous symbols generated. For the more general case of a process that is not necessarily stationary, the average rate is

:

that is, the limit of the joint entropy per symbol. For stationary sources, these two expressions give the same result. 

It is common in information theory to speak of the "rate" or "entropy" of a language. This is appropriate, for example, when the source of information is English prose. The rate of a source of information is related to its redundancy and how well it can be compressed, the subject of source coding.

===Channel capacity===

Communications over a channelsuch as an ethernet cableis the primary motivation of information theory. As anyone who's ever used a telephone (mobile or landline) knows, however, such channels often fail to produce exact reconstruction of a signal; noise, periods of silence, and other forms of signal corruption often degrade quality. How much information can one hope to communicate over a noisy (or otherwise imperfect) channel?

Consider the communications process over a discrete channel. A simple model of the process is shown below:

500px

Here X represents the space of messages transmitted, and Y the space of messages received during a unit time over our channel. Let be the conditional probability distribution function of Y given X. We will consider to be an inherent fixed property of our communications channel (representing the nature of the noise of our channel). Then the joint distribution of X and Y is completely determined by our channel and by our choice of , the marginal distribution of messages we choose to send over the channel. Under these constraints, we would like to maximize the rate of information, or the signal, we can communicate over the channel. The appropriate measure for this is the mutual information, and this maximum mutual information is called the channel capacity and is given by:
:
This capacity has the following property related to communicating at information rate R (where R is usually bits per symbol). For any information rate R 0, for large enough N, there exists a code of length N and rate  R and a decoding algorithm, such that the maximal probability of block error is  ; that is, it is always possible to transmit with arbitrarily small block error. In addition, for any rate R > C, it is impossible to transmit with arbitrarily small block error.

Channel coding is concerned with finding such nearly optimal codes that can be used to transmit data over a noisy channel with a small coding error at a rate near the channel capacity.

====Capacity of particular channel models====

* A continuous-time analog communications channel subject to Gaussian noise  see ShannonHartley theorem.

* A binary symmetric channel (BSC) with crossover probability p is a binary input, binary output channel that flips the input bit with probability p. The BSC has a capacity of bits per channel use, where is the binary entropy function to the base 2 logarithm:

::

* A binary erasure channel (BEC) with erasure probability p is a binary input, ternary output channel. The possible channel outputs are 0, 1, and a third symbol 'e' called an erasure. The erasure represents complete loss of information about an input bit. The capacity of the BEC is 1 - p bits per channel use.

::

==Applications to other fields==

===Intelligence uses and secrecy applications===

Information theoretic concepts apply to cryptography and cryptanalysis. Turing's information unit, the ban, was used in the Ultra project, breaking the German Enigma machine code and hastening the end of World War II in Europe. Shannon himself defined an important concept now called the unicity distance. Based on the redundancy of the plaintext, it attempts to give a minimum amount of ciphertext necessary to ensure unique decipherability.

Information theory leads us to believe it is much more difficult to keep secrets than it might first appear. A brute force attack can break systems based on asymmetric key algorithms or on most commonly used methods of symmetric key algorithms (sometimes called secret key algorithms), such as block ciphers. The security of all such methods currently comes from the assumption that no known attack can break them in a practical amount of time.

Information theoretic security refers to methods such as the one-time pad that are not vulnerable to such brute force attacks. In such cases, the positive conditional mutual information between the plaintext and ciphertext (conditioned on the key) can ensure proper transmission, while the unconditional mutual information between the plaintext and ciphertext remains zero, resulting in absolutely secure communications. In other words, an eavesdropper would not be able to improve his or her guess of the plaintext by gaining knowledge of the ciphertext but not of the key. However, as in any other cryptographic system, care must be used to correctly apply even information-theoretically secure methods; the Venona project was able to crack the one-time pads of the Soviet Union due to their improper reuse of key material.

===Pseudorandom number generation===
Pseudorandom number generators are widely available in computer language libraries and application programs. They are, almost universally, unsuited to cryptographic use as they do not evade the deterministic nature of modern computer equipment and software. A class of improved random number generators is termed cryptographically secure pseudorandom number generators, but even they require external to the software random seeds to work as intended. These can be obtained via extractors, if done carefully. The measure of sufficient randomness in extractors is min-entropy, a value related to Shannon entropy through Rnyi entropy; Rnyi entropy is also used in evaluating randomness in cryptographic systems. Although related, the distinctions among these measures mean that a random variable with high Shannon entropy is not necessarily satisfactory for use in an extractor and so for cryptography uses.

===Seismic exploration===
One early commercial application of information theory was in the field seismic oil exploration. Work in this field made it possible to strip off and separate the unwanted noise from the desired seismic signal. Information theory and digital signal processing offer a major improvement of resolution and image clarity over previous analog methods. The Corporation and Innovation, Haggerty, Patrick, Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 2, 97-118 (1981) 

===Semiotics===
Concepts from information theory such as redundancy and code control have been used by semioticians such as Umberto Eco and Rossi-Landi to explain ideology as a form of message transmission whereby a dominant social class emits its message by using signs that exhibit a high degree of redundancy such that only one message is decoded among a selection of competing ones. Semiotics of Ideology, Noth, Winfried, Semiotica, Issue 148,(1981) 

===Miscellaneous applications===
Information theory also has applications in gambling and investing, black holes, bioinformatics, and music.

==See also==

*Communication theory
*List of important publications
*Philosophy of information

===Applications===
* Cryptanalysis
* Cryptography
* Cybernetics
* Entropy in thermodynamics and information theory
* Gambling
* Intelligence (information gathering)
* Seismic exploration

===History===
* Hartley, R.V.L.
* History of information theory
* Shannon, C.E.
* Timeline of information theory
* Yockey, H.P.

===Theory===

* Coding theory
* Detection theory
* Estimation theory
* Fisher information
* Information algebra
* Information asymmetry
* Information geometry
* Information theory and measure theory
* Kolmogorov complexity
* Logic of information
* Network coding
* Philosophy of Information
* Quantum information science
* Semiotic information theory
* Source coding

===Concepts===

* Ban (information)
* Channel capacity
* Channel (communications)
* Communication source
* Conditional entropy
* Covert channel
* Decoder
* Differential entropy
* Encoder
* Information entropy
* Joint entropy
* KullbackLeibler divergence
* Mutual information
* Pointwise mutual information (PMI)
* Receiver (information theory)
* Redundancy
* Rnyi entropy
* Self-information
* Unicity distance
* Variety

==References==

===The classic work===
* Shannon, C.E. (1948), "A Mathematical Theory of Communication", Bell System Technical Journal, 27, pp. 379423 & 623656, July & October, 1948. PDF. Notes and other formats.
* R.V.L. Hartley, "Transmission of Information", Bell System Technical Journal, July 1928
* Andrey Kolmogorov (1968), "Three approaches to the quantitative definition of information" in International Journal of Computer Mathematics.

===Other journal articles===
* J. L. Kelly, Jr., Saratoga.ny.us, "A New Interpretation of Information Rate" Bell System Technical Journal, Vol. 35, July 1956, pp. 91726.
* R. Landauer, IEEE.org, "Information is Physical" Proc. Workshop on Physics and Computation PhysComp'92 (IEEE Comp. Sci.Press, Los Alamitos, 1993) pp. 14.
* R. Landauer, IBM.com, "Irreversibility and Heat Generation in the Computing Process" IBM J. Res. Develop. Vol. 5, No. 3, 1961

===Textbooks on information theory===

* Arndt, C. Information Measures, Information and its Description in Science and Engineering (Springer Series: Signals and Communication Technology), 2004, ISBN 978-3-540-40855-0

* Ash, RB. Information Theory. New York: Interscience, 1965. ISBN 0-470-03445-9. New York: Dover 1990. ISBN 0-486-66521-6

* Gallager, R. Information Theory and Reliable Communication. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1968. ISBN 0-471-29048-3

* Goldman, S. Information Theory. New York: Prentice Hall, 1953. New York: Dover 1968 ISBN 0-486-62209-6, 2005 ISBN 0-486-44271-3

* Cover, TM, Thomas, JA. Elements of information theory, 1st Edition. New York: Wiley-Interscience, 1991. ISBN 0-471-06259-6.
:2nd Edition. New York: Wiley-Interscience, 2006. ISBN 0-471-24195-4.

* Csiszar, I, Korner, J. Information Theory: Coding Theorems for Discrete Memoryless Systems Akademiai Kiado: 2nd edition, 1997. ISBN 963-05-7440-3

* MacKay, DJC. Information Theory, Inference, and Learning Algorithms Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003. ISBN 0-521-64298-1

* Mansuripur, M. Introduction to Information Theory. New York: Prentice Hall, 1987. ISBN 0-13-484668-0

*Pierce, JR. "An introduction to information theory: symbols, signals and noise". Dover (2nd Edition). 1961 (reprinted by Dover 1980).

* Reza, F. An Introduction to Information Theory. New York: McGraw-Hill 1961. New York: Dover 1994. ISBN 0-486-68210-2

* Shannon, CE. Warren Weaver. The Mathematical Theory of Communication. Univ of Illinois Press, 1949. ISBN 0-252-72548-4

* Stone, JV. Chapter 1 of book "Information Theory: A Tutorial Introduction", University of Sheffield, England, 2014. ISBN 978-0956372857.

* Yeung, RW. A First Course in Information Theory Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, 2002. ISBN 0-306-46791-7.

* Yeung RW. Information Theory and Network Coding Springer 2008, 2002. ISBN 978-0-387-79233-0

===Other books===
* Leon Brillouin, Science and Information Theory, Mineola, N.Y.: Dover, 1962 2004. ISBN 0-486-43918-6
* James Gleick, , New York: Pantheon, 2011. ISBN 978-0-375-42372-7
* A. I. Khinchin, Mathematical Foundations of Information Theory, New York: Dover, 1957. ISBN 0-486-60434-9
* H. S. Leff and A. F. Rex, Editors, Maxwell's Demon: Entropy, Information, Computing, Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey (1990). ISBN 0-691-08727-X
* Tom Siegfried, The Bit and the Pendulum, Wiley, 2000. ISBN 0-471-32174-5
* Charles Seife, Decoding The Universe, Viking, 2006. ISBN 0-670-03441-X
* Jeremy Campbell, Grammatical Man, Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, 1982, ISBN 0-671-44062-4
* Henri Theil, Economics and Information Theory, Rand McNally & Company - Chicago, 1967.
* Escolano, Suau, Bonev, Information Theory in Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Springer, 2009. ISBN 978-1-84882-296-2 

== External links ==

* 
* alum.mit.edu, Eprint, Schneider, T. D., "Information Theory Primer"
* ND.edu, Srinivasa, S. "A Review on Multivariate Mutual Information"
* Chem.wisc.edu, Journal of Chemical Education, Shuffled Cards, Messy Desks, and Disorderly Dorm Rooms - Examples of Entropy Increase? Nonsense!
* ITsoc.org, IEEE Information Theory Society and ITsoc.org review articles
* Information Theory, Inference, and Learning Algorithms by David MacKay - an introduction to Shannon theory, including state-of-the-art methods from coding theory, such as arithmetic coding, low-density parity-check codes, and Turbo codes.
* UMBC.edu, Eprint, Erill, I., "A gentle introduction to information content in transcription factor binding sites"

 



[[Information explosion]]

The information explosion is the rapid increase in the amount of published information or data and the effects of this abundance. As the amount of available data grows, the problem of managing the information becomes more difficult, which can lead to information overload. The Online Oxford English Dictionary indicates use of the phrase in a March 1964 New Statesman article. Information. http://dictionary.oed.com. accessed January 4, 2008 The New York Times first used the phrase in its editorial content in an article by Walter Sullivan on June 7, 1964 in which he described the phrase as much discussed. (pE11.) The earliest use of the phrase seems to have been in an IBM advertising supplement to the New York Times published on April 30, 1961 and by Frank Fremont-Smith, Director of the American Institute of Biological Sciences Interdisciplinary Conference Program, in an April 1961 article in the AIBS Bulletin (p. 18.)

Fortunately, techniques to gather knowledge from an overabundance of electronic information (e.g., data fusion may help in data mining) have existed since the 1970s.

==Related terms==
Since "information" in electronic media is often used synonymously with "data", the term information explosion is closely related to the concept of data flood (also dubbed data deluge). Sometimes the term information flood is used as well. All of those basically boil down to the ever-increasing amount of electronic data exchanged per time unit. The awareness about non-manageable amounts of data grew along with the advent of ever more powerful data processing since the mid-1960s. Google Books Ngram viewer for the terms mentioned here 

==Web servers==
As of August 2005, there were over 70 million web servers. there were over 135 million web servers. 

==Blogs==
According to Technorati, the number of blogs doubles about every 6 months with a total of 35.3 million blogs . This is an example of the early stages of logistic growth, where growth is approximately exponential, since blogs are a recent innovation. As the number of blogs approaches the number of possible producers (humans), saturation occurs, growth declines, and the number of blogs eventually stabilizes.

==See also==
* Metcalfe's law

==References==

==External links==
*Information Explosion
*The Information Overload
*Conceptualizing Information Systems and Cognitive Sustainability in 21st Century 'Attention' Economies (Includes Syllabus)
*How Much Information? 2003
*Surviving the Information Explosion: How People Find Their Electronic Information 
*Why the Information Explosion Can Be Bad for Data Mining, and How Data Fusion Provides a Way Out 
*Information Explosion, Largest databases



[[Inch]]

 1 inch = 
 SI units 
 0.0254 m 25.4 mm 
 US customary/Imperial units 
 yd ft 

An inch (plural: inches; abbreviation or symbol: in or &Prime;  a double prime) is a unit of length in the imperial and United States customary systems of measurement. Historically an inch was also used in a number of other systems of units. Traditional standards for the exact length of an inch have varied in the past, but now the imperial or US customary inch is defined to be exactly 25.4 mm. There are 12 inches in a foot and therefore 36 inches in a yard.

== Usage ==
The inch is a commonly used customary unit of length in the United States, Corpus of Contemporary American English (Brigham Young University. Retrieved December 2011) lists 24,302 instances of inch(es) compared to 1548 instances of centimeter(s) and 1343 instances of millimeter(s). Canada, Weights and Measures Act Weights and Measures Act. Retrieved January 2012, Act current to 18 January 2012. Canadian units (5) The Canadian units of measurement are as set out and defined in Schedule II, and the symbols and abbreviations therefore are as added pursuant to subparagraph 6(1)(b)(ii). and the United Kingdom. For the United Kingdom, guidance on public sector use states that since 1 October 1995, without time limit, that the inch (along with the foot) is to be used as a primary unit for road signs and related measurements of distance (with the possible exception of clearance heights and widths) and may continue to be used as a secondary or supplementary indication following a metric measurement for other purposes. Guidance Note on the use of Metric Units of Measurement by the Public Sector. Department for Business Innovation and Skills. Crown copyright 2011. Retrieved December 2011. 

The international standard symbol for inch is in (see ISO 31-1, Annex A) but traditionally the inch is denoted by a double prime, which is often approximated by double quotes, and the foot by a prime, which is often approximated by an apostrophe. For example three feet two inches can be written as 3&prime; 2&Prime;. Subdivisions of an inch are typically written using dyadic fractions with odd number numerators; for example, two and three eighths of an inch would be written as &Prime; and not as 2.375&Prime; nor as &Prime;.

Measuring tape calibrated in 32nds of an inch

=== Equivalence to other units of length ===
Mid-19th century tool for converting between different standards of the inch
1 international inch is equal to:
* 100 points (1 point = 0.01 inches), as used by the Australian Bureau of Meteorology for measuring rainfall before 1974. 
* 1,000 thou (also known as mil) (1 mil = 1 thou = 0.001 inches)
* 0.027777... yards (1 yard is equal to 36 inches.)
* 2.54 centimetres (1 centimetre  0.3937 international inches.)

== Etymology ==

The English word inch comes from Latin uncia meaning "one-twelfth part" (in this case, one twelfth of a foot); the word ounce (one twelfth of a troy pound) has the same origin. The vowel change from u to i is umlaut; the consonant change from c (pronounced as k) to ch is palatalisation (see Old English phonology).

In some other languages, the word for "inch" is similar to or the same as the word for "thumb"; for example, inch, polze thumb; inch/thumb; inch/thumb; inch, pulgar thumb; inch, polegar thumb; inch, tumme thumb; inch/thumb; inch/thumb; inch/thumb; inch/thumb; inch/thumb, Danish and / tommer inch/inches and tommel thumb.
Given the etymology of the word "inch", it would seem that the inch is a unit derived from the foot unit in Latin in Roman times.

== History ==

The earliest known reference to the inch in England is from the Laws of thelberht dating to the early 7th century, surviving in a single manuscript from 1120. Paragraph LXVII sets out the fine for wounds of various depths: one inch, one shilling, two inches, two shillings, etc. "Gif man eoh urhsting, stice ghwilve vi scillingas. Gife ofer ynce, scilling. t twam yncum, twegen. ofer ry, iii scill." 

An Anglo-Saxon unit of length was the barleycorn. After 1066, 1 inch was equal to 3 barleycorn, which continued to be its legal definition for several centuries, with the barleycorn being the base unit. One of the earliest such definitions is that of 1324, where the legal definition of the inch was set out in a statute of Edward II of England, defining it as "three grains of barley, dry and round, placed end to end, lengthwise". 

Similar definitions are recorded in both English and Welsh medieval law tracts. One, dating from the first half of the 10th century, is contained in the Laws of Hywel Dda which superseded those of Dyvnwal, an even earlier definition of the inch in Wales. Both definitions, as recorded in Ancient Laws and Institutes of Wales (vol i., pp. 184,187,189), are that "three lengths of a barleycorn is the inch". 

King David I of Scotland in his Assize of Weights and Measures (c. 1150) is said to have defined the Scottish inch as the width of an average man's thumb at the base of the nail, even including the requirement to calculate the average of a small, a medium, and a large man's measures. However, the oldest surviving manuscripts date from the early 14th century and appear to have been altered with the inclusion of newer material. 

Charles Butler, a mathematics teacher at Cheam School, in 1814 recorded the old legal definition of the inch to be "three grains of sound ripe barley being taken out the middle of the ear, well dried, and laid end to end in a row", and placed the barleycorn, not the inch, as the base unit of the English Long Measure system, from which all other units were derived. John Bouvier similarly recorded in his 1843 law dictionary that the barleycorn was the fundamental measure. Butler observed, however, that "s the length of the barley-corn cannot be fixed, so the inch according to this method will be uncertain", noting that a standard inch measure was now (by his time) kept in the Exchequer chamber, Guildhall, and that was the legal definition of the inch. This was a point also made by George Long in his 1842 Penny Cyclopdia, observing that standard measures had since surpassed the barleycorn definition of the inch, and that to recover the inch measure from its original definition, in the event that the standard measure were destroyed, would involve the measurement of large numbers of barleycorns and taking their average lengths. He noted that this process would not perfectly recover the standard, since it might introduce errors of anywhere between one hundredth and one tenth of an inch in the definition of a yard. 

=== Scottish inch ===
The now obsolete Scottish inch (), of a Scottish foot, was about 1.0016 imperial inches (about 1.0016 in). It was used in the popular expression , in English "Give him an inch and he'll take an ell", first published as "For when I gave you an inch, you tooke an ell" by John Heywood in 1546. Full text of 1874 reprint (The ell, equal to 37 inches (about 94 cm), was in use in England until 1685.) 

===Continental inches===
Before the adoption of the metric system, several European countries had customary units whose name translates into "inch". The French pouce measured 2.70 cm, at least when applied to describe the calibre of artillery pieces (see also: Units of measurement in France). The Amsterdam foot (voet) consisted of 11 Amsterdam inches (duim) (see Dutch units of measurement). The Amsterdam foot is about 8% shorter than an English foot.

==Modern standardisation==
The current internationally accepted value for the imperial and US customary inch is exactly 25.4 millimetres. This is based on the international yard of exactly 0.9144 metres adopted through the International yard and pound agreement in 1959. Before the adoption of the international inch various definitions were in use. In the United Kingdom and most countries of the British Commonwealth the inch was defined in terms of the Imperial Standard Yard. The United States adopted the conversion factor 1 metre = 39.37 inches by an act in 1866, and in 1893 Mendenhall ordered the physical realization of the inch be based on the international prototype metres numbers 21 and 27, which had been received from the CGPM together with the previously adopted conversion factor. 

In 1930 the British Standards Institution adopted an inch of exactly 25.4 mm. The American Standards Association followed suit in 1933. By 1935 industry in 16 countries had adopted the "industrial inch" as it came to be known. 

In 1946 the Commonwealth Science Congress recommended a yard of exactly 0.9144 metres for adoption throughout the British Commonwealth. This was adopted by Canada in 1951. The United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa signed a treaty agreeing to the same standards on 1 July 1959. This gives an inch of exactly 25.4 mm. However, the United States retains the -metre definition for survey purposes creating a slight difference between the international and US survey inches; the difference is exactly 2 parts in a million, so 1,000,000 international inches is equal to 999,998 US survey inches. This is approximately -inch in a mile.

== See also ==
*Anthropic units
*English units
*Square inch
*Cubic inch
*Gry
*Guz
*Pyramid inch
*UCUM
*International yard and pound

== References ==
 
* Collins Encyclopedia of Scotland
* Weights and Measures, by D. Richard Torrance, SAFHS, Edinburgh, 1996, ISBN 1-874722-09-9 (NB book focusses on Scottish weights and measures exclusively)
* 
* Scottish National Dictionary and Dictionary of the Older Scottish Tongue



[[Inn]]

A 19th century inn in Vlenii de Munte, Romania (currently in Village Museum, Bucharest)
Inns are generally establishments or buildings where travelers can seek lodging and, usually, food and drink. They are typically located in the country or along a highway.

== History and origins ==
The Tabard Inn, Southwark, London, around 1850
American scenerythe inn on the roadside (1872)
Facade of the Sultanhani caravanserai in Turkey
Inns in Europe were possibly first established when the Romans built their system of Roman roads two millennia ago. The Gospel of Luke records there being "no room at the inn" at the time of the nativity of Jesus. Some inns in Europe are several centuries old. In addition to providing for the needs of travelers, inns traditionally acted as community gathering places.

Historically, inns in Europe provided not only food and lodging, but also stabling and fodder for the travelers' horses. Famous London examples of inns include the George and the Tabard. There is however no longer a formal distinction between an inn and other kinds of establishment. Many pubs use the name "inn", either because they are long established and may have been formerly coaching inns, or to summon up a particular kind of image.

As modes of transport have evolved, tourist lodging has adapted to serve each generation of traveller. A stagecoach made frequent stops at roadside coaching inns for water, food and horses. A passenger train stops only at designated stations in the city centre, around which were built grand railway hotels. Motorcar traffic on old-style two-lane highways may pause at any camp, cabin court or motel along the way, while freeway traffic is restricted to access from designated off-ramps to side roads which quickly crowded with hotel chain operators.

The original functions of an inn are now usually split among separate establishments, such as hotels, lodges, and motels, all of which might provide the traditional functions of an inn but which focus more on lodging customers than on other services; public houses, which are primarily alcohol-serving establishments; and restaurants and taverns, which serve food and drink. (Hotels often contain restaurants serving full breakfasts and meals, thus providing all of the functions of traditional inns. Economy, limited service properties, however, claim at most an included continental breakfast as there is no kitchen and no bar.)

The lodging aspect of the word inn lives on in hotel brand names like Holiday Inn, and in some laws that refer to lodging operators as innkeepers.

== Seljuq and Ottoman inns ==
In Asia Minor during the periods of rule by the Seljuq and Ottoman Turks impressive structures functioning as inns () were built because it was thought that inns were socially significant. These inns provided accommodation for people and their vehicles or animals and served as a resting place for people, whether travelling on foot or by other means.

These inns were built between towns if the distance between them was too far for one day's travel. These structures were called caravansarais which were inns with large courtyards with ample supplies of water for both drinking and other uses. They would also routinely contain a caf in addition to supplies of food and fodder. After the caravans travelled a while they would take a break at these caravansarais, and spend the night there to rest both themselves and their animals.

== Inns of Court ==

The Inns of Court in London were originally ordinary inns where barristers met to do business, but have become institutions of the legal profession in England and Wales, and no longer function as inns.

==Modern usage==
Most properly, "inn" in modern usage signifies a hotel which provides both lodging and a restaurant (possibly with a bar or tavern) to travellers. There is a growing trend for roadside motor hotel operators to distance themselves from the low-end category of "motel" in their branding by styling themselves instead as "inns" or "lodges".

The term has been readily adopted by chains such as Premier Inn, Holiday Inn, Comfort Inn, Days Inn and Knights Inn, even though not all of these serve food and drink. Less often, it has been applied to tavern-only facilities (such as the Stonewall Inn at the centre of the New York City drag queen riots of 1969) or restaurants (such as the former U-Drop Inn caf on U.S. Route 66 in Texas) which do not provide all functions of a traditional roadside inn.

Laws governing motels and hotels are often named "Innkeeper's Act" Innkeepers Act, RSA 2000, c I-2, Consolidated Statutes of Alberta; Innkeepers Act, RSNL 1990, c I-7, Consolidated Statutes of Newfoundland and Labrador; Innkeepers Act, RSO 1990, c I.7 
Consolidated Statutes of Ontario or refer to hteliers and motel operators as "innkeepers" in the body of the legislation Hotel Keepers Act, RSBC 1996, c 206, Consolidated Statutes of British Columbia Civil Code of Qubec, LRQ, c C-1991, Division III: Deposit with an Innkeeper and legal precedent cases. These laws typically define the innkeepers' liability for valuables entrusted to them by clients and determine whether an innkeeper holds any lien against such goods. In some jurisdictions, an offence named as "defrauding an innkeeper" prohibits fraudulently obtaining "food, lodging, or other accommodation at any hotel, inn, boarding house, or eating house"; http://law.justia.com/codes/georgia/2010/title-43/chapter-21/article-1/43-21-13/ in this context, the term is often an anachronism as the majority of modern restaurants are free-standing and not attached to coaching inns or tourist lodging.

==See also==

*Bed and breakfast, B&B
*Coaching inn
*Caravanserai
*List of human habitation forms
*Public house
*Pub names
*Ryokan
*Youth hostel

== References ==
 

==Further reading==
*Burke, Thomas (1927) The Book of the Inn: being two hundred pictures of the English inn from the earliest times to the coming of the railway hotel; selected and edited by Thomas Burke. London: Constable
*Burke, Thomas (1930) The English Inn. (English Heritage.) London: Herbert Jenkins
*--do.-- (1947) --do.--Revised. (The Country Books.) London: Herbert Jenkins
*Everitt, Alan (1985) "The English Urban Inn", in his: Landscape and Community in England. London: Hambledon Press ISBN 0907628427 (The Oxford Companion to Local and Family History (ed. David Hey), 1996, describes this as "the starting point for modern studies inns"; Everitt described most of the previous literature on the topic as "a wretched farrago of romantic legends, facetious humour and irritating errors")
*Douch, H. L. (1966) Old Cornish Inns and their place in the social history of the County. Truro: D. Bradford Barton
*Monson-Fitzjohn, G. J. (1926) Quaint Signs of Olde Inns. London: Herbert Jenkins (reissued by Senate, London, 1994 ISBN 1-85958-028-9)
*Richardson, A. E. (1934) The Old Inns of England. London: B. T. Batsford
*Sherry, John (1972) The Laws of Innkeepers; for hotels, motels, restaurants and clubs. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press ISBN 0801407028

== External links ==

*Congleton's ancient Inn Signs
*The Lost Pubs Project: Lost and closed pubs of the UK.



[[International Olympiad in Informatics]]

The logo of the International Olympiad in Informatics
The International Olympiad in Informatics (IOI) is an annual competitive programming competition for secondary school students. The first IOI was held in 1989 in Pravetz, Bulgaria.

The contest consists of two days computer programming, solving problems of an algorithmic nature. To deal with problems involving very large amounts of data, it is necessary to have not only programmers, "but also creative coders, who can dream up what it is that the programmers need to tell the computer to do ... the hard part isn't the programming, but the mathematics underneath it." Students at the IOI compete on an individual basis, with up to four students competing from each participating country (with 81 countries in 2012). Students in the national teams are selected through national computing contests, such as the Australian Informatics Olympiad, British Informatics Olympiad, and Bundeswettbewerb Informatik (Germany).

The International Olympiad in Informatics is one of the most prestigious computer science competitions in the world. UNESCO and IFIP are patrons. 

== Competition structure and participation ==
IOI 2009's banner above the competition room
On each of the two competition days, the students are typically given three problems which they have to solve in five hours. Each student works on his/her own, with only a computer and no other help allowed, specifically no communication with other contestants, books etc. Usually to solve a task the contestant has to write a computer program (in C, C++ or Pascal, and occasionally FORTRAN and PHP,C++11 is supported starting from IO2014 , while Java is planned to be added in IOI2015 http://www.ioinformatics.org/index.shtml ) and submit it before the five hour competition time ends. The program is graded by being run with secret test data. From IOI 2010, tasks are divided into subtasks with graduated difficulty, and points are awarded only when all tests for a particular subtask yield correct results, within specific time and memory limits. In some cases, the contestant's program has to interact with a secret computer library, which allows problems where the input is not fixed, but depends on the program's actions  for example in game problems. Another type of problem has known inputs which are publicly available already during the five hours of the contest. For these, the contestants have to submit an output file instead of a program, and it is up to them whether they obtain the output files by writing a program (possibly exploiting special characteristics of the input), or by hand, or by a combination of these means.

IOI 2010 for the first time had a live web scoreboard with real-time provisional results. Submissions will be scored as soon as possible during the contest, and the results posted. Contestants will be aware of their scores, but not others', and may resubmit to improve their scores.

The scores from the two competition days and all problems are summed up separately for each contestant. At the awarding ceremony, contestants are awarded medals depending on their relative total score. The top 50% of the contestants are awarded medals, such that the relative number of gold : silver : bronze : no medal is approximately 1:2:3:6 (thus 1/12 of the contestants get a gold medal).

The competition room at the IOI 2006

In front of the competition room at the IOI 2007
Unlike other science olympiads, the IOI regulations specifically prohibit ranking by countries. Although unofficial rankings are circulated within some participating nations, there is therefore no standard. Prior to IOI 2010, students who did not receive medals did not have their scores published, making it impossible for a country to be ranked by adding together scores of its competitors unless each wins a medal. From IOI 2010, although the scores of students who did not receive medals are still not available in the official results, they are known from the live web scoreboard. In IOI 2012 the top 3 nations ranked by aggregate score (Russia, China and USA) were subsequently awarded during the closing ceremony.

President of the IOI, Richard Forster, says the competition has difficulty attracting women and that in spite of trying to solve it, "none of us have hit on quite what the problem is, let alone the solution." 

== List of IOI websites and locations ==
* IOI 2017 will be held in Iran, 2017
* IOI 2016 will be held in Kazan, Russia, 2016
* IOI 2015 will be held in Astana, Kazakhstan, 2015
* IOI 2014 will be held in Taipei, Taiwan, July 1320, 2014 http://www.ioi2014.org/ 
* IOI 2013 was held in Brisbane, Australia, July 613, 2013 http://ioi2013.org/ 
* IOI 2012 was held in Sirmione and Montichiari, Italy, September 2330, 2012 http://www.ioi2012.org/ (results)
* IOI 2011 was held in Pattaya, Thailand, July 2229, 2011 http://www.ioi2011.or.th/ (results)
* IOI 2010 was held in Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, August 1421, 2010 http://www.ioi2010.org/ (results)
* IOI 2009 was held in Plovdiv, Bulgaria, August 815, 2009 http://www.ioi2009.org/ (results)
* IOI 2008 was held in Cairo, Egypt, August 1623, 2008 http://www.ioi2008.org (results)
* IOI 2007 was held in Zagreb, Croatia, August 1522, 2007 http://www.hsin.hr/ioi2007/ (results)
* IOI 2006 was held in Mrida, Yucatn, Mexico, August 1320, 2006 http://olympiads.win.tue.nl/ioi/ioi2006/contest/results.html (results)
* IOI 2005 was held in Nowy Scz, Poland, August 1825, 2005 http://web.archive.org/web/20100903033717/http://www.ioi2005.pl/olympiad/ (results)
* IOI 2004 was held in Athens, Greece, September 1118, 2004 http://ioinformatics.org/locations/ioi04/ (results)
* IOI 2003 was held in Kenosha, Wisconsin, USA, August 1623, 2003 http://web.archive.org/web/20070504211414/http://www.ioinformatics.org/ioi2003/ (results)
* IOI 2002 was held in Yong-In, Korea Rep., August 1825, 2002 http://www.ioi2002.or.kr/ 
* IOI 2001 was held in Tampere, Finland, July 1421, 2001 http://www.ioi2001.edu.fi/ 
* IOI 2000 was held in Beijing, China, September 2330, 2000
* IOI 1999 was held in Antalya-Belek, Turkey, October 916, 1999 http://www.ioi99.org.tr/ 
* IOI 1998 was held in Setbal, Portugal, September 512, 1998
* IOI 1997 was held in Cape Town, South Africa, November 30  December 7, 1997
* IOI 1996 was held in Veszprm, Hungary, July 25  August 2, 1996 http://olympiads.win.tue.nl/ioi/ioi96/results.html 
* IOI 1995 was held in Eindhoven, The Netherlands, June 26  July 3, 1995 http://olympiads.win.tue.nl/ioi95/ 
* IOI 1994 was held in Haninge, Sweden, July 310, 1994
* IOI 1993 was held in Mendoza, Argentina, October 1625, 1993 http://www.ioi.org.ar/mendoza/ 
* IOI 1992 was held in Bonn, Germany, July 1121, 1992
* IOI 1991 was held in Athens, Greece, May 1925, 1991
* IOI 1990 was held in Minsk, Belarus, Soviet Union, July 1521, 1990
* IOI 1989 was held in Pravetz, Bulgaria, May 1619, 1989.

==Multiple IOI winners==

The following is a list of the top performers in the history of the IOI. The * sign indicates a perfect score, a rare achievement in IOI history. Also, First (I), second (II) and third (III) places among gold medalists are indicated where appropriate. This list includes only those countries where the national selection contest allows the same participant to go multiple times to the IOI.

 Name Team Years 
 Gennady Korotkevich Belarus G(II) 2012 G*(I) 2011 G(I) 2010 G(I) 2009 G 2008 G 2007 S 2006 
 Filip Wolski Poland G(I) 2006 G 2005 G 2004 G 2003 
 Rumen Hristov Bulgaria G 2012 G 2011 G(II) 2010 S 2009 S 2008 
 Martin Pettai Estonia G 2002 G 2001 G 2000 S 1999 
 Andrzej Gsienica-Samek Poland G 1999 G 1998 G 1997 S 1996 
 Vladimir Martianov Russia G 1999 G*(I) 1998 G(I) 1997 
 Martin Mare Czech Republic G 1995 G 1994 G 1993 
 John Pardon United States G 2007 G 2006 G 2005 
 Marcin Andrychowicz Poland G 2008 G 2007 G 2006 
 Neal Wu United States G 2010 G 2009 G 2008 
 Shogo Murai Japan G 2012 G 2011 G 2010 
 Alex Schwendner United States G 2005 G 2003 S 2004 S 2002 
 Wolfgang Thaller Austria G 1997 G 1996 S 1999 S 1998 
 Bruce Merry South Africa G 2001 G 2000 S 1999 B 1998 B 1997 B 1996 
 Goran ui Croatia G 2008 G 2007 S 2009 B 2006 
 Vlad Alexandru Gavril Romania G 2013 G 2012 S 2011 B 2010 
 Victor Bargachev Russia G(I) 1995 G(I) 1994 S 1993 
 Johnny Ho United States G*(I) 2012 G 2011 S 2013 
 Mihai Ptracu Romania G(II) 2001 G 2000 S 1999 
 Roman Pastoukhov Russia G 2000 G(II) 1999 S 2001 
 Piotr Zieliski Poland G 1997 G(III) 1996 S 1995 
 Miroslav Dudk Slovakia G 1997 G 1996 S 1995 
 Richard Krlovi Slovakia G 1999 G 1998 S 1997 
 Tomasz Czajka Poland (1998, 2000), United Kingdom (1999) G 2000 G 1999 S 1998 
 Petr Mitrichev Russia G 2002 G 2000 S 2001 
 Luka Kalinovi Croatia G 2004 G 2003 S 2002 
 Rostislav Rumenov Bulgaria G 2007 G 2006 S 2005 
 Vladislav Epifanov Russia G 2008 G 2007 S 2009 
 Cosmin Gheorghe Romania G 2009 G 2008 S 2007 
 Pasin Manurangsi Thailand G 2011 G 2010 S 2009 
 Wenyu Cao United States G 2011 G 2010 S 2009 
 Tzvetomir Petrov Bulgaria G(I) 1990 G 1993 B 1991 
 David Arthur Canada G(II) 2000 G 1999 B 1998 
 Janis Sermulins Latvia G 1999 G(II) 1997 B 1998 
 Teodor Tonchev Bulgaria G(I) 1989 G(III) 1990 
 Hong Chen P.R. China G(II) 2000 G(I) 1999 
 Weidong Hu P.R. China G(I) 2005 G(II) 2004 
 Wanyeong Jung South Korea G(I) 2002 G 2001 
 Reid Barton United States G(I) 2001 G 2000 
 Kazuhiro Hosaka Japan G(II) 2009 G 2008 
 Velin Tzanov Bulgaria G(III) 2002 G 2001 

== See also ==
* International Science Olympiad
* ACM International Collegiate Programming Contest
* Central European Olympiad in Informatics
* Online judge

== References ==

== External links ==
*    
*IOI International Committee Website
*IOI Database
*IOI Secretariat Website
*IOI 2004 (held in Athens,Greece) website
*IOI 2005 Website
*IOI 2007 Website
*IOI 2009 Website
*IOI 2010 Website
*Photos from some former Informatics Olympiads.
*IOI 2009 Results
*IOI 2011 Website
*IOI 2012 Website
*IOI 2013 Website

Open-source project for running contests:
*Contest Management System Open-source tool in Python to run and manage a programming contest on a server .



[[Iota]]

Iota (uppercase , lowercase ; ) is the ninth letter of the Greek alphabet. It was derived from the Phoenician letter Yodh. Victor Parker, A History of Greece, 1300 to 30 BC, (John Wiley & Sons, 2014), 67. Letters that arose from this letter include the Roman I and J and the Cyrillic  (, ), Yi (, ), Je (, ), and iotified letters (e.g. Yu (, )).
 
In the system of Greek numerals iota has a value of 10. 

Iota represents the sound . In ancient Greek it occurred in both long and short versions, but this distinction was lost in Koine Greek. 

Iota participated as the second element in falling diphthongs, with both long and short vowels as the first element. Where the first element was long, the iota was lost in pronunciation at an early date, and was written in polytonic orthography as iota subscript, in other words as a very small  under the main vowel, for instance . The former diphthongs became digraphs for simple vowels in Koine Greek. see Koine Greek phonology 

The word is used in a common English phrase, 'not one iota', meaning 'not the slightest amount', in reference to a phrase in the New Testament: "until heaven and earth pass away, not an iota, not a dot, will pass from the Law" (). 

The word 'jot' (or iot) derives from iota. 

The German, Portuguese and Spanish name for the letter J (Jot / jota) is derived from iota.

==Symbol==

* The iota symbol is used to generate a vector of consecutive integers in the programming language APL.
* The name "iota" denotes a pseudo-constant to represent successive integers in the Go programming language.
* The lowercase iota symbol is sometimes used to write the imaginary unit, but more often Roman i or j is used.
* In mathematics, the inclusion map of one space into another is sometimes denoted by the lowercase iota.
* In logic, the lowercase iota denotes the definite descriptor.
* The lowercase iota symbol has Unicode code point U+03B9 and the uppercase U+0399.

==Character encodings==

* Greek Iota / Ypogegrammeni

* Coptic Iaude

* Latin Iota

* Cyrillic Iota

* Technical Iota

* Mathematical Iota

These characters are used only as mathematical symbols. Stylized Greek text should be encoded using the normal Greek letters, with markup and formatting to indicate text style.

==References==



[[ISP (disambiguation)]]

ISP may refer to:

In business:
* ISP Sports, a marketing company which operates several college sports radio broadcast networks
* Institute of Sales Promotion, a UK organisation
* Integrated Service Provider, a for-hire firm that performs a variety of logistics service activities
* Internet Service Provider, an organization that offers users access to the Internet and related services

In computer science:
* ISP Formal Verification Tool, an "In-situ Partial Order" verification tool for MPI (Message Passing Interface) programs
* Image Signal Processor, digital camera hardware
* In-System Programming, a way to configure programmable logic devices while they are installed in a larger system
* Interface segregation principle, a principle of Object Oriented Design
* Internet service provider, an organization that provides access to the Internet.
* Information Support Plan, Department of Defense Architecture Framework for documenting a project Information Management needs and plans

In education:
* Independent study project
* Information Systems Professional, an information technology title and post-nominal
* Instituto Superior Politcnico, a university in So Tom and Prncipe
* Integrated science program, an honors program at Northwestern University
* International School of Pakistan, a private school in Kuwait
* International School of Paris, a private school in Paris, France
* International School of Prague, an English speaking international school, located in Prague, Czech Republic
* Yale Information Society Project at Yale Law School 
* Institute for Social sciences of Politics, a research laboratory in political sociology and political science at Paris West University Nanterre La Dfense and cole Normale Suprieure de Cachan, France.

In law enforcement:
* Idaho State Police, law enforcement agency of Idaho
* Illinois State Police, law enforcement agencies across Illinois
* Indiana State Police, law enforcement agency of Indiana
* Iowa State Police, law enforcement agency of Iowa

In organizations:
* Independent Socialist Party (disambiguation), in several countries
* Invisibl Skratch Piklz, a group of turntable artists in the early 1990s

In physics and engineering:
* Invariant set postulate, the only postulate joining fractal cosmology with quantum mechanics
* Specific impulse, represented by Isp, a way to describe rocket and jet engine efficiency
* Imperial smelting process, a method of zinc and lead production developed by the Imperial Smelting Corporation

In transportation:
* Islip railway station, England, Network Rail station code ISP
* Long Island MacArthur Airport, Islip, New York, IATA Airport Code ISP

In other uses:
* Indigenous sugar cane, polysaccharide



[[Erectile dysfunction]]

Erectile dysfunction (ED) or impotence is sexual dysfunction characterized by the inability to develop or maintain an erection of the penis during sexual performance. Erectile dysfunction glossary - MUSC Health A penile erection is the hydraulic effect of blood entering and being retained in sponge-like bodies within the penis. The process is often initiated as a result of sexual arousal, when signals are transmitted from the brain to nerves in the penis. The most important organic causes are cardiovascular disease and diabetes, neurological problems (for example, trauma from prostatectomy surgery), hormonal insufficiencies (hypogonadism) and drug side effects.

Psychological impotence is where erection or penetration fails due to thoughts or feelings (psychological reasons) rather than physical impossibility; this is somewhat less frequent but often can be helped. Notably in psychological impotence, there is a strong response to placebo treatment. Erectile dysfunction can have severe psychological consequences as it can be tied to relationship difficulties and masculine self-image generally.

Besides treating the underlying causes such as potassium deficiency or arsenic contamination of drinking water, the first line treatment of erectile dysfunction consists of a trial of PDE5 inhibitor drugs (the first of which was sildenafil or Viagra). In some cases, treatment can involve prostaglandin tablets in the urethra, injections into the penis, a penile prosthesis, a penis pump or vascular reconstructive surgery. 

The Latin term impotentia coeundi describes simple inability to insert the penis into the vagina; it is now mostly replaced by more precise terms, such as erectile dysfunction (ED). The study of erectile dysfunction within medicine is covered by andrology, a sub-field within urology. Research indicates that erectile dysfunction is common, and it is suggested that approximately 40% of males suffer from erectile dysfunction or impotence, at least occasionally. 

==Signs and symptoms==
Erectile dysfunction is characterized by the regular or repeated inability to obtain or maintain an erection. It is analyzed in several ways:
* Obtaining full erections at some times, such as nocturnal penile tumescence when asleep (when the mind and psychological issues, if any, are less present), tends to suggest that the physical structures are functionally working. 
* Other factors leading to erectile dysfunction are diabetes mellitus (causing neuropathy).

==Causes==
* Drugs (anti-depressants (SSRIs ) and nicotine are most common)
* Neurogenic disorders 
* Cavernosal disorders (Peyronie's disease )
* Psychological causes: performance anxiety, stress, mental disorders, psychological problems, negative feelings. 
* Surgery 
* Aging. It is four times higher in men in their 60s than in men in their 40s. 
* Kidney failure
*Diseases such as diabetes and multiple sclerosis (MS). While these two causes have not been proven they're likely suspects as they cause issues with both the blood flow and nervous systems.
* At least one paper has suggested that arsenic poisoning from contaminated well water may be a cause in some regions, perhaps by alteration of voltage gated potassium channels. 
* Lifestyle: smoking is a key cause of erectile dysfunction. Smoking causes impotence because it promotes arterial narrowing. See also Tobacco and health.

Surgical intervention for a number of conditions may remove anatomical structures necessary to erection, damage nerves, or impair blood supply. Erectile dysfunction is a common complication of treatments for prostate cancer, including prostatectomy and destruction of the prostate by external beam radiation, although the prostate gland itself is not necessary to achieve erection.

ED can also be associated with bicycling due to both neurological and vascular problems due to compression. The increase risk appears to be about 1.7-fold. 

A recent study suggests an epidemiological association between chronic periodontitis (periodontal inflammation) and erectile dysfunction, similarly to the association between periodontitis and coronary heart diseases, and cerebrovascular diseases. In all the three conditions (erectile dysfunction, coronary heart disease and cerebrovascular diseases), despite the epidemiological association with periodontitis, no causative connection has yet been proven.

February 2011: Men who use non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) 3 times a day for more than 3 months are at a 22 percent increased risk of erectile dysfunction. A link between NSAID use and erectile dysfunction still existed for different age, race, ethnicity, smoker, diabetes, hypertension, high cholesterol, coronary diasease and other health problems. But due to benefit of NSAID, it's too early for men to avoid NSAIDs based solely on the research stated at Journal of Urology. 

==Pathophysiology==
Penile erection is managed by two mechanisms: the reflex erection, which is achieved by directly touching the penile shaft, and the psychogenic erection, which is achieved by erotic or emotional stimuli. The former uses the peripheral nerves and the lower parts of the spinal cord, whereas the latter uses the limbic system of the brain. In both conditions, an intact neural system is required for a successful and complete erection. Stimulation of the penile shaft by the nervous system leads to the secretion of nitric oxide (NO), which causes the relaxation of smooth muscles of corpora cavernosa (the main erectile tissue of penis), and subsequently penile erection. Additionally, adequate levels of testosterone (produced by the testes) and an intact pituitary gland are required for the development of a healthy erectile system. As can be understood from the mechanisms of a normal erection, impotence may develop due to hormonal deficiency, disorders of the neural system, lack of adequate penile blood supply or psychological problems. Restriction of blood flow can arise from impaired endothelial function due to the usual causes associated with coronary artery disease, but can also be caused by prolonged exposure to bright light.

==Diagnosis==

There are no formal tests to diagnose erectile dysfunction. Some blood tests are generally done to exclude underlying disease, such as hypogonadism and prolactinoma. Diabetes is considered a disorder, but is also a risk. Impotence is also related to generally poor physical health, poor dietary habits, obesity, and most specifically cardiovascular disease such as coronary artery disease and peripheral vascular disease.

A useful and simple way to distinguish between physiological and psychological impotence is to determine whether the patient ever has an erection. If never, the problem is likely to be physiological; if sometimes (however rarely), it could be physiological or psychological. The current diagnostic and statistical manual of mental diseases (DSM-IV) has included a listing for impotence.

;Duplex ultrasound:Duplex ultrasound is used to evaluate blood flow, venous leak, signs of atherosclerosis, and scarring or calcification of erectile tissue. Injecting prostaglandin, a hormone-like stimulator produced in the body, induces erection. Ultrasound is then used to see vascular dilation and measure penile blood pressure.

;Penile nerves function:Tests such as the bulbocavernosus reflex test are used to determine if there is sufficient nerve sensation in the penis. The physician squeezes the glans (head) of the penis, which immediately causes the anus to contract if nerve function is normal. A physician measures the latency between squeeze and contraction by observing the anal sphincter or by feeling it with a gloved finger inserted past the anus.

;Nocturnal penile tumescence (NPT):It is normal for a man to have five to six erections during sleep, especially during rapid eye movement (REM). Their absence may indicate a problem with nerve function or blood supply in the penis. There are two methods for measuring changes in penile rigidity and circumference during nocturnal erection: snap gauge and strain gauge. A significant proportion of men who have no sexual dysfunction nonetheless do not have regular nocturnal erections.

;Penile biothesiometry:This test uses electromagnetic vibration to evaluate sensitivity and nerve function in the glans and shaft of the penis.

;Dynamic infusion cavernosometry (DICC): technique in which fluid is pumped into the penis at a known rate and pressure. It gives a measurement of the vascular pressure in the corpus cavernosum during an erection.

;Corpus cavernosometry:Cavernosography measurement of the vascular pressure in the corpus cavernosum. Saline is infused under pressure into the corpus cavernosum with a butterfly needle, and the flow rate needed to maintain an erection indicates the degree of venous leakage. The leaking veins responsible may be visualised by infusing a mixture of saline and x ray contrast medium and performing a cavernosogram.; Digital Subtraction Angiography: In DSA, the images are acquired digitally.

;Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA): This is similar to magnetic resonance imaging. Magnetic resonance angiography uses magnetic fields and radio waves to provide detailed images of the blood vessels. Doctors may inject a "contrast agent" into the patient's bloodstream that causes vascular tissues to stand out against other tissues. The contrast agent provides for enhanced information regarding blood supply and vascular anomalies.

==Treatment==

Treatment depends on the cause.

Exercise, particularly aerobic exercise during midlife is an effective for preventing ED; exercise as a treatment is under investigation. Wespes E (chair), et al.
Guidelines on Male Sexual Dysfunction: Erectile dysfunction and premature ejaculation. European Association of Urology 2013 

Oral pharmacotherapy and vacuum erection devices are first-line treatments, followed by injections of drugs into the penis, and penile implants. 

===Oral medication===
;Phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors
The cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases constitute a group of enzymes that destroy the cyclic nucleotides cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP). Phosphodiesterases exist in different molecular forms and are unevenly distributed throughout the body. One of the forms of phosphodiesterase is termed PDE5, and inhibiting PDE5 increases the amount of cGMP available in the blood supply to the penis, thus increasing blood flow. The PDE5 inhibitors sildenafil (Viagra), vardenafil (Levitra) and tadalafil (Cialis) are prescription drugs which are taken orally. 

===Topical medication===
;Alprostadil
A topical cream combining Alprostadil with the permeation enhancer DDAIP has been approved in Canada under the brand name Vitaros as a first line treatment for erectile dysfunction. 

===Injected medication===
Another treatment regimen is injection therapy. One of the following drugs is injected into the penis: papaverine, phentolamine, and prostaglandin E1. 

===Pumps===

The device helps draw blood into the penis by applying negative pressure. This type of device is sometimes referred to as penis pump and may be used just prior to sexual intercourse. Several types of FDA approved vacuum therapy devices are available with a doctor's prescription. When pharmacological methods fail, a purpose-designed external vacuum pump can be used to attain erection, with a separate compression ring fitted to the penis to maintain it. These pumps should be distinguished from other penis pumps (supplied without compression rings) which, rather than being used for temporary treatment of impotence, are claimed to increase penis length if used frequently, or vibrate as an aid to masturbation. More drastically, inflatable or rigid penile implants may be fitted surgically.

===Surgery===

Often, as a last resort if other treatments have failed, the most common procedure is prosthetic implants which involves the insertion of artificial rods into the penis. 

===Alternative medicine===
The FDA does not recommend alternative therapies (i.e. those that have not received FDA approval) to treat sexual dysfunction. Many products are advertised as "herbal viagra" or "natural" sexual enhancement products, but no clinical trials or scientific studies support the effectiveness of these products for the treatment of erectile dysfunction, and synthetic chemical compounds similar to sildenafil have been found as adulterants in many of these products. Enforcement Report for June 30, 2010, United States Food and Drug Administration The United States Food and Drug Administration has warned consumers that any sexual enhancement product that claims to work as well as prescription products is likely to contain such a contaminant. Hidden Risks of Erectile Dysfunction "Treatments" Sold Online, United States Food and Drug Administration, February 21, 2009 

==History==

An unhappy wife is complaining to the Qadi about her husband's impotence. Ottoman miniature.
During the late 16th and 17th centuries in France, male impotence was considered a crime, as well as legal grounds for a divorce. The practice, which involved inspection of the complainants by court experts, was declared obscene in 1677. 

Dr. John R. Brinkley initiated a boom in male impotence cures in the U.S. in the 1920s and 1930s. His radio programs recommended expensive goat gland implants and "mercurochrome" injections as the path to restored male virility, including operations by surgeon Serge Voronoff.

Modern drug therapy for ED made a significant advance in 1983, when British physiologist Giles Brindley, PhD dropped his trousers and demonstrated to a shocked Urodynamics Society audience his papaverine-induced erection. The drug Brindley injected into his penis was a non-specific vasodilator, an alpha-blocking agent, and the mechanism of action was clearly corporal smooth muscle relaxation. The effect that Brindley discovered established the fundamentals for the later development of specific, safe, orally effective drug therapies. 

==Research==
; Gene therapy
Gene therapy is being developed that would allow for weeks or months long effect, supporting erections. This gene therapy involves injection of a transfer gene, calcium-sensitive potassium channel (hMaxi-K), into the penis. 

; Tx2-6
A study done at the Medical College of Georgia has found that venom from the Brazilian wandering spider contains a toxin, called Tx2-6, that causes erections. Scientists believe that combining this toxin with existing medication such as Viagra may lead to an effective treatment for erectile dysfunction. 

==References==

==External links==

* 



[[Identity and change]]

The relationship between identity and change in the philosophical field of metaphysics seems, at first glance, deceptively simple, and belies the complexity of the issues involved. This article explores "the problem of identity and change".

== Change ==
When an object changes, it always changes in some particular way. A baby grows up, and so changes in respect of size and maturity; a snake sheds its skin, and so changes in respect of its skin. "Change" may therefore be defined as follows:

: An object, O, changes with respect to property, P, if and only if O has P at one time, and at a later time, O does not have P.

That seems to be, in one way, what it means for a thing to change: it has a property at one time, and later it does not have that property. If a banana becomes brown, it can then be said: at one time, the banana is yellow; several days later, the banana is not yellow, but is instead brown. This appears fairly straightforward at this point, and there are no apparent problems as yet.

Another way for an object to change is to change its parts. 

: An object, O, changes with respect to its part, P, if and only if O has the part P at one time, and at a later time, O does not have P.

Some philosophers believe that an object can't persist through a change of parts. They defend mereological essentialism. [http://www.sccs.swarthmore.edu/users/08/ajb/tmve/wiki100k/docs/Identity_and_change.html ] 

== Problem of change ==
The question then arises as to what sort of change happens after a thing is destroyed? When a person dies, one does not say that the person's life has changed. Neither does one go around saying, "Harry just isn't the same sort of guy since he died." Instead, one says that Harry's life has ended. Similarly, when a building is demolished, one does not say that the building "changes"; one says that it is destroyed. So what sort of events, on the one hand, result in a mere change, and what sort of events, on the other hand, result in a thing's destruction &mdash; in the state of its existence? This is one aspect of the problem that will be considered here. It is called "the problem of change and identity".

=== The Ship of Theseus===
The "problem of change and identity" is generally explained with the story of the Ship of Theseus (q.v.):
: In ancient times, there was a ship, called the "Theseus" after its famous former owner. As the years wore on, the Theseus started getting weak and creaky. The old boards were removed, put into a warehouse, and replaced with new ones. Then, the masts started tottering, and soon they, too, were warehoused and replaced. And in this way, after fifty years, this ship now has all new boards, masts, and everything. The question then arises: Is the ship in the harbor, now called S2, the same ship as the ship that was in the harbor, fifty years ago (called S1, for convenience)? In other words, is S2 really the "Theseus"?

There is one answer which is a little too easy and quick. One might say: "No, of course not. The Theseus has changed a lot, so it's not the same ship. At the end of your life, you're not going to be the same person as you were, when you were a teenager. You're going to change a lot in the meantime." However, this is not quite answering the intended question. What is intended by the question is the sense of the word, "same", in which an old woman is the same person at the end of her life as she is, at the beginning of her life. Certainly, the word, "same", has such a sense. After all, one implicitly depends on it when one says, for example, "She has changed a lot". In order for someone to change a lot, there has to be one person who underwent the change. (One could perhaps reject that sense, saying that objects do not change over time.)

Going back to the definition of "change", an object changes with respect to a property if the object has that property at one time, and at a later time, the object does not have the property. What changes is the fact that the object has a particular property. The only way that that fact can change is if the object remains in existence. One can therefore think of a continuing object as the ground of change, or the arena where change occurs, as it were. To get back to the Theseus, the question is: Has the Theseus merely changed a lot, or is the Theseus gone, being replaced by a new ship?

One may say, "Sure, it's just a refurbished Theseus, greatly changed to be sure, but still the Theseus". If one thinks in this manner, then consider what happens when the story is extended further. Suppose someone buys all the planks, masts and whatever that is stored in the warehouse, and out of all of those materials, and absolutely no others, he builds a ship according to the same plans that were used to build the ship, christened "the Theseus". And this ship, called S3, is launched and sits in the harbor right next to where S2 is. Is S3 the same as S1? In other words, is this recently constructed ship, the same ship as the ship originally called the "Theseus", considering that S3 was built out of the same materials, and according to the same plans as S1.

Other questions: Should we stop calling S1 the Ship of Theseus and instead call S3 the Ship of Theseus? S1 has a historic path through the oceans, a path which could be traced regardless of the repairs which were made to it over time. The path identifies the ship; no other ship has this path. Or does S3 also have this path? 

One could take this concept even further by not only the properties but also its subject matter of the "ship". What if instead the warehoused planks, masts, and other materials were used to build something completely different from a ship, like a house. (A concept explored by the artist Simon Starling, who turned a shed into a working boat and then back into a shed, winning him the 2005 Turner Prize.) The same materials and supplies are being used; yet they have taken on a new form. This relates to the concept of recreation vs. destruction.

Inevitably, the problem arises: How can one ever say that both S2 and S3 are the same ship as S1, the original Theseus? This is because if they were both the same as S1, then they would have to be the same as each other. This follows from transitivity, which states that if x = y and x = z, then y = z. With S2 and S3 being clearly different ships, sitting in different places in the harbor, several choices present themselves: 
* S2 is the same ship as S1;
* S3 is the same ship as S1; or
* neither is the same ship as S1:
* S1 has ceased to exist.

How does one then decide which is the correct answer in this case? Whenever one makes an identity claim (i.e. a claim which states that two things are the same), one almost always uses two different descriptions. Sometimes, one may say, "x = x", like "I am I", but such claims are not particularly interesting or informative. The interesting identity claims are claims where two different descriptions are used for one and the same thing. As an example, take these two descriptions: "the Morning Star", and "the Evening Star". Sometimes, one can look in the sky just before dawn, and see a very bright point of light &mdash; that has been called "the Morning Star". And then also, one can look in the sky just after sunset, and see a very similar point &mdash; that has been called "the Evening Star". The Morning Star is, in fact, identical to the Evening Star &mdash; both are the planet Venus. As such, they are "two" things, only in description, but in actuality, are one and the same thing under two different descriptions.

It is a similar case with S1, S2, and S3, those being three different abbreviations, standing for the following descriptions:
* "S1", referring to the ship which sat in the harbor fifty years ago, newly christened "the Theseus";
* "S2", referring to the ship which sits in the harbor now, with the new planks; and
* "S3", referring to the ship which sits in the harbor, recently constructed out of the old planks.
When one, therefore, asks a question like, "Is S2 the same as S1?", one can be understood to mean this: "Is the ship which sits in the harbor now, with the new planks, the same ship as the ship which sat in the harbor fifty years ago, newly christened 'the Theseus'?" Do those two descriptions refer to the same thing, or do they not?

Philosophers are perhaps not interested in the "Ship of Theseus" problem per se, but in a more general problem: How does one decide that X is the same as Y, where X describes something at one time, and Y describes that "same" thing at a later time? This is called the "problem of identity over time", or alternatively, the "problem of change".

=== Leibniz's solution ===
The German philosopher Gottfried Leibniz came up with what is now called Leibniz's law (see identity of indiscernibles) that may have some bearing on the question. Leibniz's law states:

: X is the same as Y if, and only if, X and Y have all the same properties and relations; thus, whatever is true of X is also true of Y, and vice-versa.

Applying Leibniz's Law to the Ship of Theseus problem, S2 is the same as S1 if, and only if, S2 and S1 have all the same properties and relations. Does the ship now in the harbor have all the same properties and relations as the ship that was in the harbor fifty years ago? One might be tempted to say, "Clearly not! They have lots of different properties. So they can't be the same ship." Does that sound convincing? To answer this question, let us consider the property, "contains mast #1". Mast #1 is one of the masts that the original Ship of Theseus had. S1 definitely had this property, but S2 is not so equipped, but has mast #2, instead. It follows that S2 must therefore be different from S1.

Many philosophers strongly oppose this view. For if this argument works, then any property that has changed from the last time we looked at a thing would mean that the thing does not exist anymore, and there is a new thing in its place. Every little change in every little property would mean the whole thing is destroyed. Suppose we look at S1 just a couple of years after it was built. If just one plank has been replaced, will we say that the ship is a different ship? Many philosophers would say surely not, as would common sense. But the ship that is floating on the ocean for a couple of years does have different properties from the original. Leibniz's Law would have us say that it is a different ship. One might see all this and conclude, "Well, Leibniz's Law must not be a law at all, but a false claim! X and Y do not need to have all the same properties to be the same thing." 

Leibniz's Law can be saved, by saying: Properties are to be described as occurring at particular times, i.e. they are indexed to times. A property that is described as at a particular time is said to be "temporally-indexed". For example, we can say that S1 has mast #1 in 600 BC. If we say what time the ship has the mast, then we have indexed the property of having the mast to that time. We say the ship has the mast then, using the word, "has", tenselessly. That means we do not say that it, at present, has the mast, but rather, we say it "has" the mast in 600 BC. We are not claiming that the ship has the mast at any other time; just at that time. But if it were a later time, say 550 BC, that very same ship could "have" mast #1 in 600 BC, considering that we are talking about a tenseless "have". That is, it always has the same properties, but the properties are of the form P-at-T. This gives us a way to save Leibniz's Law from the objection we gave, but at the same time, brings up the issue of whether change really occurs. After all, we defined "change" as something having one property at one time, and not at some later time. By this solution though, any given object always has all the properties throughout time, and the properties are merely temporally-specific.

Putting this in plain English, S1 now has the property that it will have mast #2; and S2 now has the property that it did have mast #1. We can then say that S1 and S2 have all the same temporally-indexed properties. According to Leibniz's Law, therefore, they would be the same ship.

One might also say, through the same sorts of contortions that S1 and S3 might have the same temporally-indexed properties. It then follows from Leibniz's Law that they instead would be the same ship.

Can Leibniz's Law help us decide whether it is S2 or S3 that is the same as the original Theseus? Perhaps not by itself. Leibniz's Law says that some ships are the same, if, and only if they have all the same properties and relations &mdash; or, rather, the same temporally-indexed properties and relations. How then is one to decide that they have all the same temporally-indexed properties and relations? Leibniz's Law seems to offer little or no help when it comes to that decision.

=== Pragmatic solution ===
One especially meaningful "solution" to the problem of the Ship of Theseus is to say that whether the ship is the same or not depends on what purpose the word "same" here is being used for. There are multiple, perhaps infinite, purposes which could underlie the question. Here are just a few examples.

If, supposing it turns out that the original Ship of Theseus, S1, was actually stolen property, and the rightful owner demands its return, should the police give him S2 or S3? Instead of figuring out which ship, if either, is the "same", and then declaring that it should be returned, the pragmatic solution is to figure out which ship should be returned, and then declare that it is the "same". The current owner of S2 could argue that the original owner did not pay for any of the labor or materials of S2, but did provide at least the materials for S3. Thus, the original owner should not be entitled to S2, but rather, some or all of S3. For the purpose of legal entitlement, therefore, part or all of S3 is the same as S1.

Now, let us say that the purpose is not legal entitlement, but rather, the following situation: The admiral of the fleet believes that captains and crews who have fought alongside each other are more effective than captains and crews who are strangers to each other. The admiral then declares that captains must serve at least one year on the same ship. One day, Captain Hercules takes command of the Theseus, and then transfers 18 months later. During this time, the ship's materials are completely replaced as in the previous example, but the crew stays the same. Is S2 = S1, S3 = S1, both, or neither? For the admiral's purpose, S2 = S1 because S2 has the same crew as S1, and Captain Hercules has thus fulfilled the admiral's objective.

Still another example supposes that you are writing a history of this great ship, when it was conceived, how it was constructed, even what repairs were made to it, what battles it saw, who served in it, and so on. For this purpose the fact that pieces of the ship have been replaced over time, even if all pieces have been replaced, is irrelevant. The history of the Ship of Theseus is the history of the Ship of Theseus.

Thus, whether S2, S3, both, or neither is the same ship as S1 is a matter of convention and what purposes we have for considering things to be the same or different. Two objects may be considered the same for one purpose, and yet different for another. See pragmatism.

=== The ship of Theseus problem: a non-receivable question ===
One way of thinking about the Ship of Theseus problem is as follows: It is a question that is not receivable because of the mismatch between the domain of the question and the domain of the subject matter to which it is applied. Let us review the three main knowledge domains of concern here:
* A, the real ontological universe that exists and happens by itself;
* B, our reality or how we experience the real universe, A; and
* C, or our scientific analysis of our reality, B.
The distinction between B and C is demonstrated in the following example: In the evening, one can go out and see at the same moment the sun setting, the moon and a few stars; this is our reality or B. In the scientific domain C, however, the analysis of B reveals that the stars are thousands of light years away, the sun is eight light minutes away, and the moon is about a light second away. Since one cannot logically consider these subjects to be both "at the same moment" and "away in time", an exclusive choice has to be made that defines these two separate domains, B and C. Our reality or domain B is created by the complex, but consistent transformation of A by our biological and mental makeup. Therefore, domain B, or our reality, is internally logical. The scientific knowledge, or domain C, is created by the application of a consistent methodology of analysis of our reality, B. Therefore, the scientific domain is internally logical. Domains B and C each have their own internal logic, derived from a consistent approach respecting both processes and subject matter. Using the questions or processes of one domain on the subject matter of another domain will logically produce puzzles, paradoxes, and inconsistencies. The Ship of Theseus problem is an example of such an inconsistency created by the use of the question of identity proper to the ontology of domain A, applied to the subject matter of domain B, our reality. The question about the identity of the Ship of Theseus is simply not receivable and comes from the poor practice of not respecting the proper correspondence of the question domain to the subject matter domain. The problem of identity is an ontological problem, and should therefore be applied to the (metaphysical) subject matter of domain A, the real universe.

==Persistence over time==

Common-sense tells us that objects persist across time, that there is some sense in which you are the same person you were yesterday, in which the oak is the same as the acorn, in which you perhaps even can step into the same river twice. Philosophers have developed two rival theories for how this happens, called endurantism and perdurantism. Broadly speaking, endurantists hold that a whole object exists at each moment of its history, and the same object exists at each moment, while perdurantists believe that objects are 4-dimensional entities made up of a series of temporal parts like the frames of a movie.

== Identity and change in conscious beings ==
The problem of personal identity relates to change as applied to people. The molecules that make up each individual change almost completely over a period of years. Usually, there is no trouble in saying that a little girl in 1920, for example, is the same as an old woman in 1998, even though they share a relatively small number of molecules in common. The same person is just described in two different ways, first as a little girl, and second, as an old woman. In fact, we are confident enough of our ability to reidentify people over time that we are given names that are supposed to last us from when we get them until we die many years later. The question is exactly why we call the old woman in 1998 the same person as that little girl in 1920.

However, according to quantum physics, individual molecules (and atoms, electrons, protons etc.) have no identity. For example, every electron is the same and in quantum mechanics, one can not keep track of an individual electron precisely. Therefore any electron can interchange with another one with no observable physical change of the system at all. Thus, any real object cannot remain the same, also because of movement of its physical parts (even much bigger than molecules). Similarly to Leibniz solution, in a real life, we can say the person (or any macroscopic object) is the same, because all signs refer to the person (or object) in the past, which evolved in time.

==See also==

* Ship of Theseus
* Perdurantism

== References ==

==External links==
* Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy on temporal parts
* Carsten Korfmacher, 'Personal Identity', in "The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy"
* Identity Change



[[IranContra affair]]

The IranContra affair (, ), also referred to as Irangate, Contragate or the Iran&ndash;Contra scandal, was a political scandal in the United States that was uncovered by Daniel Sheehan and the Christic Institute, and became national news in November of 1986. Institute, Christic. Inside the Shadow Government. Washington, D.C.: n.p., 1988. Print. Sheehan, Daniel. The People's Advocate. Berkeley: Counterpoint, 2013. Print. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5wpq4qqIp8/ The Christic Institute (Heart Of The Matter, BBC 1987) http://articles.latimes.com/1987-07-12/news/vw-3208_1_christic-institute/ 12, July. "Arms Scandal Brings Christic Institute New Visibility : Group Gaining Credibility and Converts in L.A." Los Angeles Times. Los Angeles Times, 12 July 1987. Web. 12 May 2014. During the Reagan administration, senior administration officials secretly facilitated the sale of arms to Iran, the subject of an arms embargo. The Iran-Contra Affair 20 Years On. The National Security Archive (George Washington University), 2006-11-24 Some U.S. officials also hoped that the arms sales would secure the release of several hostages and allow U.S. intelligence agencies to fund the Nicaraguan Contras. Under the Boland Amendment, further funding of the Contras by the government had been prohibited by Congress. 

The scandal began as an operation to free the seven American hostages being held in Lebanon by a group with Iranian ties connected to the Army of the Guardians of the Islamic Revolution. It was planned that Israel would ship weapons to Iran, and then the United States would resupply Israel and receive the Israeli payment. The Iranian recipients promised to do everything in their power to achieve the release of the U.S. hostages. The plan deteriorated into an arms-for-hostages scheme, in which members of the executive branch sold weapons to Iran in exchange for the release of the American hostages. Large modifications to the plan were devised by Lieutenant Colonel Oliver North of the National Security Council in late 1985, in which a portion of the proceeds from the weapon sales was diverted to fund anti-Sandinista and anti-communist rebels, or Contras, in Nicaragua. 

While President Ronald Reagan was a supporter of the Contra cause, Reagan, Ronald (1990), p. 542 the evidence is disputed as to whether he authorized the diversion of the money raised by the Iranian arms sales to the Contras. Handwritten notes taken by Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger on December 7, 1985, indicate that Reagan was aware of potential hostage transfers with Iran, as well as the sale of Hawk and TOW missiles to "moderate elements" within that country. http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB210/14-Weinberger%20Diaries%20Dec%207%20handwritten.pdf Weinberger wrote that Reagan said "he could answer to charges of illegality but couldn't answer to the charge that 'big strong President Reagan passed up a chance to free the hostages'". After the weapon sales were revealed in November 1986, Reagan appeared on national television and stated that the weapons transfers had indeed occurred, but that the United States did not trade arms for hostages. The investigation was impeded when large volumes of documents relating to the scandal were destroyed or withheld from investigators by Reagan administration officials. On March 4, 1987, Reagan returned to the airwaves in a nationally televised address, taking full responsibility for any actions that he was unaware of, and admitting that "what began as a strategic opening to Iran deteriorated, in its implementation, into trading arms for hostages". 

Several investigations ensued, including those by the U.S. Congress and the three-person, Reagan-appointed Tower Commission. Neither found any evidence that President Reagan himself knew of the extent of the multiple programs. Ultimately the sale of weapons to Iran was not deemed a criminal offense but charges were brought against five individuals for their support of the Contras. Those charges, however, were later dropped because the administration refused to declassify certain documents. The indicted conspirators faced various lesser charges instead. In the end, fourteen administration officials were indicted, including then-Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger. Eleven convictions resulted, some of which were vacated on appeal. The rest of those indicted or convicted were all pardoned in the final days of the presidency of George H. W. Bush, who had been vice-president at the time of the affair. 

==Background==
Contra militants based in Honduras waged a guerrilla war to topple the Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN) revolutionary government of Nicaragua. Direct U.S. funding of the Contras insurgency was made illegal through the Boland Amendment, the name given to three U.S. legislative amendments between 1982 and 1984 aimed at limiting U.S. government assistance to the Contra's militants. Funding ran out for the Contras by July 1984 and in October a total ban was placed in effect. In violation of the Boland Amendment, senior officials of the Reagan administration continued to secretly arm and train the Contras and provide arms to Iran, an operation they called "the Enterprise". 

Ironically, military aid to the Contras was reinstated with Congressional consent in October 1986, a month before the scandal broke. ORTEGA, FAULTING REAGAN, WARNS OF COMING WAR New York Times 19 October 1986 

==Arms sales to Iran==

Michael Ledeen, a consultant of National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane, requested assistance from Israeli Prime Minister Shimon Peres for help in the sale of arms to Iran. Having been designated a State Sponsor of Terrorism since January 1984, http://www.state.gov/j/ct/list/c14151.htm Iran was in the midst of the IranIraq War and could find few Western nations willing to supply it with weapons. The idea behind the plan was for Israel to ship weapons through an intermediary (identified as Manucher Ghorbanifar) to the Islamic republic as a way of aiding a supposedly moderate, politically influential faction within the regime of the Ayatollah Khomeini who were believed to be seeking a rapprochement with the United States; after the transaction, the United States would reimburse Israel with the same weapons, while receiving monetary benefits. The Israeli government required that the sale of arms meet high level approval from the United States government, and when McFarlane convinced them that the U.S. government approved the sale, Israel obliged by agreeing to sell the arms. 

In 1985 President Reagan entered Bethesda Naval Hospital for colon cancer surgery. While the President was recovering in the hospital, McFarlane met with him and told him that representatives from Israel had contacted the National Security Agency to pass on confidential information from what Reagan later described as the "moderate" Iranian faction opposed to the Ayatollah's hardline anti-American policies. Reagan, Ronald (1990), p. 504 According to Reagan, these Iranians sought to establish a quiet relationship with the United States, before establishing formal relationships upon the death of the aging Ayatollah. In Reagan's account, McFarlane told Reagan that the Iranians, to demonstrate their seriousness, offered to persuade the Hezbollah terrorists to release the seven U.S. hostages. Reagan, Ronald (1990), p. 505 McFarlane met with the Israeli intermediaries; Walsh Iran / Contra Report - Chapter 24 The Investigation of State Department Officials: Shultz, Hill and Platt. Retrieved 7 June 2008. Reagan claims that he allowed this because he believed that establishing relations with a strategically located country, and preventing the Soviet Union from doing the same, was a beneficial move. Although Reagan claims that the arms sales were to a "moderate" faction of Iranians, the Walsh Iran/Contra Report states that the arms sales were "to Iran" itself, Walsh Iran/Contra Report, Part I: The Underlying Facts. which was under the control of the Ayatollah.

Following the IsraeliU.S. meeting, Israel requested permission from the United States to sell a small number of TOW antitank missiles (tube-launched, optically tracked, and wire-guided) to Iran, claiming that this would aid the "moderate" Iranian fraction, by demonstrating that the group actually had high-level connections to the U.S. government. Reagan initially rejected the plan, until Israel sent information to the United States showing that the "moderate" Iranians were opposed to terrorism and had fought against it. Reagan, Ronald (1990), p. 506 Now having a reason to trust the "moderates", Reagan approved the transaction, which was meant to be between Israel and the "moderates" in Iran, with the United States reimbursing Israel. In his 1990 autobiography An American Life, Reagan claimed that he was deeply committed to securing the release of the hostages; it was this compassion that supposedly motivated his support for the arms initiatives. The president requested that the "moderate" Iranians do everything in their capability to free the hostages held by Hezbollah. 

A BGM-71 TOW anti-tank guided missile
The following arms were supplied to Iran: http://www.fas.org/irp/offdocs/walsh/part_i.htm "Iran-Contra Report; Arms, Hostages and Contras: How a Secret Foreign Policy Unraveled" March 16, 1984. Retrieved 7 June 2008. 
*August 20, 1985  96 TOW anti-tank missiles
*September 14, 1985  408 more TOWs
*November 24, 1985  18 Hawk anti-aircraft missiles
*February 17, 1986  500 TOWs
*February 27, 1986  500 TOWs
*May 24, 1986  508 TOWs, 240 Hawk spare parts
*August 4, 1986  More Hawk spares
*October 28, 1986  500 TOWs

===First arms sale===
On August 30, 1985, Israel sent 100 American-made BGM-71 TOW antitank missiles to Iran through an arms dealer named Manucher Ghorbanifar. Subsequently, on September 14, 1985, 408 more TOW missiles were delivered. On September 15, 1985, following the second delivery, Reverend Benjamin Weir was released by his captors, the Islamic Jihad Organization. "Excerpts from the Tower Commission's Report", January 26, 1987. 

===Modifications in plans===

Robert McFarlane resigned on December 4, 1985, citing that he wanted to spend more time with his family. Reagan, Ronald (1990), p. 509 He was replaced by Admiral John Poindexter. 

Two days later, Reagan met with his advisors at the White House, where a new plan was introduced. This one called for a slight change in the arms transactions: instead of the weapons going to the "moderate" Iranian group, they would go to "moderate" Iranian army leaders. Reagan, Ronald (1990), p. 510 As the weapons were delivered from Israel by air, the hostages held by Hezbollah would be released. Israel would continue to be reimbursed by the United States for the weapons. Though staunchly opposed by Secretary of State George Shultz and Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger, the plan was authorized by Reagan, who stated that, "We were not trading arms for hostages, nor were we negotiating with terrorists". Reagan, Ronald (1990), p. 512 Now retired National Security Advisor McFarlane flew to London to meet with Israelis and Ghorbanifar in an attempt to persuade the Iranian to use his influence to release the hostages before any arms transactions occurred; this plan was rejected by Ghorbanifar. 

On the day of McFarlane's resignation, Oliver North, a military aide to the United States National Security Council (NSC), proposed a new plan for selling arms to Iran, which included two major adjustments: instead of selling arms through Israel, the sale was to be direct, and a portion of the proceeds would go to Contras, or Nicaraguan paramilitary fighters waging guerrilla warfare against the democratically-elected Sandinista government, at a markup. North proposed a $15 million markup, while contracted arms broker Ghorbanifar added a 41% markup of his own. Other members of the NSC were in favor of North's plan; with large support, Poindexter authorized it without notifying President Reagan, and it went into effect. At first, the Iranians refused to buy the arms at the inflated price because of the excessive markup imposed by North and Ghorbanifar. They eventually relented, and in February 1986, 1,000 TOW missiles were shipped to the country. From May to November 1986, there were additional shipments of miscellaneous weapons and parts. 

Both the sale of weapons to Iran, and the funding of the Contras, attempted to circumvent not only stated administration policy, but also the Boland Amendment. Administration officials argued that regardless of the Congress restricting the funds for the Contras, or any affair, the President (or in this case the administration) could carry on by seeking alternative means of funding such as private entities and foreign governments. Funding from one foreign country, Brunei, was botched when North's secretary, Fawn Hall, transposed the numbers of North's Swiss bank account number. A Swiss businessman, suddenly $10 million richer, alerted the authorities of the mistake. The money was eventually returned to the Sultan of Brunei, with interest. 
 

On January 7, 1986, John Poindexter proposed to the president a modification of the approved plan: instead of negotiating with the "moderate" Iranian political group, the United States would negotiate with "moderate" members of the Iranian government. Reagan, Ronald (1990), p. 516 Poindexter told Reagan that Ghorbanifar had important connections within the Iranian government, so with the hope of the release of the hostages, Reagan approved this plan as well. Throughout February 1986, weapons were shipped directly to Iran by the United States (as part of Oliver North's plan, without the knowledge of President Reagan) and none of the hostages were released. Retired National Security Advisor McFarlane conducted another international voyage, this one to Tehran; bringing with him a gift of a bible having a handwritten inscription by Ronald Reagan; and, according to some, a cake baked in the shape of a key. He met directly with the "moderate" Iranian political group that sought to establish U.S.-Iranian relations in an attempt to free the four remaining hostages. Reagan, Ronald (1990), pp. 520-521 This meeting also failed. The members requested concessions such as Israel's withdrawal from the Golan Heights, which the United States rejected. 

===Subsequent dealings===
In late July 1986, Hezbollah released another hostage, Father Lawrence Martin Jenco, former head of Catholic Relief Services in Lebanon. Following this, William Casey, head of the CIA, requested that the United States authorize sending a shipment of small missile parts to Iranian military forces as a way of expressing gratitude. Casey also justified this request by stating that the contact in the Iranian government might otherwise lose face, or be executed, and hostages killed. Reagan authorized the shipment to ensure that those potential events would not occur. Reagan, Ronald (1990), p. 523 

In September and October 1986 three more AmericansFrank Reed, Joseph Cicippio, and Edward Tracywere abducted in Lebanon by a separate terrorist group. The reasons for their abduction are unknown, although it is speculated that they were kidnapped to replace the freed Americans. Ranstorp, Magnus, Hizb'allah in Lebanon: The Politics of the Western Hostage Crisis, New York, St. Martins Press, 1997 pp. 98-99 One more original hostage, David Jacobsen, was later released. The captors promised to release the remaining two, but the release never happened. Reagan, Ronald (1990), pp. 526-527 

==Discovery and scandal==
North's mugshot, after his arrest

After a leak by Iranian Mehdi Hashemi, the Lebanese magazine Ash-Shiraa exposed the arrangement on November 3, 1986. This was the first public reporting of the weapons-for-hostages deal. The operation was discovered only after an airlift of guns (Corporate Air Services HPF821) was downed over Nicaragua. Eugene Hasenfus, who was captured by Nicaraguan authorities, initially alleged in a press conference on Nicaraguan soil that two of his coworkers, Max Gomez and Ramon Medina, worked for the Central Intelligence Agency. He later said he did not know whether they did or not. The Iranian government confirmed the Ash-Shiraa story, and ten days after the story was first published, President Reagan appeared on national television from the Oval Office on November 13, stating:

"My purpose was... to send a signal that the United States was prepared to replace the animosity between U.S. and Iran with a new relationship... At the same time we undertook this initiative, we made clear that Iran must oppose all forms of international terrorism as a condition of progress in our relationship. The most significant step which Iran could take, we indicated, would be to use its influence in Lebanon to secure the release of all hostages held there." 

The scandal was compounded when Oliver North destroyed or hid pertinent documents between November 21 and November 25, 1986. During North's trial in 1989, his secretary, Fawn Hall, testified extensively about helping North alter, shred, and remove official United States National Security Council (NSC) documents from the White House. According to the New York Times, enough documents were put into a government shredder to jam it. North's explanation for destroying some documents was to protect the lives of individuals involved in Iran and Contra operations. It was not until years after the trial that North's notebooks were made public, and only after the National Security Archive and Public Citizen sued the Office of the Independent Counsel under the Freedom of Information Act. 

During the trial North testified that on November 21, 22, or 24, he witnessed Poindexter destroy what may have been the only signed copy of a presidential covert-action finding that sought to authorize CIA participation in the November 1985 Hawk missile shipment to Iran. U.S. Attorney General Edwin Meese admitted on November 25 that profits from weapons sales to Iran were made available to assist the Contra rebels in Nicaragua. On the same day, John Poindexter resigned, and Oliver North was fired by President Reagan. Poindexter was replaced by Frank Carlucci on December 2, 1986. 

In his expose Veil: The Secret Wars of the CIA 1981&ndash;1987, journalist Bob Woodward chronicles the role of the CIA in facilitating the transfer of funds from the Iran arms sales to the Nicaraguan Contras spearheaded by Oliver North. Then Director of the CIA, William J. Casey, admitted to Woodward in February 1987 that he was aware of the diversion of funds to the contras confirming a number of encounters documented by Woodward. The controversial admission occurred while Casey was hospitalized for a stroke, and, according to his wife, was unable to communicate. On May 6, 1987, William Casey died the day after Congress began its public hearings on IranContra.

==Tower Commission==

On November 25, 1986, President Reagan announced the creation of a Special Review Board to look into the matter; the following day, he appointed former Senator John Tower, former Secretary of State Edmund Muskie, and former National Security Adviser Brent Scowcroft to serve as members. This Presidential Commission took effect on December 1 and became known as the Tower Commission. The main objectives of the commission were to inquire into "the circumstances surrounding the Iran-Contra matter, other case studies that might reveal strengths and weaknesses in the operation of the National Security Council system under stress, and the manner in which that system has served eight different presidents since its inception in 1947". The Tower Commission was the first presidential commission to review and evaluate the National Security Council.

President Reagan (center) receives the Tower Commission Report in the White House Cabinet Room; John Tower is at left and Edmund Muskie is at right, 1987.
President Reagan appeared before the Tower Commission on December 2, 1986, to answer questions regarding his involvement in the affair. When asked about his role in authorizing the arms deals, he first stated that he had; later, he appeared to contradict himself by stating that he had no recollection of doing so. In his 1990 autobiography, An American Life, Reagan acknowledges authorizing the shipments to Israel. Reagan, Ronald (1990), p. 501 

The report published by the Tower Commission was delivered to the president on February 26, 1987. The Commission had interviewed 80 witnesses to the scheme, including Reagan, and two of the arms trade middlemen: Manucher Ghorbanifar and Adnan Khashoggi. The 200-page report was the most comprehensive of any released, criticizing the actions of Oliver North, John Poindexter, Caspar Weinberger, and others. It determined that President Reagan did not have knowledge of the extent of the program, especially about the diversion of funds to the Contras, although it argued that the president ought to have had better control of the National Security Council staff. The report heavily criticized Reagan for not properly supervising his subordinates or being aware of their actions. A major result of the Tower Commission was the consensus that Reagan should have listened to his National Security Advisor more, thereby placing more power in the hands of that chair. 

==Congressional Committees Investigating The Iran-Contra Affair==

The Democratic-controlled United States Congress issued its own report on November 18, 1987, stating that "If the president did not know what his national security advisers were doing, he should have". The congressional report wrote that the president bore "ultimate responsibility" for wrongdoing by his aides, and his administration exhibited "secrecy, deception and disdain for the law". It also read that "the central remaining question is the role of the President in the IranContra affair. On this critical point, the shredding of documents by Poindexter, North and others, and the death of Casey, leave the record incomplete". 

==Aftermath==

Reagan expressed regret regarding the situation during a nationally televised address from the Oval Office on March 4, 1987, and two other speeches; Reagan had not spoken to the American people directly for three months amidst the scandal. President Reagan told the American people the reason why he did not update them on the scandal:

"The reason I haven't spoken to you before now is this: You deserve the truth. And as frustrating as the waiting has been, I felt it was improper to come to you with sketchy reports, or possibly even erroneous statements, which would then have to be corrected, creating even more doubt and confusion. There's been enough of that." 

He then took full responsibility for the acts committed:
"First, let me say I take full responsibility for my own actions and for those of my administration. As angry as I may be about activities undertaken without my knowledge, I am still accountable for those activities. As disappointed as I may be in some who served me, I'm still the one who must answer to the American people for this behavior." 

Finally, the president stated that his previous assertions that the U.S. did not trade arms for hostages were incorrect:
"A few months ago I told the American people I did not trade arms for hostages. My heart and my best intentions still tell me that's true, but the facts and the evidence tell me it is not. As the Tower board reported, what began as a strategic opening to Iran deteriorated, in its implementation, into trading arms for hostages. This runs counter to my own beliefs, to administration policy, and to the original strategy we had in mind." 

To this day Reagan's role in the transactions is not definitively known; it is unclear exactly what Reagan knew and when, and whether the arms sales were motivated by his desire to save the U.S. hostages. Oliver North wrote that "Ronald Reagan knew of and approved a great deal of what went on with both the Iranian initiative and private efforts on behalf of the contras and he received regular, detailed briefings on both...I have no doubt that he was told about the use of residuals for the Contras, and that he approved it. Enthusiastically." Handwritten notes by Defense Secretary Weinberger indicate that the President was aware of potential hostages transfers with Iran, as well as the sale of Hawk and TOW missiles to what he was told were "moderate elements" within Iran. Notes taken on December 7, 1985, by Weinberger record that Reagan said that "he could answer charges of illegality but he couldn't answer charge that 'big strong President Reagan passed up a chance to free hostages'". The Republican-written "Report of the Congressional Committees Investigating the Iran-Contra Affair" concluded, that There is some question and dispute about precisely the level at which he chose to follow the operation details. There is no doubt, however, ... the President set the US policy towards Nicaragua, with few if any ambiguities, and then left subordinates more or less free to implement it. Report of the Congressional Committees Investigating the Iran-Contra Affair, with supplemental minority and additional views, H. Doc 100-433, S. Doc 100-216, 00th Congress, 1st sess., November 13, 1987, 501 

Domestically, the scandal precipitated a drop in President Reagan's popularity as his approval ratings saw "the largest single drop for any U.S. president in history", from 67% to 46% in November 1986, according to a New York Times/CBS News poll. Mayer, Jane and Doyle McManus, Landslide: The Unmaking of The President, 1984-1988. Houghton Mifflin, (1988) p.292 and 437 The "Teflon President", as Reagan was nicknamed by critics, survived the scandal, however, and by January 1989 a Gallup poll was "recording a 64% approval rating", the highest ever recorded for a departing President at that time. 

Internationally the damage was more severe. Magnus Ranstorp wrote, "U.S. willingness to engage in concessions with Iran and the Hezbollah not only signaled to its adversaries that hostage-taking was an extremely useful instrument in extracting political and financial concessions for the West but also undermined any credibility of U.S. criticism of other states' deviation from the principles of no-negotiation and no concession to terrorists and their demands". Ranstorp, Magnus, Hizb'allah in Lebanon: The Politics of the Western Hostage Crisis, New York, St. Martins Press, 1997 p.203 

In Iran Mehdi Hashemi, the leaker of the scandal, was executed in 1987, allegedly for activities unrelated to the scandal. Though Hashemi made a full video confession to numerous serious charges, some observers find the coincidence of his leak and the subsequent prosecution highly suspicious. Abrahamian, Tortured Confessions, University of California, (1999), pp 162-166 

===Indictments===
* Caspar Weinberger, Secretary of Defense, was indicted on two counts of perjury and one count of obstruction of justice on June 16, 1992. Weinberger received a pardon from George H. W. Bush on December 24, 1992, before he was tried. FAS.org 
* William Casey, Head of the CIA. Thought to have conceived the plan, was stricken ill hours before he would testify. Reporter Bob Woodward reported Casey knew of and approved the plan. "Did A Dead Man Tell No Tales?" by Richard Zoglin, Time, October 12, 1987 
* Robert C. McFarlane, National Security Adviser, convicted of withholding evidence, but after a plea bargain was given only two years of probation. Later pardoned by President George H. W. Bush. ^ Pichirallo, Joe (March 12, 1988). "McFarlane Enters Guilty Plea Arising From Iran-Contra Affair; Former Reagan Adviser Withheld Information From Congress". Washington Post. 
* Elliott Abrams, Assistant Secretary of State, convicted of withholding evidence, but after a plea bargain was given only two years probation. Later pardoned by President George H. W. Bush. Walsh, Lawrence E. (August 4, 1993). "Final Report of the Independent Counsel For Iran/Contra Matters Vol. I: Investigations and Prosecutions". Summary of Prosecutions. U.S. Court of Appeal for the District of Columbia. 
* Alan D. Fiers, Chief of the CIA's Central American Task Force, convicted of withholding evidence and sentenced to one year probation. Later pardoned by President George H. W. Bush.
* Clair George, Chief of Covert Ops-CIA, convicted on two charges of perjury, but pardoned by President George H. W. Bush before sentencing. 
* Oliver North, member of the National Security Council convicted of accepting an illegal gratuity, obstruction of a congressional inquiry, and destruction of documents, but the ruling was overturned since he had been granted immunity. http://www.nytimes, July 21, 1988, "Civil Liberties Union Asks Court to Quash Iran-Conta Indictment" by Philip Shanon 
* Fawn Hall, Oliver North's secretary, was given immunity from prosecution on charges of conspiracy and destroying documents in exchange for her testimony. Hall, North Trial Testimony, 3/22/89, pp. 531116, and 3/23/89, pp. 537380, 538587; Chapter 5 Fawn Hall 147 
* Jonathan Scott Royster, Liaison to Oliver North, was given immunity from prosecution on charges of conspiracy and destroying documents in exchange for his testimony. royster, North Trial Testimony, 3/22/89, pp. 5311-17, and 3/23/89 pp. 5373-80, 5386-86; Chapter 6 Scott Royster 148 
* National Security Advisor John Poindexter was convicted of five counts of conspiracy, obstruction of justice, perjury, defrauding the government, and the alteration and destruction of evidence. The Supreme Court upheld a lower court ruling that overturned these convictions. 
* Duane Clarridge. An ex-CIA senior official, he was indicted in November 1991 on seven counts of perjury and false statements relating to a November 1985 shipment to Iran. Pardoned before trial by President George H. W. Bush. 
* Richard V. Secord. Ex-major general in the Air Force who organized the Iran arms sales and Contra aid. He pleaded guilty in November 1989 to making false statements to Congress and was sentenced to two years of probation. 
* Albert Hakim. A businessman, he pleaded guilty in November 1989 to supplementing the salary of North by buying a $13,800 fence for North with money from "the Enterprise", which was a set of foreign companies Hakim used in Iran-Contra. In addition, Swiss company Lake Resources Inc., used for storing money from arms sales to Iran to give to the Contras, plead guilty to stealing government property. Hakim was given two years of probation and a $5,000 fine, while Lake Resources Inc. was ordered to dissolve. 

Oliver North and John Poindexter were indicted on multiple charges on March 16, 1988. North, indicted on 16 counts, was found guilty by a jury of three felony counts. The convictions were vacated on appeal on the grounds that North's Fifth Amendment rights may have been violated by the indirect use of his testimony to Congress which had been given under a grant of immunity. In 1990 Poindexter was convicted on several felony counts of conspiracy, lying to Congress, obstruction of justice, and altering and destroying documents pertinent to the investigation. His convictions were also overturned on appeal on similar grounds. Arthur L. Liman served as chief counsel for the Senate during the IranContra Scandal. 

The Independent Counsel, Lawrence E. Walsh, chose not to re-try North or Poindexter. In total, several dozen people were investigated by Walsh's office. http://www.brown.edu/Research/Understanding_the_Iran_Contra_scandal/thelegalaftermath.php 

During his election campaign in 1988, Vice President Bush denied any knowledge of the IranContra affair by saying he was "out of the loop". Though his diaries included that he was "one of the few people that know fully the details", he repeatedly refused to discuss the incident and won the election. http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB210/index.htm However, a book published in 2008 by Israeli journalist and terrorism expert Ronen Bergman asserts that Bush was personally and secretly briefed on the affair by Amiram Nir, counter-terrorism adviser to the then Israeli Prime Minister, when Bush was on a visit to Israel. "Nir could have incriminated the incoming President. The fact that Nir was killed in a mysterious chartered airplane crash in Mexico in December 1988 has given rise to numerous conspiracy theories", writes Bergman. Bergman, The secret war with Iran, published Simon and Schuster NY 2008, this edition 2011, page 112 On December 24, 1992, nearing the end of his term in office after being defeated by Bill Clinton the previous month, Bush pardoned six administration officials, namely Elliott Abrams, Duane Clarridge, Alan Fiers, Clair George, Robert McFarlane, and Caspar Weinberger. 

In Poindexter's hometown of Odon, Indiana, a street was renamed to John Poindexter Street. Bill Breeden, a former minister, stole the street's sign in protest of the IranContra affair. He claimed that he was holding it for a ransom of $30 million, in reference to the amount of money given to Iran to transfer to the Contras. He was later arrested and confined to prison, making him, as satirically noted by Howard Zinn, "the only person to be imprisoned as a result of the IranContra Scandal". Zinn, Howard (2003), pp. 587-588 

==Reports and documents==
The 100th Congress formed a joint committee (Congressional Committees Investigating The Iran-Contra Affair) and held hearings in mid-1987. Transcripts were published as: Iran-Contra Investigation: Joint Hearings Before the Senate Select Committee on Secret Military Assistance to Iran and the Nicaraguan Opposition and the House Select Committee to Invesitgate Covert Arms Transactions with Iran (U.S. GPO 1987-88). A closed Executive Session heard classified testimony from North and Poindexter; this transcript was published in a redacted format. Report of the Congressional Committees... p 15 The joint committee's final report was Report of the Congressional Committees Investigating the Iran-Contra Affair With Supplemental, Minority, and Additional Views (U.S. GPO November 17, 1987). Several appendices of the report are available online, from archive.org The records of the committee are at the National Archives, but many are still non-public. Iran-Contra joint committee documents, at the National Archives. 

Testimony was also heard before the House Foreign Affairs Committee, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Senate Select Committee on Intelligence and can be found in the Congressional Record for those bodies. The Senate Intelligence Committee produced two reports: Preliminary Inquiry into the Sale of Arms to Iran and Possible Diversion of Funds to the Nicaraguan Resistance (February 2, 1987) and Were Relevant Documents Withheld from the Congressional Committees Investigating the Iran-Contra Affair? (June 1989). The two Senate Intelligence Committee reports are online: senate.gov, 100th congress and 101st congress 

The Tower Commission Report was published as the Report of the President's Special Review Board. U.S. GPO February 26, 1987. It was also published as The Tower Commission Report, Bantam Books, 1987, ISBN 0-553-26968-2 Excepts of the Tower Report are online at UC Santa Barbara 

The Office of Independent Counsel/Walsh investigation produced four interim reports to Congress. Its final report was published as the Final Report of the Independent Counsel for Iran/Contra Matters. Portions of the OIC report are online at: http://www.fas.org/irp/offdocs/walsh/ Walsh's records are available at the National Archives. National Archives, Records of Independent Counsels, Lawrence Walsh 

==See also==
*Timeline of the IranContra affair
* Operation Tipped Kettle (transfer of PLO weapons seized by Israel in Lebanon to the Contras)
*Political scandals of the United States
*IranUnited States relations

*CIA drug trafficking
*CIA Operation 40  an undercover operation in the early 1960s

*October surprise conspiracy theory
*Gary Webb  journalist who investigated Nicaraguans linked to the CIA-backed Contras in a newspaper series and book, both titled Dark Alliance
*Eugene Hasenfus  alleged to be employed by the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)

==Footnotes==

==References==
*Asleson, Vern. Nicaragua: Those Passed By. Galde Press ISBN 1-931942-16-1, 2004
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

==External links==
*Understanding the Iran-Contra Affairs, a comprehensive website
*The Iranian Arms Scandal from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives
*The Contras: a question of US Funding from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives
*Final Report of the Independent Counsel for Iran/Contra Matters (Walsh Report)
*Busby, Robert (2011-02-03) The scandal that almost destroyed Ronald Reagan, Salon.com
*Time Article
*Arms for Hostages
*Story needs to be told
* The Iran-Contra Affair 20 Years On: Documents Spotlight Role of Reagan, Top Aides. By the National Security Archive
*How the Reagan Administration Taught Iran the Wrong Lessons &ndash; Middle East Review of International Affairs, June, 2007 article by Nathan Thrall
*Audio, "The Secret Government: The Constitution in Crisis", 1987 Bill Moyers special on the Iran-Contra Affair
* Condensed article outlining Iran-Contra
*The Importance of the Iran-Contra Scandal, 25 Years Later

 

Controversies



[[Infocom]]

Infocom was a software company, based in Cambridge, Massachusetts, that produced numerous works of interactive fiction. They also produced one notable business application, a relational database called Cornerstone.

Infocom was founded on June 22, 1979 by MIT staff and students led by Dave Lebling, Marc Blank, Albert Vezza, and Joel Berez and lasted as an independent company until 1986 when it was bought by Activision. Activision finally shut down the Infocom division in 1989, although they released some titles in the 1990s under the Infocom Zork brand. Activision abandoned the Infocom trademark in 2002.

The name was later registered by Oliver Klaeffling of Germany in 2007, which itself was abandoned the following year. The Infocom trademark is currently held by Pete Hottelet's Omni Consumer Products, who registered the name around the same time as Klaeffling in 2007. That "new" "official" Infocom web site 

==Overview==
Infocom games are text adventures where users direct the action by entering short strings of words to give commands when prompted. Generally the program will respond by describing the results of the action, often the contents of a room if the player has moved within the virtual world. The user reads this information, decides what to do, and enters another short series of words. Examples include "go west" or "take flashlight".

Infocom games were written using a roughly LISP-like programming language called ZIL (Zork Implementation Language or Zork Interactive Languageit was referred to as both) that compiled into a byte code able to run on a standardized virtual machine called the Z-machine. As the games were text based and used variants of the same Z-machine interpreter, the interpreter had to be ported to new computer architectures only once per architecture, rather than once per game. Each game file included a sophisticated parser which allowed the user to type complex instructions to the game. Unlike earlier works of interactive fiction which only understood commands of the form 'verb noun', Infocom's parser could understand a wider variety of sentences. For instance one might type "open the large door, then go west", or "go to festeron". The Wishbringer manual with more examples of complex commands possible with Infocom games. 

With the Z-machine, Infocom was able to release most of their games for most popular home computers of the day simultaneouslythe Apple II family, Atari 800, IBM PC compatibles, Amstrad CPC/PCW (one disc worked on both machines), Commodore 64, Commodore Plus/4, Commodore 128, Infocom was actually one of the very few companies to release game software for the C128's native mode, contrary to most software houses' practice of only catering for the combined C64/128 market (as the C128 was compatible with the C64) Kaypro CP/M, Texas Instruments TI-99/4A, the Mac, Atari ST, the Commodore Amiga and the Radio Shack TRS-80. The company was also known for shipping creative props, or "feelies" (and even "smellies"), with its games.

==History==

===The beginning===
Zork I was Infocom's first product. This screenshot of Zork I is representative of the sort of interaction a player has with Infocom's interactive fiction titles. Here it is depicted running on a modern Z-machine interpreter.

Inspired by Colossal Cave, Marc Blank and Dave Lebling created what was to become the first Infocom game, Zork, in 1977 at MIT's Laboratory for Computer Science. Despite the development of a revolutionary virtual memory system that allowed games to be much larger than the average personal computer's normal capacity, the enormous mainframe-developed game had to be split into three roughly equal parts. Zork I was released originally for the TRS-80 in 1980 and eventually sold more than a million copies across several platforms. Even though Microsoft released a cheap version of Adventure with its initial version of MS-DOS 1.0 for IBM PCs, Zork I was still a popular seller for the PC, thanks to the superior quality of its writing and packaging.

Lebling and Blank each authored several more games and additional game writers (or "Implementors") were hired, notably including Steve Meretzky. Other popular and inventive titles included a number of sequels and spinoff games in the Zork series, The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy by Douglas Adams, and A Mind Forever Voyaging.

In its first few years of operation, text adventures proved to be a huge revenue stream for the company. Whereas most computer games of the era would achieve initial success and then suffer a significant drop-off in sales, Infocom titles continued to sell for years and years. Employee Tim Anderson said of their situation, "It was phenomenal  we had a basement that just printed money." (Briceno 2000, p18) 

===Reception===
In a 1987 interview Joel Berez stated, " audience tends to be composed of heavy readers. We sell to the minority that does read". Three components proved key to Infocom's success: marketing strategy, rich storytelling and feelies. Whereas most game developers sold their games mainly in software stores, Infocom also distributed their games via bookstores. (Briceno 2000, p23) Infocom's products appealed more to those with expensive computers, such as the Apple Macintosh, IBM PC, and Commodore Amiga. Berez stated that "there is no noticeable correlation between graphics machines and our penetration. There is a high correlation between the price of the machine and our sales ... people who are putting more money into their machines tend to buy more of our software". Since their games were text-based, patrons of bookstores were drawn to the Infocom games as they were already interested in reading. Unlike most computer software, Infocom titles were distributed under a no-returns policy, which allowed them to make money from a single game for a longer period of time.

Next, Infocom titles featured strong storytelling and rich descriptions, eschewing the day's primitive graphic capabilities, allowing users to use their own imaginations for the lavish and exotic locations the games described. Infocom's puzzles were unique in that they were usually tightly integrated into the storyline, and rarely did gamers feel like they were being made to jump through one arbitrary hoop after another, as was the case in many of the competitors' games. The puzzles were logical but also required close attention to the clues and hints given in the story, causing most gamers to keep copious notes as they went along.

Sometimes, though, Infocom threw in puzzles just for the humor of itif the user never ran into these, they could still finish the game just fine. But discovering these early Easter Eggs was satisfying for some fans of the games. For example, one popular Easter egg was in the Enchanter game, which involved collecting magic spells to use in accomplishing the quest. One of these was a summoning spell, which the player needed to use to summon certain characters at different parts of the game. At one point the game mentions the "Implementers" who were responsible for creating the land of Zork. If the player tried to summon the Implementers, the game would suddenly produce a vision of Dave Lebling and Marc Blank at their computers, surprised at this "bug" in the game and working feverishly to fix it.

Third, the inclusion of "feelies"imaginative props and extras tied to the game's themeprovided some copy protection against pirating. Some games were unsolvable without the extra content provided with the boxed game. And because of the cleverness and uniqueness of the feelies, users rarely felt like they were an intrusion or inconvenience, as was the case with most of the other copy-protection schemes of the time.

Although Infocom started out with Zork, and although the Zork world was the centerpiece of their product line throughout the Zork and Enchanter series, the company quickly branched out into a wide variety of story lines: fantasy, science-fiction, mystery, horror, historical adventure, children's stories, and others that defied categories. In an attempt to reach out to females, Infocom also produced Plundered Hearts, which required the gamer to take the part of a heroine in a swashbuckling adventure on the high seas, and which required the heroine to use more feminine tactics to win the game, since hacking-and-slashing was not a very ladylike way to behave. And to compete with the Leisure Suit Larry style games that were also appearing, Infocom also came out with Leather Goddesses of Phobos in 1986, which featured "tame", "suggestive", and "lewd" playing modes, and that was notable for including among its "feelies" a "scratch-and-sniff" card with six odors that corresponded to six cues during the game.

====Invisiclues====
Originally, hints for the game were provided as a "pay-per-hint" service created by Mike Dornbrook called the Zork User's Group (ZUG). Dornbrook also started Infocom's customer newsletter called The New Zork Times to discuss game hints and preview and showcase new products.

The pay-per-hint service eventually led to the development of InvisiClues: books with hints, maps, clues and solutions for puzzles in the games. The answers to the puzzles were printed in invisible ink that only became visible with a special marker that was provided with each book. Usually, two or more answers were given for each question that a gamer might have. The first answer would provide a subtle hint, the second a less subtle hint, and so forth until the last one gave an explicit answer. Gamers could thus reveal only the hints that they needed to have to play the game. To prevent the mere questions (printed in normal ink) from giving away too much information about the game, a certain number of misleading fake questions were included in every InvisiClues book. The InvisClues books were regularly ranked in near the top of best seller lists for computer books. (Briceno 2000, p26-27) 

In the Solid Gold line or re-releases InvisiClues were integrated into the game. By typing "HINT" twice the player would open up a screen of possible topics where they could then reveal one hint at a time for each puzzle, just like the books.

====Interactive fiction====
Infocom also released a small number of "interactive fiction paperbacks" (gamebooks), which were based on the games and featured the ability to choose a different path through the story. Similar to the Choose Your Own Adventure series, every couple of pages the book would give the reader the chance to make a choice, such as which direction they wanted to go or how they wanted to respond to another character. The reader would then choose one of the given answers and turn to the appropriate page. These books, however, never did sell particularly well, and quickly disappeared from the bookshelves.

===Cornerstone===
Despite their success with computer games, Vezza and other company founders hoped to produce successful business programs like Lotus Development, also founded by people from MIT. In 1984 Infocom started putting resources into a new division to produce business products. In 1985 they released a database product, Cornerstone, aimed at capturing the then booming database market for small business. Though this application was hailed upon its release for ease of use, it sold only 10,000 copies; not enough to cover the development expenses. 

The program failed for a number of reasons. Although it was packaged in a slick hard plastic carrying case and was a very good database for personal and home use, it was originally priced at USD$495 per copy and used copy-protected disks. Another serious miscalculation was that the program did not include any kind of scripting language, so it was not promoted by any of the database consultants that small businesses typically hired to create and maintain their DB applications. Reviewers were also consistently disappointed that Infocomnoted for the natural language syntax of their gamesdid not include a natural language query ability, which was the most expected feature for this database. And a final disappointment was that Cornerstone was available only for IBM PCs and not any of the other platforms that Infocom supported for their games; while Cornerstone had been programmed with its own virtual machine for maximum portability, that feature had become essentially irrelevant. Cornerstone used the virtual machine for its processing, resulting in lackluster performance. Down From the Top of Its Game: Cornerstone from MIT 

===Changing marketplace===
Whereas Infocom's games had benefited significantly from the portability offered by running on top of a virtual machine, this strategy did not prove to be a significant advantage for Cornerstone; in fact, the virtual machine significantly slowed the database's execution speed. Businesses were moving en masse to the IBM PC platform by that time, so portability was no longer a significant differentiator. Infocom had sunk much of the money from games sales into Cornerstone; this, in addition to a slump in computer game sales, left the company in a very precarious financial position. By the time Infocom removed the copy-protection and reduced the price to less than $100, it was too late, and the market had moved on to other database solutions.

And finally, the game market itself was shifting into graphic games. The 1990s, though, were a turbulent time for graphics development, as the computer industry was collapsing, with long-time computer makers such as Tandy/Radio Shack, Atari, and Commodore/Amiga disappearing, and the PC and Macintosh markets were fighting for dominance. Development of graphics technology was very aggressive during this time, which made it very expensive and risky to create cutting-edge, high-performance graphics, and many companies came and went in this period. Many people were buying new, more powerful computers expressly for games, and the days were long-gone when people would be satisfied with simple vectored line drawings, such as those that made the Wizardry games famous, or with the blocky graphics that were used in Sierra Entertainment's King's Quest games. In this climate, Infocom's history of text-based adventures and story-centered gaming did not help much in making the transition to graphics.

===Activision takeover===
After Cornerstone's failure, Infocom laid off half of its 100 employees, and Activision acquired the company on 13 June 1986 for $7.5 million. While relations were cordial between the two companies at first, the departure of Jim Levy from Activision left Bruce Davis in charge. Davis believed that his company had paid too much for Infocom and initiated a lawsuit against them to recoup some of the cost, along with changing the way Infocom was run. For example:
* Davis required they use Activision's packaging plant instead of their own in-house one, raising the cost of each package from $0.45 to over $0.90. In addition, the Activision plant made numerous mistakes in packaging, whereas the Infocom one almost never did.
* Infocom had a successful marketing approach that kept all their games in store inventories for years. Because of this, older titles' sales often kept pace with sales of newer games. For example, because Zork was available for years after its initial release in 1980, it continued to top charts in sales well into the mid-1980s. Activision preferred to market Infocom's games the way they marketed their other titles: replacing older titles with newer ones. While this made sense for the graphically intensive games that made up the rest of Activision's catalog, since Infocom games were text based, it didn't make sense - the newer games didn't have improved text. This marketing approach cut off potential revenue for numerous Infocom titles that had consistently brought in money for several years.
* Davis required the struggling developer to produce eight titles a year. Infocom had traditionally produced about four games per year with more staff than they had post-merger.
* Davis pushed Infocom to release more graphical games, but the one they did release, Fooblitzky, bombed. This was, in part, due to Infocom's long-standing rule of maximum portability; a game that could display graphics on a number of different systems couldn't take advantage of the strengths of any of them.
* The cost of acquisition was amortized by deducting it from Infocom's operating revenue during the next several years.

===Closure and afterward===
By 1988 rumors spread of disputes between Activision and Infocom. Infocom employees reportedly believed that Activision gave poorer-quality games to Infocom, such as Tom Snyder Productions' unsuccessful Infocomics. Activision moved Infocom development to California in 1989, and the company was now just a publishing label. Rising costs and falling profits, exacerbated by the lack of new products in 1988 and technical issues with its MS-DOS products, caused Activision to close Infocom in 1989. 

For a few years, Activision continued to market Infocom's classic games in collections (usually by genre, such as the Science Fiction collection); in 1991, they published The Lost Treasures of Infocom, followed in 1992 by The Lost Treasures of Infocom II. These compilations featured nearly every game produced by Infocom before 1988. (Leather Goddesses of Phobos was not included in either bundle, but could be ordered via a coupon included with Lost Treasures II.) The compilations lacked the "feelies" that came with each game, but in some cases included photographs of them. In 1996, the first bundles were followed by Classic Text Adventure Masterpieces of Infocom, a single CD-ROM which contained the works of both collections. This release, however, was missing The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy and Shogun because the licenses from Douglas Adams' and James Clavell's estates had expired.

In 2012, Activision released Lost Treasures of Infocom for iOS devices. In-app purchases provide access for 27 of the titles. It also lacks Shogun and The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy as well as Beyond Zork, Zork Zero and Nord and Bert.

==Titles and authors==

===Interactive fiction===
* The Zork series:
** The original Zork Trilogy (Marc Blank & Dave Lebling):
*** Zork I: The Great Underground Empire (1980)
*** Zork II: The Wizard of Frobozz (1981)
*** Zork III: The Dungeon Master (1982)
** The Enchanter Trilogy:
*** Enchanter (1983, Marc Blank and Dave Lebling)
*** Sorcerer (1984, Steve Meretzky)
*** Spellbreaker (1985, Dave Lebling)
** Zork I|Mini Zork I: The Great Underground Empire] (1987, Marc Blank & Dave Lebling, free cut-down, single load tape version of game, covermounted on UK's ZZAP!64 magazine)
** Zork|Beyond Zork: The Coconut of Quendor] (1987, Brian Moriarty)
** Zero|Zork Zero: The Revenge of Megaboz] (1988, Steve Meretzky)
** (1997, Michael Berlyn and Marc Blank)
* The Planetfall series:
** Planetfall (1983, Steve Meretzky)
** Stationfall (1987, Steve Meretzky)
* Deadline (1982, Marc Blank)
* Starcross (1982, Dave Lebling)
* Suspended: A Cryogenic Nightmare (1983, Michael Berlyn)
* Infidel (1983, Michael Berlyn)
* The Witness (1983, Stu Galley)
* Cutthroats (1984, Michael Berlyn & Jerry Wolper)
* The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy (1984, Steve Meretzky & Douglas Adams)
* Seastalker (1984, Stu Galley & Jim Lawrence)
* Suspect (1984, Dave Lebling)
* A Mind Forever Voyaging (1985, Steve Meretzky)
* Wishbringer: The Magick Stone of Dreams (1985, Brian Moriarty)
* Ballyhoo (1986, Jeff O'Neill)
* Hollywood Hijinx (1986, "Hollywood" Dave Anderson)
* Leather Goddesses of Phobos (1986, Steve Meretzky)
* Moonmist (1986, Stu Galley & Jim Lawrence)
* Trinity (1986, Brian Moriarty)
* Border Zone (1987, Marc Blank)
* Bureaucracy (1987, Infocom & Douglas Adams)
* The Lurking Horror (1987, Dave Lebling)
* Nord and Bert Couldn't Make Head or Tail of It (1987, Jeff O'Neill)
* Plundered Hearts (1987, Amy Briggs)
* (1988, Bob Bates)
* (1989, Bob Bates)
* James Clavell's Shogun (1989, Dave Lebling)
* Journey (1989, Marc Blank)

===Other titles===
* Graphic Adventures
** (1992, Steve Meretzky)
** Return to Zork (1993, Doug Barnett)
** (1996)
** Zork Grand Inquisitor (1997)
* BattleTech Games
** (1988, developed by Westwood Studios)
** (1991, developed by Westwood Studios)
* Other Games
** Fooblitzky (1985, Marc Blank, Mike Berlyn, Poh Lim & Paula Maxwell)
** (1988, Scott Schmitz, Ken Updike & Amy Briggs)
** Mines of Titan (1988, Louis Castle & Brett Sperry)
** Tombs & Treasure (1989, developed by Nihon Falcom)
** Circuit's Edge (1989, developed by Westwood Studios)
* Infocomics
** Lane Mastodon vs. the Blubbermen (1988, Steve Meretzky)
** Gamma Force in Pit of a Thousand Screams (1988, Amy Briggs)
** ZorkQuest: Assault on Egreth Castle (1988, Elizabeth Langosy)
** ZorkQuest II: The Crystal of Doom (1988, Elizabeth Langosy)

===Collections===
* The Zork Trilogy (1986; contained Zork I, Zork II & Zork III)
* The Enchanter Trilogy (1986; contained Enchanter, Sorcerer & Spellbreaker)
* The Lost Treasures of Infocom (1991; contained 20 of Infocom's interactive fiction games)
* The Lost Treasures of Infocom II (1992; contained 11 interactive fiction games)
* The Zork Anthology (1994; contained Zork I, Zork II, Zork III, Beyond Zork & Zork Zero)
* The Mystery Collection (1995; contained Deadline, Lurking Horror, Moonmist, Sherlock: The Riddle of the Crown Jewels, Suspect and The Witness. Zork Zero and Planetfall were a bonus in some packages)
* The Adventure Collection (1995; contained Border Zone, Plundered Hearts, Cutthroats, Trinity and Infidel)
* The Comedy Collection (1995; contained Bureaucracy, Hollywood Hijinx and Nord and Bert Couldn't Make Head or Tail of It)
* The Fantasy Collection (1995; contained Spellbreaker, Enchanter, Sorcerer, Seastalker and Wishbringer)
* The Science Fiction Collection (1995; contained Suspended, A Mind Forever Voyaging, Starcross, Stationfall and Hitchhikers Guide to the Galaxy)
* Classic Text Adventure Masterpieces of Infocom (1996; contained 33 Infocom games plus six winners of the 1995 Interactive Fiction Competition, which was not affiliated with Infocom)
* Zork Special Edition (1997; contained Zork I, Zork II, Zork III, Beyond Zork, Zork Zero, Return to Zork, Zork: Nemesis, and Planetfall)
* Zork Classics: Interactive Fiction (2000)
* The Zork Legacy Collection (2002; contained The Zork Anthology, Return to Zork, and Zork Nemesis)
* Lost Treasures of Infocom (2012; In-App purchases for most of the titles)

==Legacy==
With the exception of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy and Shogun, the copyrights to the Infocom games are believed to be still held by Activision. Dungeon, the mainframe precursor to the commercial Zork trilogy, is generally assumed to be in the public domain and is available from The Interactive Fiction Archive as original FORTRAN source code, a Z-machine story file and as various native source ports. Many Infocom titles can be downloaded via the Internet, but only in violation of the copyright. There are currently at least four Infocom sampler and demos available from the IF Archive as Z-machine story files which require a Z-machine interpreter to play. Interpreters are available for most computer platforms, the most widely used being the Frotz, Zip, and Nitfol interpreters.

Five games (Zork I, Planetfall, The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, Wishbringer and Leather Goddesses of Phobos) were re-released in Solid Gold format. The Solid Gold versions of those games include a built-in InvisiClues hint system.

Zork made a cameo appearance as an easter egg in Activision and Treyarch's . It can be accessed during the main menu and runs much like a DOS program.

==See also==
* 69,105, a number commonly found as an in-joke in many Infocom titles.

==Footnotes==

==References==
* 

==External links==

===Articles about Infocom===
* Infocom company profile from MobyGames
* Interactive Text In An Animated Age: Infocom Faces The Challenge article, an interview with Joel Berez and Marc Blank from Compute! magazine in January 1988.
* Milliways: Infocom's Unreleased Sequel to Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy
* Infocom Novels

===Detailed Infocom & game information===
* Infocom-The Master Storytellers Infocom history, authors, etc.; often updated with any news from Activision
* INFOCOM, Imagination sold and serviced here; Homepage by Peter Scheyen An enthusiast's home page, containing, among many other resources, a timeline of Infocom's founding, releases and eventual dissolution.
* Down From the Top of Its Game: The Story of Infocom, Inc.A report from MIT which offers a very detailed examination of Infocom's creative successes and marketing failures.

===Game details===
* Infocom Documentation Project - Group working with Activision's permission to recreate manuals for Infocom games in PDF and text formats.
* The Infocom Gallery with photos of all game boxes, feelies, instruction manuals and extra game contents.
* The Gallery of Zork an updated version of the Infocom Gallery with higher-resolution photos, more material, such as more photos of earlier packaging, and online playable versions of the Infocom games.
* Covers of the Infocom boxes from Retrology: Gregor's retro-video games website
* Reviews and ratings of Infocom's games at the Interactive Fiction Database, The web's most active Interactive Fiction community.
* Infocom Fact-sheet Contains extensive information on various releases including different versions and packaging. Also includes a timeline of Infocom.
* The Infocom Project High-quality scans of game boxes and contents.

 



[[Interactive fiction]]

Interactive fiction, often abbreviated IF, is software simulating environments in which players use text commands to control characters and influence the environment. Works in this form can be understood as literary narratives and as video games. Montfort, Nick & Urbano, Paulo (Tr.). A quarta Era da Fico Interactiva. Nada, Volume 8. October 2006. In common usage, the term refers to text adventures, a type of adventure game where the entire interface can be "text-only". Graphical text adventure games, where the text is accompanied by graphics (still images, animations or video) still fall under the text adventure category if the main way to interact with the game is text. Some users of the term distinguish between "interactive fiction" that focuses on narrative and "text adventures" that focus on puzzles. Meanwhile, more expansive definitions of "interactive fiction" may include all adventure games, including wholly graphical adventures such as Myst.

As a commercial product, interactive fiction reached its peak in popularity from 1979 to 1986, as a dominant software product marketed for home computers. Due to their text-only nature, they sidestepped the problem of writing for widely divergent graphics architectures. This meant that interactive fiction games were easily ported across all the popular platforms, even those such as CP/M (not known for gaming or strong graphics capabilities). Today, a steady stream of new works is produced by an online interactive fiction community, using freely available development systems.

The term can also be used to refer to literary works that are not read in a linear fashion, known as gamebooks, where the reader is instead given choices at different points in the text; these decisions determine the flow and outcome of the story. The most famous example of this form of interactive fiction is the Choose Your Own Adventure book series, and the collaborative "" format has also been described as a form of interactive fiction. Soultanis, Greg. Mullin, Eileen, ed. XYZZY News - The Magazine for Interactive Fiction Enthusiasts. Issue #4. July/August 1995. 

Interactive fiction is sometimes used as a synonym for visual novel, a popular style of PC game in Japan. 

==Medium==
Zork I is one of the first interactive fiction games, as well as being one of the first commercially sold. It is one of the most famous interactive fiction games. Here it is portrayed running on Gargoyle, a modern interpreter.
Text adventures are one of the oldest types of computer games and form a subset of the adventure genre. The player uses text input to control the game, and the game state is relayed to the player via text output.

Input is usually provided by the player in the form of simple sentences such as "get key" or "go east", which are interpreted by a text parser. Parsers may vary in sophistication; the first text adventure parsers could only handle two-word sentences in the form of verb-noun pairs. Later parsers, such as those built on Infocom's ZIL (Zork Implementation Language), could understand complete sentences. DeMaria, Rusel and Wilson, Johnny L. (2002) High Score!: The Illustrated History of Electronic Games McGraw-Hill/Osborne, Berkeley, Calif., p. 52, ISBN 0-07-222428-2 Later parsers could handle increasing levels of complexity parsing sentences such as "open the red box with the green key then go north". This level of complexity is the standard for works of interactive fiction today.

Despite their lack of graphics, text adventures include a physical dimension where players move between rooms. Many text adventure games boasted their total number of rooms to indicate how much gameplay they offered. These games are unique in that they may create an illogical space, where going north from area A takes you to area B, but going south from area B did not take you back to area A. This can create mazes that do not behave as players expect, and thus players must maintain their own map. These illogical spaces are much more rare in today's era of 3D gaming, and the Interactive Fiction community in general decries the use of mazes entirely, claiming that mazes have become arbitrary 'puzzles for the sake of puzzles' and that they can, in the hands of inexperienced designers, become immensely frustrating for players to navigate.

Interactive fiction shares much in common with Multi-User Dungeons ('MUDs'). MUDs, which became popular in the mid-1980s, rely on a textual exchange and accept similar commands from players as do works of IF; however, since interactive fiction is single player, and MUDs, by definition, have multiple players, they differ enormously in gameplay styles. MUDs often focus gameplay on activities that involve communities of players, simulated political systems, in-game trading, and other gameplay mechanics that aren't possible in a single player environment.

Interactive fiction usually relies on reading from a screen and on typing input, although text-to-speech synthesizers allow blind and visually impaired users to play interactive fiction titles as audio games. 

===Writing style===
Interactive fiction features two distinct modes of writing: the player input and the game output.

As described above, player input is expected to be in simple command form (imperative sentences). A typical command may be:
pull lever

The responses from the game are usually written from a second-person point of view, in present tense. This is because, unlike in most works of fiction, the main character is closely associated with the player, and the events are seen to be happening as the player plays. While older text adventures often identified the protagonist with the player directly, newer games tend to have specific, well-defined protagonists with separate identities from the player. The classic essay "Crimes Against Mimesis" This is a reformatted version of a set of articles originally posted to Usenet:

 discusses, among other IF issues, the nature of "You" in interactive fiction.

A typical response might look something like this, the response to "look in tea chest" at the start of Curses:

That was the first place you tried, hours and hours ago now, and there's nothing there but that boring old book. You pick it up anyway, bored as you are. Nelson, Graham Curses, 1993. 

Many text adventures, particularly those designed for humour (such as Zork, The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, and Leather Goddesses of Phobos), address the player with an informal tone, sometimes including sarcastic remarks (see the transcript from Curses, above, for an example). The late Douglas Adams, in designing the IF version of his 'Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy', created a unique solution to the final puzzle of the game: the game requires the one solitary item that the player didn't choose at the outset of play.

Some IF works dispense with second-person narrative entirely, opting for a first-person perspective ('I') or even placing the player in the position of an observer, rather than a direct participant. In some 'experimental' IF, the concept of self-identification is eliminated entirely, and the player instead takes the role of an inanimate object, a force of nature, or an abstract concept; experimental IF usually pushes the limits of the concept and challenges many assumptions about the medium.

==History==

===Adventure===
Around 1975, Will Crowther, a programmer and an amateur caver, wrote the first text adventure game, Adventure (originally called ADVENT because a filename could only be six characters long in the operating system he was using, and later named Colossal Cave). Having just gone through a divorce, he was looking for a way to connect with his two young children. Over the course of a few weekends, he wrote a text based cave exploration game that featured a sort of guide/narrator who talked in full sentences and who understood simple two word commands that came close to natural English. Adventure was programmed in Fortran for the PDP-10. Stanford University graduate student Don Woods discovered Adventure while working at the Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, and in 1977 obtained and expanded Crowther's source code (with Crowther's permission). Crowther's original version was an accurate simulation of part of the real Colossal Cave, but also included fantasy elements (such as axe-wielding dwarves and a magic bridge); Woods's changes were reminiscent of the writings of J.R.R. Tolkien, and included a troll, elves, and a volcano some claim is based on Mount Doom, but Woods says was not. "Even the description of the volcano, which some writers have claimed was modelled after Mount Doom, was written with no particular vision in mind." 
 

In early 1977, Adventure spread across ARPAnet, "In early 1977, Adventure swept the ARPAnet." and has survived on the Internet to this day. The game has since been ported to many other operating systems, and was included with the floppy-disk distribution of Microsoft's MS-DOS 5.0 OS. Adventure is a cornerstone of the online IF community; there currently exist dozens of different independently-programmed versions, with additional elements, such as new rooms or puzzles, and various scoring systems.

The popularity of Adventure led to the wide success of interactive fiction during the late 1970s and the 1980s, when home computers had little, if any, graphics capability. Many elements of the original game have survived into the present, such as the command 'xyzzy', which is now included as an Easter Egg in games such as Minesweeper.

Adventure was also directly responsible for the founding of Sierra Online (later Sierra Entertainment); Ken and Roberta Williams played the game when it first appeared, and when unable to find any other games of similar quality, decided to design one of their own. 

===Commercial era===

====Adventure International====
Adventure International was founded by Scott Adams (not to be confused with the creator of Dilbert).

In 1978, Adams wrote Adventureland, which was loosely patterned after the original Advent. He took out a small ad in a computer magazine in order to promote and sell Adventureland, thus creating the first commercial adventure game. In 1979 he founded Adventure International, the first commercial publisher of interactive fiction. The company went bankrupt in 1985.

====Infocom====
The largest company producing works of interactive fiction was Infocom, which created the Zork series and many other titles, among them Trinity, The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy and A Mind Forever Voyaging.

In June 1977, Marc Blank, Bruce K. Daniels, Tim Anderson, and Dave Lebling began writing the mainframe version of Zork (also known as Dungeon), at the MIT Laboratory for Computer Science. The game was programmed in a computer language called MDL, a variant of LISP. In early 1979, the game was completed. Ten members of the MIT Dynamics Modelling Group went on to join Infocom when it was incorporated later that year.

In order to make its games as portable as possible, Infocom developed the Z-machine, a custom virtual machine which could be implemented on a large number of platforms, and which took standardized "story files" as input.

The Infocom parser was widely regarded as the best of its era. It accepted complex, complete sentence commands like "put the blue book on the writing desk" at a time when most of its competitors parsers were restricted to simple two word verb-noun combinations such as "put book". The parser was actively upgraded with new features like undo and error correction, and later games would 'understand' multiple sentence input: 'pick up the gem and put it in my bag. take the newspaper clipping out of my bag then burn it with the book of matches'.

In a non-technical sense, Infocom was responsible for developing the interactive style that would be emulated by many later interpreters.

The company was bought by Activision in 1986 after the failure of Cornerstone, Infocom's database software program, and stopped producing text adventures a few years later.

In 1991 and 1992, Activision released volumes one and two of The Lost Treasures of Infocom, a collection containing most of Infocom's games, followed in 1996 by Classic Text Adventure Masterpieces of Infocom.

====Legend Entertainment====
Legend Entertainment was founded by Bob Bates and Mike Verdu in 1989. It started out from the ashes of Infocom.

The text adventures produced by Legend used (high-resolution) graphics as well as sound. Some of their titles include Eric the Unready, the Spellcasting series and Gateway (based on Frederik Pohl's novels).

The last text adventure created by Legend was Gateway II, while the last game ever was Unreal 2 (the well-known first-person shooter action game). Legend was acquired in 2004 by Atari.

====Other companies====
Probably the first commercial work of interactive fiction produced outside the U.S. was the dungeon crawl game of Acheton, produced in Cambridge, England, and first commercially released by Acornsoft (later expanded and reissued by Topologika). Other leading companies in the U.K. were Magnetic Scrolls and Level 9 Computing. Also worthy of mention are Delta 4, Melbourne House, and the homebrew company Zenobi.

In the early 1980s Edu-Ware also produced interactive fiction for the Apple II as designated by the "if" graphic that was displayed on startup. Their titles included the Prisoner and Empire series (Empire I: World Builders, Empire II: Interstellar Sharks, Empire III: Armageddon).

In 1981, CE Software published SwordThrust as a commercial successor to the Eamon gaming system for the Apple II. SwordThrust and Eamon were simple two-word parser games with many role-playing elements not available in other interactive fiction. 
While SwordThrust published seven different titles, it was vastly overshadowed by the non-commercial Eamon system which allowed private authors to publish their own titles in the series. By March 1984, there were 48 titles published for the Eamon system, and over 270 titles in total as of March 2013.

In Italy, interactive fiction games were mainly published and distributed through various magazines in included tapes. The largest number of games were published in the two magazines Viking and Explorer, with versions for the main 8-bit home computers (Sinclair ZX Spectrum, Commodore 64 and MSX). The software house producing those games was Brainstorm Enterprise, and the most prolific IF author was Bonaventura Di Bello, who produced 70 games in the Italian language. The wave of interactive fiction in Italy lasted for a couple of years thanks to the various magazines promoting the genre, then faded and remains still today a topic of interest for a small group of fans and less known developers, celebrated on Web sites and in related newsgroups.

In Spain, interactive fiction was considered a minority genre, and was not very much successful. The first Spanish interactive fiction commercially released was Yenght in 1983, by Dinamic Software, for the ZX Spectrum. Later on, it was in 1987, when the same company produced an interactive fiction about Don Quijote. After several other attempts, a company emerged from Dinamic, called Aventuras AD which was the main interactive fiction publisher in Spain, including titles like a Spanish adaptation of Colossal Cave Adventure, an adaptation of the Spanish comic El Jabato, and mainly the Ci-U-Than trilogy, composed by La diosa de Cozumel (1990), Los templos sagrados (1991) and Chichen-Itz (1992). During this period, the Club de Aventuras AD (CAAD), the main Spanish speaking community around interactive fiction in the world, was founded, and after the end of Aventuras AD in 1992, the CAAD continued on its own, first with their own magazine, and then with the advent of Internet, with the launch of an active internet community that still produces interactive non commercial fiction nowadays. 

===Modern era===
After the decline of the commercial interactive fiction market in the 1990s, an online community eventually formed around the medium. In 1987, the Usenet newsgroup rec.arts.int-fiction was created, and was soon followed by rec.games.int-fiction. By custom, the topic of rec.arts.int-fiction is interactive fiction authorship and programming, while rec.games.int-fiction encompasses topics related to playing interactive fiction games, such as hint requests and game reviews. As of late 2011, discussions between writers have mostly moved from rec.arts.int-fiction to the Interactive Fiction Community Forum. intfiction.org  Index page 

One of the most important early developments was the reverse-engineering of Infocom's Z-Code format and Z-Machine virtual machine in 1987 by a group of enthusiasts called the InfoTaskForce and the subsequent development of an interpreter for Z-Code story files. As a result, it became possible to play Infocom's work on modern computers.

For years amateurs formed a small community producing interactive fiction works of relatively limited scope using the Adventure Game Toolkit and similar tools. The breakthrough that allowed the interactive fiction community to truly prosper, however, was the creation and distribution of two sophisticated development systems. In 1987, Michael J. Roberts released TADS, a programming language designed to produce works of interactive fiction. In 1993, Graham Nelson released Inform, a programming language and set of libraries which compiled to a Z-Code story file. Each of these systems allowed anyone with sufficient time and dedication to create a game, and caused a growth boom in the online interactive fiction community.

Despite the lack of commercial support, the availability of high quality tools allowed enthusiasts of the genre to develop new high quality games. Competitions such as the annual Interactive Fiction Competition for short works, the newer Spring Thing for longer works, and the XYZZY Awards, further helped to improve the quality and complexity of the games. Modern games go much further than the original "Adventure" style, improving upon Infocom games, which relied extensively on puzzle solving, and to a lesser extent on communication with non player characters, to include experimentation with writing and story-telling techniques.

While the majority of modern interactive fiction developed is distributed for free, there are some commercial endeavors, including Peter Nepstad's , several games by Howard Sherman published as Malinche Entertainment, The General Coffee Company's Future Boy!, Cypher, a graphically enhanced cyberpunk game and various titles by Textfyre. Emily Short was commissioned to develop the game City of Secrets but the project fell through and she ended up releasing it herself. 

Some authors offer optional commercial feelies (physical props associated with a game); the tradition of 'Feelies' (and the term itself) is believed to have originated with Deadline (1982), the third Infocom title after Zork I and II. Seeing the dual potential benefits of both aiding game-play immersion and providing a measure of creative copy-protection, Infocom and later other companies began creating feelies for numerous titles. In 1987, Infocom released a special version of the first three Zork titles together with plot-specific coins and other trinkets. This concept would see expansion as time went on, such that later game feelies would contain passwords, coded instructions, page numbers, or other information that would be required to successfully complete the game.

==Other uses==

The term "Interactive Fiction" is sometimes used to describe other forms of storytelling and games, including visual novels, interactive novels, and interactive storytelling.

===Visual novel===

Visual novels are interactive fiction featuring mostly static graphics, usually with anime-style art. As the name might suggest, they resemble mixed-media novels or tableau vivant stage plays. Visual novels are especially prevalent in Japan, where they make up nearly 70% of PC games released. They are rarely produced for video game consoles, but the more popular games are sometimes ported to video game systems such as the PlayStation 2. The market for visual novels outside of East Asia, however, is limited.

Visual novels have been a staple of PC software sales in Japan and other East Asian countries for over a decade, so much so that popular titles are open ported to consoles, and some even have famous manga and anime series based upon them; such titles include Kanon (1999), Air (2000) and Clannad (2004) by Key; Rumbling Hearts (2001) by Age; School Days (2005) by 0verflow; Higurashi no Naku Koro ni (2002) by 07th Expansion; and Fate/stay night (2004) by Type-Moon.

===Interactive novel===

The interactive novel is a form of web fiction and interactive fiction. While authors of requirements: Paper and print|traditional paper-and-ink novel]s have sometimes tried to give readers the random directionality offered by true hypertexting, this approach was not completely feasible until the development of HTML. Paper novels (indeed, some digital novels) are linear, that is, read from page to page in a straight line. Interactive novels, however, offer readers a unique way to read fiction by choosing a page, a character, or a direction. By following hyperlinked phrases within the novel, readers can find new ways to understand characters. There is no wrong way to read a hypertext interactive novel. Links embedded within the pages are meant to be taken at a reader's discretion  to allow the reader a choice in the novel's world.

As interactive fiction becomes more accessible via reading apps like Kindle Fire, Coliloquy Lets Readers Interact with Kindle Books digital publishing houses like "Coliloquy" have emerged.

===Interactive storytelling===

Interactive storytelling is a developing kind of computer entertainment. The term was coined by Chris Crawford, a main proponent and developer. He defines interactive storytelling as, "a form of interactive entertainment in which the player plays the role of the protagonist in a dramatically rich environment." Crawford, Chris (2004) Chris Crawford on Interactive Storytelling. New Riders. 

Interactive storytelling and interactive fiction are distinct in that interactive storytelling focuses on drama and dynamic circumstances, where interactive fiction games, traditionally (but not necessarily) focus on puzzle-solving and navigating through pre-conceived circumstances. They are similar, however, in that well-written forms of both are nonlinear.

==Notable works==

* Colossal Cave Adventure, by Will Crowther and Don Woods, was the first text adventure ever made. 
* Adventureland, by Scott Adams, is considered one of the defining works of interactive fiction.
* The Zork series by Infocom (1979 onwards) was the first text adventure to see widespread commercial release. Article at The Dot Eaters. 2006. 
* Softporn Adventure, by Chuck Benton, a popular adult game that inspired the Leisure Suit Larry series.
* The Hobbit, by Philip Mitchell and Veronika Megler of Beam Software (1982) was an early reinterpretation of an existing novel into interactive fiction, with several independent non-player characters.
* Planetfall, by Steve Meretzky of Infocom (1983), featured Floyd the robot, which Allen Varney claimed to be the first game character who evoked a strong emotional commitment from players. 
* Suspended by Michael Berlyn was an Infocom game notable for a large vocabulary and unique character personalities.
* The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, by Douglas Adams and Steve Meretzky of Infocom (1984), was notable in that the author of the original work was involved in the reinterpretation.
* A Mind Forever Voyaging, by Steve Meretzky of Infocom (1985), a story-heavy, puzzle-light game often touted as Infocom's first serious work of science fiction. 
* Leather Goddesses of Phobos by Steve Meretzky, a risqu sci-fi parody from Infocom.
* Amnesia (1987), by Hugo Award and Nebula Award winning science fiction and fantasy author Thomas M. Disch, a purely text-only adventure published by Electronic Arts. 
* Curses, by Graham Nelson (1993), the first game ever written in the Inform programming language. Considered one of the first "modern" games to meet the high standards set by Infocom's best titles. 
* So Far, by Andrew Plotkin (1996), the first XYZZY Award for Best Game winner in 1996. http://www.ifarchive.org/if-archive/magazines/XYZZYnews/award96-winners.txt 
* Anchorhead, by Michael S. Gentry (1998) is a highly rated horror story inspired by H. P. Lovecraft's Cthulhu Mythos. 
* Photopia, by Adam Cadre (1998), one of the first almost entirely puzzle-free games. It won the annual Interactive Fiction Competition in 1998. 
* Spider and Web, by Andrew Plotkin (1998), an award-winning espionage story with many twists and turns. 
* Varicella by Adam Cadre (1999). It won four XYZZY Awards in 1999 including the XYZZY Award for Best Game, and had a scholarly essay written about it. 
* Galatea, by Emily Short (2000). Galatea is focused entirely on interaction with the animated statue of the same name. Galatea has one of the most complex interaction systems for a non-player character in an interactive fiction game. Adam Cadre called Galatea "the best NPC ever". 
* Slouching Towards Bedlam, by Star C. Foster and Daniel Ravipinto (2003). Set in a steampunk setting, the game integrates meta-game functionality (saving, restoring, restarting) into the game world itself. The game won four XYZZY Awards. 
* The Dreamhold, by Andrew Plotkin (2004). Designed for those new to IF, it provides an extensive help section and tutorials. Although the puzzles are not too difficult, it can be a challenge for both novice and experienced players. http://pr-if.org/play/ 
* Faade by Michael Mateas, Andrew Stern and John Grieve (2005). An interactive drama using natural language processing.

==Software==

===Development systems===
A number of systems for writing interactive fiction exist. Most IF development is now implemented in Inform, TADS, or ADRIFT. In the 2006 IFComp, most games were written for Inform, with a strong minority of games for TADS and ADRIFT, followed by a smattering of games for other systems. 

While familiarity with a programming language leads many new authors to attempt to produce their own complete IF application, most established IF authors recommend use of a specialised IF language, arguing that such systems allow authors to avoid the technicalities of producing a full featured parser, while allowing broad community support. The choice of authoring system usually depends on the author's desired balance of ease of use versus power, and the portability of the final product. 

Other development systems include:
* ALAN
* Hugo
* JACL
* SUDS
* Gilsoft's The Quill and the Professional Adventure Writer
* Incentive Software's Graphic Adventure Creator (GAC)
* David Malmberg's Adventure Game Toolkit (AGT)
* Twine and twee, for web-based games
* Quest
* InfiniQuest
* Trogdor-pp, a text adventure engine with planned support for online MUDing

===Interpreters===
Interpreters are the software used to play the works of interactive fiction created with a development system. They may be part of the development system, or can be compiled together with the work of fiction as a standalone executable file. Interpreters distributed separately include:
* Frotz (Z-machine; available on desktop computing platforms and iOS)
* Gargoyle (a package of several interpreters: Agility, Alan 2 and 3, Frotz, Glulxe, Hugo, Level 9, Magnetic, Scare, TADS 2 and 3; available on desktop computing platforms)
* Text Fiction (Z-machine; available for Android)

==Distribution==
In addition to commercial distribution venues and individual websites, many works of free interactive fiction are distributed through community websites. These include the Interactive Fiction Database (IFDB), a game catalog and recommendation engine, and the Interactive Fiction Archive.

Works may be distributed for playing in a web browser or in a separate interpreter. In the latter case they are often made available in the Blorb package format that many interpreters support.

==See also==
* Hypertext fiction
* Roleplaying Games, which are occasionally described as another form of interactive fiction.
* Visual novel, interactive fiction with graphics.
* Multi-User Dungeon (MUD), which may be considered as a kind of multiplayer or collaborative interactive fiction.
* 
* Gamebook
* Graphic adventures, adventure games with roots in interactive fiction.
* Interactive storytelling
* Get Lamp, a documentary about interactive fiction

==Notes==

==Further reading==
* 
* Keller, Daniel. "Reading and playing: what makes interactive fiction unique" p. 276-298. in Williams, J. P., & Smith, J. H. (2007). The players' realm: studies on the culture of video games and gaming. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland & Co. ISBN 978-0-7864-2832-8
* Seegert, Alf. (2009), "'Doing there' vs. 'being there': performing presence in interactive fiction", Journal of Gaming and Virtual Worlds 1: 1, pp. 2337, 

==External links==
* Baf's Guide to the Interactive Fiction Archive, a more user-friendly interface for the IF archive.
* A Brief History of Interactive Fiction, a timeline of events in interactive fiction history at the Brass Lantern website.
* IFReviews Organization, huge repository for text adventure game reviews written and rated by Interactive Fiction community players and members.
* The Interactive Fiction Archive, a large archive of free-to-download and play interactive fiction (random mirror).
* Interactive Fiction Database (IFDB), a community site where one can find personalized recommendations for IF games to play.
* Interactive Fiction: More Than Retro Fun, a beginner's introduction and setup guide to Interactive Fiction games and interpreters
* The Interactive Fiction Wiki, a MediaWiki wiki specific to Interactive Fiction.
* Parchment, a z-machine interpreter written in javascript and playable in any browser. Links to many playable games.
* Something about Interactive Fiction - MobyGames examines the history (and future) of this gaming genre.
* SPAG, a quarterly e-zine discussing all things IF
* 
* Web-adventures, an online z-machine interpreter

 


[[Ice hockey]]

Ice hockey is a team sport played on ice in which two teams of skaters use sticks to shoot a hard rubber hockey puck into their opponent's net to score points. In some countries, such as Canada, the United States and some European countries, such as Finland, Latvia and Sweden, it is known simply as "hockey"; the name "ice hockey" is used in countries where "hockey" generally refers to field hockey (such as South American, Asian, Australasian and some European countries). Ice hockey teams usually consists of four lines of three forwards, three pairs of defencemen, and two goalies. Five members of each team skate up and down the ice trying to take the puck and score a goal against the opposing team. Each team has a goaltender who tries to stop the puck from going into the goal.

A fast-paced physical sport, hockey is most popular in areas of North America (particularly Canada and northern parts of the United States) and Europe. In North America, the National Hockey League (NHL) is the highest level for men's hockey and the most popular. Ice hockey is the official national winter sport of Canada, National Sports of Canada Act where the game enjoys immense popularity. Worldwide, there are ice hockey federations in 73 countries. 

The sport is believed to be an off-shoot of stick and ball games invented elsewhere, particularly the games of the 1700s and 1800s in the United Kingdom. These games were brought to Canada and the United States and several similar winter games, such as "shinney" and "ice polo" using informal rules, developed. The first recognized recorded game resembling modern ice hockey was played indoors on March 3, 1875, in Montreal, and several characteristics of that game such as the length of playing time, the length of the ice rink, the use of a puck and the dimensions of the goal have been retained to this day. Amateur ice hockey leagues began in the 1880s, and professional ice hockey originated around 1900. The Stanley Cup, emblematic of ice hockey club supremacy, was first awarded in 1893 to recognize the Canadian amateur champion and later became the championship trophy of the NHL. In the early 1900s, the Canadian rules were adopted by the Ligue International de Hockey sur Glace, the precursor of today's International Ice Hockey Federation (IIHF) and the sport was played for the first time in the Olympics in the Olympic Games of 1920.

In international competitions, the national teams of seven countries predominate: Canada, the Czech Republic, Finland, Russia, Slovakia, Sweden and the United States. Of the 66 medals awarded all-time in men's competition at the Olympics, only six medals were not awarded to one of those countries. In the annual Ice Hockey World Championships, 162 of 177 medals have been awarded to the seven nations: Including former incarnations of them, such as Czechoslovakia or the Soviet Union. All 12 Olympic and 36 IIHF World Women's Championships medals have been awarded to one of these seven countries, and every gold medal in both competitions has been won by either Canada or the United States. 

==History==
alt=Many people on the ice, doing different things.
Bat-and-ball games date back to pre-Christian times. In Europe, these games included the Irish game of hurling, the closely related Scottish game of shinty and versions of field hockey (including "bandie ball," played in England). IJscolf, a game resembling colf on an ice-covered surface, was popular in the Low Countries between the Middle Ages and the Dutch Golden Age. It was played with a wooden curved bat (called a colf or kolf), a wooden or leather ball and two poles (or nearby landmarks), with the objective to hit the chosen point using the least number of strokes. A similar game (knattleikr) had been played for a thousand years or more by the Norse, as documented in the Icelandic sagas. In England, evidence of games of 'hockey on ice' (the name replaced "bandie ball"), played with a "bung" (a plug of cork or oak used as a stopper on a barrel) date back to the 1700s. William Pierre Le Cocq stated, in a 1799 letter written in Chesham, England:I must now describe to you the game of Hockey; we have each a stick turning up at the end. We get a bung. There are two sides one of them knocks one way and the other side the other way. If any one of the sides makes the bung reach that end of the churchyard it is victorious. An 1797 engraving unearthed by Swedish sport historians Carl Giden and Patrick Houda shows a person on skates with a stick and bung on the River Thames, probably in December 1796. 

British soldiers and immigrants to Canada and the United States brought their stick-and-ball games with them and played them on the ice and snow of winter. In 1825, John Franklin wrote "The game of hockey played on the ice was the morning sport" on Great Bear Lake during one of his Arctic expeditions. A mid-1830s watercolour portrays New Brunswick lieutenant governor Archibald Campbell and his family with British soldiers on skates playing a stick-on-ice sport. Captain R.G.A. Levinge, a British Army officer in New Brunswick during Campbells time, wrote about "hockey on ice" on Chippewa Creek (a tributary of the Niagara River) in 1839. In 1843 another British Army officer in Kingston, Ontario wrote, "Began to skate this year, improved quickly and had great fun at hockey on the ice." An 1859 Boston Evening Gazette article referred to an early game of hockey on ice in Halifax that year. An 1835 painting by John O'Toole depicts skaters with sticks and bung on a frozen stream in the American state of West Virginia. 

In the same era, the Mi'kmaq people, a First Nations people of Nova Scotia, also had a stick-and-ball game. Canadian oral histories describe a traditional stick-and-ball game played by the Mi'kmaq in eastern Canada, and Silas Tertius Rand (in his 1894 Legends of the Micmacs) describes a Mi'kmaq ball game known as tooadijik. Rand also describes a game played (probably after European contact) with hurleys, known as wolchamaadijik. Dalhousie University (2000). Thomas Raddall Selected Correspondence: An Electronic Edition. Print source: Thomas Raddall Fonds, Correspondence. From Thomas Raddall to Douglas M. Fisher, January 25, 1954. MS-2-202 41.14. Retrieved on May 10, 2009. Sticks made by the Mi'kmaq were used by the British for their games.

alt=Cartoon drawing of hockey game and people falling through the ice

Early 19th-century paintings depict shinney (or "shinny"), an early form of hockey with no standard rules which was played in Nova Scotia. Many of these early games absorbed the physical aggression of what the Mi'kmaq in Nova Scotia called dehuntshigwa'es (lacrosse). Shinney was played on the St. Lawrence River at Montreal and Quebec City, and in Kingston and Ottawa, Ontario. The number of players was often large. To this day, shinney (derived from "shinty") is a popular Canadian term for an informal type of hockey, either ice or street hockey.

Thomas Chandler Haliburton, in The Attache: Second Series (published in 1844), reminisced about boys from King's College School in Windsor, Nova Scotia playing "hurly on the long pond on the ice" when he was a student there in 1810 and earlier. Based on Haliburton's account, there have been claims that modern hockey was invented in Windsor, Nova Scotia, by King's College students and named after an individual (Colonel Hockey's game). Others claim that the origins of hockey come from games played in the area of Dartmouth and Halifax in Nova Scotia.

===Name===
The name "hockey" has no clear origin, although its first known mention in English dates to 1363. King Edward III of England issued a proclamation banning a number of games: "moreover we ordain that you prohibit under penalty of imprisonment all and sundry from such stone, wood and iron throwing; handball, football, or hockey; coursing and cock-fighting, or other such idle games." 

According to the Austin Hockey Association, the word "puck" derives from the Scots Gaelic puc or the Irish poc (to poke, punch or deliver a blow). "...The blow given by a hurler to the ball with his caman or hurley is always called a puck." 

===Modern ice hockey===
The early Quebec Skating Rink, representative of early rinks
alt=Photograph of outdoor hockey game
While the game's origins lie elsewhere, Montreal is at the centre of the development of the sport of contemporary ice hockey. On March 3, 1875, the first organized indoor game was played at Montreal's Victoria Skating Rink between two nine-player teams, including James Creighton and several McGill University students. Instead of a ball or bung, the game featured a puck (to keep it in the rinkwhich had boardsand to protect referees). The goal posts were 6 ft apart, and the game lasted 60 minutes. The goals today are six feet wide as well.

In 1877 several McGill students (including Creighton, Henry Joseph, Richard F. Smith, W. F. Robertson, and W. L. Murray) codified seven ice hockey rules, based on those for field hockey. The McGill University Hockey Club, the first hockey club, was founded in 1877 (followed by the Montreal Victorias, organized in 1881).

The game became so popular that the first "world championship" of ice hockey was featured in Montreal's annual Winter Carnival in 1883; the McGill team captured the "Carnival Cup." The trophy for this tournament is on display at the Musee McCord Museum in Montreal. A picture of this trophy can be seen at The number of players per side was reduced to seven, and the game divided into thirty-minute halves. The positions were now named: left and right wing, centre, rover, point, cover point and goalkeeper. In 1885, the Montreal City Hockey League was established. The article is called "Creation & Foundation of Modern Hockey," at http://www.hockey-information.com/hockey-history.html In 1886 the teams competing at the Winter Carnival organized the Amateur Hockey Association of Canada (AHAC), and played a season comprising "challenges" to the existing champion. 

alt=Trophy bowl and base in glass case
In Europe, it is believed that in 1885 the Oxford University Ice Hockey Club was formed to play the first Ice Hockey Varsity Match against traditional rival Cambridge in St. Moritz, Switzerland; however, this is undocumented. The match was won by the Oxford Dark Blues, 60; Cambridge Evening News, "Sporting Heritage is Found," July 26, 2003. the first photographs and team lists date from 1895. This rivalry continues, claiming to be the oldest hockey rivalry in history; a similar claim is made about the rivalry between Queen's University and Royal Military College of Kingston, Ontario, Canada. Since 1986, considered the 100th anniversary of the rivalry, teams of the two colleges play for the Carr-Harris Cup. 

In 1888 the Governor General of Canada, Lord Stanley of Preston (whose sons and daughter were hockey enthusiasts), attended the Montreal Winter Carnival tournament and was impressed with the game. In 1892, realizing that there was no recognition for the best team in Canada (although a number of leagues had championship trophies), he purchased a decorative bowl for use as a trophy. The Dominion Hockey Challenge Cup (which later became known as the Stanley Cup) was first awarded in 1893 to the Montreal Hockey Club, champions of the AHAC; it continues to be awarded annually to the National Hockey League's championship team. Stanley's son Arthur helped organize the Ontario Hockey Association, and Stanley's daughter Isobel was one of the first women to play ice hockey.

By 1893, there were almost a hundred teams in Montreal alone; in addition, there were leagues throughout Canada. Winnipeg hockey players used cricket pads to better protect the goaltender's legs; they also introduced the "scoop" shot, later known as the wrist shot. Goal nets became a standard feature of the Canadian Amateur Hockey League (CAHL) in 1900. Left and right defence began to replace the point and cover-point positions in the OHA in 1906.

alt=Team in uniform, wearing horizontally striped sweaters
Ice hockey was not the only game on ice derived from stick-and-ball games played in Europe; during this period bandie ball was adapted to the ice, evolving into bandy (which remains popular in Sweden, Russia, Finland and Norway). "Ice polo", played with a ball rather than a puck, was popular in the United States during this period; however, by 1893 the first ice hockey matches were played at Yale and Johns Hopkins University. Ice polo (played in New England) would die out as Americans adopted ice hockey. In 1896, the first ice hockey league in the U.S. was formed. The U.S. Amateur Hockey League was founded in New York City, shortly after the opening of the artificial-ice St. Nicholas Rink.

Lord Stanley's five sons were instrumental in bringing ice hockey to Europe, defeating a court team (which included the future Edward VII and George V) at Buckingham Palace in 1895. By 1903, a five-team league had been founded. The Ligue Internationale de Hockey sur Glace was founded in 1908 to govern international competition, and the first European championship was won by Great Britain in 1910. During the mid-20th century, the Ligue became the International Ice Hockey Federation. 

Matthews Arena in Boston, in use since 1910
As the popularity of ice hockey as a spectator sport grew, earlier rinks were replaced by larger rinks. Most of the early indoor ice rinks have been demolished; Montreal's Victoria Rink, built in 1862, was demolished in 1925. Many older rinks succumbed to fire, such as Denman Arena, Dey's Arena, Quebec Skating Rink and Montreal Arena, a hazard of the buildings' wood construction. The Stannus Street Rink in Windsor, Nova Scotia (built in 1897) may be the oldest still in existence; however, it is no longer used for ice hockey. The Aberdeen Pavilion (built in 1898) in Ottawa was used for ice hockey in 1904 and is the oldest existing facility that has hosted Stanley Cup games.

The oldest indoor ice hockey arena still in use today for ice hockey is Boston's Matthews Arena, which was built in 1910. It has been modified extensively several times in its history and is used today by Northeastern University for ice hockey and other sports. It was the original home rink of the Boston Bruins professional team. The Madison Square Garden in New York City, built in 1968, is the oldest continuously-operating arena in the NHL (National Hockey League). 

===Professional era===
alt=A young Lester Pearson waiting for a pass in an outdoor game

Professional hockey has existed since the early 20th century. By 1902, the Western Pennsylvania Hockey League was the first to employ professionals. The league joined with teams in Michigan and Ontario to form the first fully professional leaguethe International Professional Hockey League (IPHL)in 1904. The WPHL and IPHL hired players from Canada; in response, Canadian leagues began to pay players (who played with amateurs). The IPHL, cut off from its largest source of players, disbanded in 1907. By then, several professional hockey leagues were operating in Canada (with leagues in Manitoba, Ontario and Quebec).

In 1910, the National Hockey Association (NHA) was formed in Montreal. The NHA would further refine the rules: dropping the rover position, dividing the game into three 20-minute periods and introducing minor and major penalties. After re-organizing as the National Hockey League (NHL) in 1917, the league expanded into the United States, starting with the Boston Bruins in 1924.

Professional hockey leagues developed later in Europe, since bandy was still popular, but amateur leagues leading to national championships were in place. One of the first was the Swiss National League A, founded in 1916. Today, professional leagues have been introduced in most countries of Europe. Top European leagues include the Kontinental Hockey League, the Czech Extraliga, the Finnish Liiga and the Swedish Hockey League.

==Equipment==
Goaltenders use more protective equipment than other players.

Since ice hockey is a full contact sport and body checks are allowed, injuries are a common occurrence. Protective equipment is mandatory and is enforced in all competitive situations. This includes a helmet (cage worn if certain age), shoulder pads, elbow pads, mouth guard, protective gloves, heavily padded shorts (also known as hockey pants) or a girdle, athletic cup (also known as a jock, for males; and jill, for females), shin pads, skates, and (optionally) a neck protector. In addition, goaltenders use different gear, a neck guard, chest/arm protector, blocker, catch glove, and leg pads.

One important piece of equipment is the ice skate itself. Hockey skates are optimized for several factors, some of which increase the effort needed to achieve the highest skating speeds (see Racing Skates). Hockey skates are optimized for physical acceleration (maneuverability). This includes rapid starts, stops, turns, and changes in skating direction. In addition they must be rigid and tough to protect the skater's feet from contact with other skaters, sticks, pucks, the boards, and the ice itself. Rigidity also improves the overall maneuverability of the skate. Blade length, thickness (width), and curvature (rocker/radius (front to back) and radius of hollow (across the blade width) are quite different from speed or figure skates. Hockey players usually adjust these parameters based on their
skill level, position, and body type.

Another important piece of equipment is the stick itself. It consists of long, relatively wide, and slightly curved flat blade, attached to a shaft. The curve itself has a big impact on its performance. A deep curve allows for lifting the puck easier while a shallow curve allows for easier backhands. The flex of the stick also has impact on the performance. Typically a less flexible stick is meant for a stronger player since the player is looking for the right balanced flex that allows the stick to flex easily while still having a strong "whip-back" which sends the puck flying at high speeds. It is quite distinct from sticks in other sports games and most suited to hitting and controlling the flat puck. Its unique shape contributed to the early development of the game. The 'Moffat' stick is currently reputed to be the oldest hockey stick in existence. By retracing the stick's ownership through several generations of the Moffatt family, a settler clan that was farming outside of North Sydney (in Nova Scotia) by the early 1800s, Presley compiled considerable archival and other evidence that the object was probably used in early, shinny-like games of "hurley" at a popular skating site called Pottle Lake.
It is typical of the 19th century style of stick used in the Irish game of hurling.

==Injury==
Ice hockey is a full contact sport and carries a high risk of injury. The players are moving at around 30  45 km/h (approximately 20 - 30 mph) and quite a bit of the game revolves around the physical contact between the players. Skate blades, hockey sticks, shoulders, hips, and hockey pucks all contribute. The type of injuries associated with hockey include lacerations, concussions, contusions, ligament tears, broken bones, hyperextensions, and muscle strains.

===Head injuries===
According to the Hughston Health Alert, "Lacerations to the head, scalp, and face are the most frequent types of injury hockey." (Schmidt 6) Even a shallow cut to the head results in a loss of a large amount of blood. Most concussions occur during player to player contact (49%) rather than when a player is checked into the boards (35%). Not only are lacerations common, it is estimated that direct trauma accounts for 80% of all injuries. Most of these injuries are caused by player contact, falls and contact with a puck, high stick and occasionally, a skate blade. (Schmidt 3) One of the causes of head injury is checking from behind. Due to the danger of delivering a check from behind, many leagues, including the NHL have made this a major and game misconduct penalty (called "boarding"). Another type of check that accounts for many of the player to player contact concussions is a check to the head. A check to the head can be defined as delivering a hit while the receiving players head is down and their waist is bent and the aggressor is targeting the receiving player's head. Checks to the head have accounted for nearly 50% of concussions that players in the National Hockey League have suffered. Concussions that players suffer may go unreported because there are no obvious physical signs if a player is not knocked unconscious. This can prove to be dangerous if a player decides to return to play without receiving proper medical attention. In recent years there has been debate over whether or not a check to head should be deemed an acceptable hit in hockey. In March 2011, the NHL instituted a new concussion testing protocol to help improve detection of concussions during gameplay 

==Game==
While the general characteristics of the game are the same wherever it is played, the exact rules depend on the particular code of play being used. The two most important codes are those of the International Ice Hockey Federation (IIHF) and of the Canadian-founded and North American-expanded National Hockey League (NHL). Both codes originated from Canadian rules of ice hockey of the early 20th Century.

Typical layout of an ice hockey rink surface
Ice hockey is played on a hockey rink. During normal play, there are six players per side on the ice at any time, one of them being the goaltender, each of whom is on ice skates. The objective of the game is to score goals by shooting a hard vulcanized rubber disc, the puck, into the opponent's goal net, which is placed at the opposite end of the rink. The players may control the puck using a long stick with a blade that is commonly curved at one end.

Players may also redirect the puck with any part of their bodies, subject to certain restrictions. Players may not hold the puck in their hand and are prohibited from using their hands to pass the puck to their teammates, unless they are in the defensive zone. Players are also prohibited from kicking the puck into the opponent's goal, though unintentional redirections off the skate are permitted. Players may not intentionally bat the puck into the net with their hands.

Hockey is an "offside" game, meaning that forward passes are allowed, unlike in rugby. Before the 1930s hockey was an onside game, meaning that only backward passes were allowed. Those rules favoured individual stick-handling as a key means of driving the puck forward. With the arrival of offside rules, the forward pass transformed hockey into a truly team sport, where individual performance diminished in importance relative to team play, which could now be coordinated over the entire surface of the ice as opposed to merely rearward players.

The five players other than the goaltender are typically divided into three forwards and two defencemen. The forward positions consist of a centre and two wingers: a left wing and a right wing. Forwards often play together as units or lines, with the same three forwards always playing together. The defencemen usually stay together as a pair generally divided between left and right. Left and right side wingers or defencemen are generally positioned as such, based on the side on which they carry their stick. A substitution of an entire unit at once is called a line change. Teams typically employ alternate sets of forward lines and defensive pairings when shorthanded or on a power play. Substitutions are permitted at any time during the course of the game, although during a stoppage of play the home team is permitted the final change. When players are substituted during play, it is called changing on the fly. A new NHL rule added in the 20052006 season prevents a team from changing their line after they ice the puck.

The boards surrounding the ice help keep the puck in play and they can also be used as tools to play the puck. Players are permitted to "bodycheck" opponents into the boards as a means of stopping progress. The referees, linesmen and the outsides of the goal are "in play" and do not cause a stoppage of the game when the puck or players are influenced (by either bouncing or colliding) into them. Play can be stopped if the goal is knocked out of position. Play often proceeds for minutes without interruption. When play is stopped, it is restarted with a faceoff. Two players "face" each other and an official drops the puck to the ice, where the two players attempt to gain control of the puck. Markings on the ice indicate the locations for the "faceoff" and guide the positioning of players.

There are three major rules of play in ice hockey that limit the movement of the puck: offside, icing, and the puck going out of play. A player is "offside" if he enters his opponent's zone before the puck itself. Under many situations, a player may not "ice the puck", shoot the puck all the way across both the centre line and the opponent's goal line. The puck goes "out of play" whenever it goes past the perimeter of the ice rink (onto the player benches, over the "glass," or onto the protective netting above the glass) and a stoppage of play is called by the officials using whistles. It also does not matter if the puck comes back onto the ice surface from those areas as the puck is considered dead once it leaves the perimeter of the rink.

Under IIHF rules, each team may carry a maximum of 20 players and two goaltenders on their roster. NHL rules restrict the total number of players per game to 18, plus two goaltenders. In the NHL, the players are usually divided into four lines of three forwards, and into three pairs of defenceman. On occasion, teams may elect to substitute an extra defenceman for a forward; this seventh defenceman might sometimes play on the fourth line as a forward.

==Penalties==

Altercations often occur near the goal after a stoppage of play, since defensive players are highly concerned with protecting their goaltender.

In ice hockey, infractions of the rules lead to play stoppages whereby the play is restarted at a face off. Some infractions result in the imposition of a penalty to a player or team. In the simplest case, the offending player is sent to the "penalty box" and their team has to play with one fewer player on the ice for a designated period of time. Minor penalties last for two minutes, major penalties last for five minutes, and a double minor penalty is two consecutive penalties of two minutes duration. A single Minor penalty may be extended by a further two minutes for causing visible injury to the victimized player. This is usually when blood is drawn during high sticking. Players may be also assessed personal extended penalties or game expulsions for misconduct in addition to the penalty or penalties their team must serve. The team that has been given a penalty is said to be playing shorthanded while the opposing team is on a power play.

A two-minute minor penalty is often charged for lesser infractions such as tripping, elbowing, roughing, high-sticking, delay of the game, too many players on the ice, boarding, illegal equipment, charging (leaping into an opponent or body-checking him after taking more than two strides), holding, holding the stick (grabbing an opponent's stick), interference, hooking, slashing, kneeing, unsportsmanlike conduct (arguing a penalty call with referee, extremely vulgar or inappropriate verbal comments), butt-ending (striking an opponent with the knob of the sticka very rare penalty), spearing, or cross-checking. As of the 20052006 season, a minor penalty is also assessed for diving, where a player embellishes or simulates an offence. More egregious fouls may be penalized by a four-minute double-minor penalty, particularly those that injure the victimized player. These penalties end either when the time runs out or when the other team scores during the power play. In the case of a goal scored during the first two minutes of a double-minor, the penalty clock is set down to two minutes upon a score, effectively expiring the first minor penalty. Five-minute major penalties are called for especially violent instances of most minor infractions that result in intentional injury to an opponent, or when a "minor" penalty results in visible injury (such as bleeding), as well as for fighting. Major penalties are always served in full; they do not terminate on a goal scored by the other team. The foul of 'boarding', defined as "check an opponent in such a manner that causes the opponent to be thrown violently in the boards" by the NHL Rulebook is penalized either by a minor or major penalty at the discretion of the referee, based on the violent state of the hit. A minor or major penalty for boarding is often assessed when a player checks an opponent from behind and into the boards.

Some varieties of penalties do not always require the offending team to play a man short. Concurrent five-minute major penalties in the NHL usually result from fighting. In the case of two players being assessed five-minute fighting majors, both the players serve five minutes without their team incurring a loss of player (both teams still have a full complement of players on the ice). This differs with two players from opposing sides getting minor penalties, at the same time or at any intersecting moment, resulting from more common infractions. In this case, both teams will have only four skating players (not counting the goaltender) until one or both penalties expire (if one penalty expires before the other, the opposing team gets a power play for the remainder of the time); this applies regardless of current pending penalties. However, in the NHL, a team always has at least three skaters on the ice. Thus, ten-minute misconduct penalties are served in full by the penalized player, but his team may immediately substitute another player on the ice unless a minor or major penalty is assessed in conjunction with the misconduct (a two-and-ten or five-and-ten). In this case, the team designates another player to serve the minor or major; both players go to the penalty box, but only the designee may not be replaced, and he is released upon the expiration of the two or five minutes, at which point the ten-minute misconduct begins. In addition, game misconducts are assessed for deliberate intent to inflict severe injury on an opponent (at the officials' discretion), or for a major penalty for a stick infraction or repeated major penalties. The offending player is ejected from the game and must immediately leave the playing surface (he does not sit in the penalty box); meanwhile, if an additional minor or major penalty is assessed, a designated player must serve out of that segment of the penalty in the box (similar to the above-mentioned "two-and-ten"). In some rare cases, a player may receive up to nineteen minutes in penalties for one string of plays. This could involve receiving a four-minute double minor penalty, getting in a fight with an opposing player who retaliates, and then receiving a game misconduct after the fight. In this case, the player is ejected and two teammates must serve the double-minor and major penalties.

A penalty shot is awarded to a player when the illegal actions of another player stop a clear scoring opportunity, most commonly when the player is on a breakaway A penalty shot allows the obstructed player to pick up the puck on the centre red-line and attempt to score on the goalie with no other players on the ice, to compensate for the earlier missed scoring opportunity. A penalty shot is also awarded for a defender other than the goaltender covering the puck in the goal crease, a goaltender intentionally displacing his own goal posts during a breakaway to avoid a goal, a defender intentionally displacing his own goal posts when there is less than two minutes to play in regulation time or at any point during overtime, or a player or coach intentionally throwing a stick or other object at the puck or the puck carrier and the throwing action disrupts a shot or pass play.

An ice hockey referee is responsible for assessing most penalties during a game.

Officials also stop play for puck movement violations, such as using one's hands to pass the puck in the offensive end, but no players are penalized for these offences. The sole exceptions are deliberately falling on or gathering the puck to the body, carrying the puck in the hand, and shooting the puck out of play in one's defensive zone (all penalized two minutes for delay of game).

In the NHL, a unique penalty applies to the goalies. The goalies now are forbidden to play the puck in the "corners" of the rink near their own net. This will result in a two-minute penalty against the goalie's team. The area immediately behind the net (marked by two red lines on either side of the net) is the only area behind the net where the goalie can play the puck.

An additional rule that has never been a penalty, but was an infraction in the NHL before recent rules changes, is the two-line offside pass. Prior to the 200506 NHL season, play was stopped when a pass from inside a team's defending zone crossed the centre line, with a face-off held in the defending zone of the offending team. Now, the centre line is no longer used in the NHL to determine a two-line pass infraction, a change that the IIHF had adopted in 1998. Players are now able to pass to teammates who are more than the blue and centre ice red line away.

The NHL has taken steps to speed the game of hockey up and create a game of finesse, by retreating from the past where illegal hits, fights, and "clutching and grabbing" among players were commonplace. Rules are now more strictly enforced, resulting in more penalties, which in turn provides more protection to the players and facilitates more goals being scored. The governing body for United States amateur hockey has implemented many new rules to reduce the number of stick-on-body occurrences, as well as other detrimental and illegal facets of the game ("Zero Tolerance").

In men's hockey, but not in women's, a player may use his hip or shoulder to hit another player if the player has the puck or is the last to have touched it. This use of the hip and shoulder is called body checking. Not all physical contact is legal  in particular, hits from behind and most types of forceful stick-on-body contact are illegal.

==Officials==

A typical game of hockey has two to four officials on the ice, charged with enforcing the rules of the game. There are typically two linesmen who are mainly responsible for calling offside and icing violations, breaking up fights, and conducting faceoffs, and one or two referees, who call goals and all other penalties. Linesmen can, however, report to the referee(s) that a penalty should be assessed against an offending player in some situations. The restrictions on this practice vary depending on the governing rules. On-ice officials are assisted by off-ice officials who act as goal judges, time keepers, and official scorers.

The most widespread system in use today is the three-man system, that features one referee and two linesmen. Another less commonly used system is the two referee and one linesman system. This system is very close to the regular three-man system except for a few procedure changes. With the first being the National Hockey League, a number of leagues have started to implement the four-official system, where an additional referee is added to aid in the calling of penalties normally difficult to assess by one single referee. The system is now used in every NHL game, at IIHF World Championships, the Olympics and in many professional and high-level amateur leagues in North America and Europe.

Officials are selected by the league they work for. Amateur hockey leagues use guidelines established by national organizing bodies as a basis for choosing their officiating staffs. In North America, the national organizing bodies Hockey Canada and USA Hockey approve officials according to their experience level as well as their ability to pass rules knowledge and skating ability tests. Hockey Canada has officiating levels I through VI. USA Hockey has officiating levels 1 through 4. 

==Tactics==
Winning the faceoff can be the key to some strategies. A game between Saginaw and Plymouth's Ontario Hockey League teams.

===Checking===

An important defensive tactic is checkingattempting to take the puck from an opponent or to remove the opponent from play. Stick checking, sweep checking, and poke checking are legal uses of the stick to obtain possession of the puck. The neutral zone trap is designed to isolate the puck carrier in the neutral zone preventing him from entering the offensive zone. Body checking is using one's shoulder or hip to strike an opponent who has the puck or who is the last to have touched it (the last person to have touched the puck is still legally "in possession" of it, although a penalty is generally called if he is checked more than two seconds after his last touch). Often the term checking is used to refer to body checking, with its true definition generally only propagated among fans of the game.

===Offensive tactics===

Offensive tactics include improving a team's position on the ice by advancing the puck out of one's zone towards the opponent's zone, progressively by gaining lines, first your own blue line, then the red line and finally the opponent's blue line. NHL rules instated for the 2006 season redefined offside to make the two-line pass legal; a player may pass the puck from behind his own blue line, past both that blue line and the centre red line, to a player on the near side of the opponents' blue line. Offensive tactics are designed ultimately to score a goal by taking a shot. When a player purposely directs the puck towards the opponent's goal, he or she is said to "shoot" the puck.
Peter Bondra of the Atlanta Thrashers shoots the puck and scores against Roberto Luongo of the Florida Panthers during the 2005-06 NHL Season

A deflection is a shot that redirects a shot or a pass towards the goal from another player, by allowing the puck to strike the stick and carom towards the goal. A one-timer is a shot struck directly off a pass, without receiving the pass and shooting in two separate actions. Headmanning the puck, also known as cherry-picking or breaking out, is the tactic of rapidly passing to the player farthest down the ice.

A team that is losing by one or two goals in the last few minutes of play will often elect to pull the goalie; that is, remove the goaltender and replace him or her with an extra attacker on the ice in the hope of gaining enough advantage to score a goal. However, it is an act of desperation, as it sometimes leads to the opposing team extending their lead by scoring a goal in the empty net.

A delayed penalty call occurs when a penalty offense is committed by the team that does not have possession of the puck. In this circumstance the team with possession of the puck is allowed to complete the play; that is, play continues until a goal is scored, a player on the opposing team gains control of the puck, or the team in possession commits an infraction or penalty of their own. Because the team on which the penalty was called cannot control the puck without stopping play, it is impossible for them to score a goal. However, it is possible for the controlling team to mishandle the puck into their own net. In these cases the team in possession of the puck can pull the goalie for an extra attacker without fear of being scored on. If a delayed penalty is signaled and the team in possession scores, the penalty is still assessed to the offending player, but not served. This rule was recently changed by the NCAA for college level hockey in the United States. In college games, the penalty is still enforced even if the team in possession scores. 

One of the most important strategies for a team is their forecheck. Forechecking is the act of attacking the opposition in their defensive zone. Forechecking is an important part of the dump and chase strategy (i.e. shooting the puck into the offensive zone and then chasing after it). Each team will use their own unique system but the main ones are: 212, 122, and 14. The 212 is the most basic forecheck system where two forwards will go in deep and pressure the opposition's defencemen, the third forward stays high and the two defencemen stay at the blueline. The 122 is a bit more conservative system where one forward pressures the puck carrier and the other two forwards cover the oppositions' wingers, with the two defencemen staying at the blueline. The 14 is the most defensive forecheck system, referred to as the trap, where one forward will apply pressure to the puck carrier around the oppositions' blueline and the other 4 players stand basically in a line by their blueline in hopes the opposition will skate into one of them. Another strategy is the left wing lock, which has two forwards pressure the puck and the left wing and the two defencemen stay at the blueline.

There are many other little tactics used in the game of hockey. Cycling moves the puck along the boards in the offensive zone to create a scoring chance by making defenders tired or moving them out of position. Pinching is when a defencemen pressures the opposition's winger in the offensive zone when they are breaking out, attempting to stop their attack and keep the puck in the offensive zone. A saucer pass is a pass used when an opposition's stick or body is in the passing lane. It is the act of raising the puck over the obstruction and having it land on a teammate's stick.

A "deke," short for "decoy," is a feint with the body or stick to fool a defender or the goalie. Many modern players, such as Pavel Datsyuk, Mike Legg, Sidney Crosby and Patrick Kane, have picked up the skill of "dangling," which is fancier deking and requires more stick handling skills.

===Fights===

Although fighting is officially prohibited in the rules, it is both a target of criticism and a considerable draw for the sport. At the professional level in North America fights are unofficially condoned. Enforcers and other players fight to demoralize the opposing players while exciting their own, as well as settling personal scores. A fight will also break out if one of the team's skilled players gets hit hard or someone gets hit by what the team perceives as a dirty hit. The amateur game penalizes fisticuffs more harshly, as a player who receives a fighting major is also assessed at least a 10-minute misconduct penalty (NCAA and some Junior leagues) or a game misconduct penalty and suspension (high school and younger, as well as some casual adult leagues). KAHC Suspended Players retrieved August 2, 2009. Crowds seem to like fighting in ice hockey and cheer when fighting erupts. 

==Periods and overtime==
A professional game consists of three periods of twenty minutes each, the clock running only when the puck is in play. The teams change ends for the second period, again for the third period, and again at the start of each overtime played (playoffs only; same ends as the odd periods otherwise). Recreational leagues and children's leagues often play shorter games, generally with three shorter periods of play.

Various procedures are used if a game is tied. In tournament play, as well as in the NHL playoffs, North Americans favour sudden death overtime, in which the teams continue to play twenty-minute periods until a goal is scored. Up until the 19992000 season regular season NHL games were settled with a single five-minute sudden death period with five players (plus a goalie) per side, with both teams awarded one point in the standings in the event of a tie. With a goal, the winning team would be awarded two points and the losing team none (just as if they had lost in regulation).

From 19992000 until 200304, the National Hockey League decided ties by playing a single five-minute sudden death overtime period with each team having four players (plus a goalie) per side to "open-up" the game. In the event of a tie, each team would still receive one point in the standings but in the event of a victory the winning team would be awarded two points in the standings and the losing team one point. The idea was to discourage teams from playing for a tie, since previously some teams might have preferred a tie and 1 point to risking a loss and zero points. The only exception to this rule is if a team opts to pull their goalie in exchange for an extra skater during overtime and is subsequently scored upon (an 'empty net' goal), in which case the losing team receives no points for the overtime loss.

International play and several North American professional leagues, including the NHL (in the regular season), now use an overtime period identical to that from 9900  0304 followed by a penalty shootout. If the score remains tied after an extra overtime period, the subsequent shootout consists of three players from each team taking penalty shots. After these six total shots, the team with the most goals is awarded the victory. If the score is still tied, the shootout then proceeds to a sudden death format. Regardless of the number of goals scored during the shootout by either team, the final score recorded will award the winning team one more goal than the score at the end of regulation time. In the NHL if a game is decided in overtime or by a shootout the winning team is awarded two points in the standings and the losing team is awarded one point. Ties no longer occur in the NHL.

The overtime mode for the NHL playoffs differ from the regular season. In the playoffs there are no shootouts nor ties. If a game is tied after regulation an additional 20 minutes of 5 on 5 sudden death overtime will be added. In case of a tied game after the overtime, multiple 20-minute overtimes will be played until a team scores, which wins them the match.

==Women's ice hockey==

===Modern women's ice hockey===
Drawing of a female ice hockey player, from (1899)
Ice hockey is one of the fastest growing women's sports in the world, with the number of participants increasing 350 percent in the last 10 years. In 2011, Canada had 85,827 women players, United States had 65,609, Finland 4,760, Sweden 3,075 and Switzerland 1,172. While there are not as many organized leagues for women as there are for men, there exist leagues of all levels, including the Canadian Women's Hockey League, Western Women's Hockey League, Mid-Atlantic Women's Hockey League, and various European leagues; as well as university teams, national and Olympic teams, and recreational teams. By the end of 2013, the IIHF had held fifteen IIHF World Women's Championship tournaments. 
A women's ice hockey team in 1921

The USHL welcomed the first female professional hockey player in 196970, when the Marquette Iron Rangers signed Karen Koch. 

Women's ice hockey was added as a medal sport at the 1998 Winter Olympics in Nagano, Japan. The United States won the gold, Canada won the silver and Finland won the bronze medal. 

The chief difference between women's and men's hockey is that body checking is not allowed in women's hockey. After the 1990 Women's World Championship, body checking was eliminated in women's hockey. In current IIHF women's competition, body checking is either a minor or major penalty, decided at the referee's discretion. 

In addition, players in women's competition are required to wear protective full-face masks. 

One woman, Manon Rhaume, appeared as a goaltender for the NHL's Tampa Bay Lightning in pre-season games against the St. Louis Blues and the Boston Bruins, and in 2003 Hayley Wickenheiser played with the Kirkkonummi Salamat in the Finnish men's Suomi-sarja league. Several women have competed in North American minor leagues, including goaltenders Kelly Dyer, Erin Whitten, Manon Rhaume, and defenceman Angela Ruggiero.

==Pond hockey==

Pond hockey is a form of ice hockey played generally as pick-up hockey on lakes, ponds and artificial outdoor rinks during the winter. Pond hockey is commonly referred to in hockey circles as shinny. Its rules differ from traditional hockey because there is no hitting and very little shooting, placing a greater emphasis on skating, puckhandling and passing abilities. Since 2002, the World Pond Hockey Championship has been played on Roulston Lake in Plaster Rock, New Brunswick, Canada. Since 2006, the U.S. Pond Hockey Championships have been played in Minneapolis, Minnesota, and the Canadian National Pond Hockey Championships have been played in Huntsville, Ontario.

==Leagues and championships==

===National teams===
Finland vs Russia in the Winter Olympics 2006 in Turin.
Hockey has been played at the Winter Olympics since 1924 (and was played at the summer games in 1920). Canada won six of the first seven gold medals to 1952, the exception occurring in 1936 when Great Britain won. The USSR won all but two gold medals from 1956 to 1988 as well as a final time as the Unified Team at the 1992 Albertville Olympics. The United States won their first gold medal in 1960. On the way to winning the gold medal at the 1980 Lake Placid Olympics amateur US college players defeated the heavily favoured Soviet squad  an event known as the "Miracle on Ice" in the United States. Restrictions on professional players were fully dropped at the 1998 games in Nagano. The Games saw the full participation of players from the NHL, which suspended operations during the Games and has done so in subsequent Games. The 2010 games in Vancouver were the first played in an NHL city since the inclusion of NHL players. The 2010 games were the first played on NHL-sized ice rinks, which are narrower than the IIHF standard.

Ice Hockey World Championships 2010 in Germany
National teams representing the member federations of the IIHF compete annually in the IIHF Ice Hockey World Championships. Teams are selected from the available players by the individual federations, without restriction on amateur or professional status. Since it is held in the spring, the tournament coincides with the annual NHL Stanley Cup playoffs and many of the top players are hence not available to participate in the tournament. Many of the NHL players who do play in the IIHF tournament come from teams eliminated before the playoffs or in the first round, and federations often hold open spots until the tournament to allow for players to join the tournament after their club team is eliminated. For many years, the tournament was an amateur-only tournament, but this restriction was removed, beginning in the 1970s. Players are not paid to play in the tournament, but insurance and expenses are covered from the tournament revenues.

The 1972 Summit Series and 1974 Summit Series, two series pitting the best Canadian and Soviet players without IIHF restrictions were major successes, and established a rivalry between Canada and the USSR. In the spirit of best-versus-best without restrictions on amateur or professional status, the series were followed by five Canada Cup tournaments, played in North America. Two NHL versus USSR series were also held: the 1979 Challenge Cup and Rendez-vous '87. The Canada Cup tournament later became the World Cup of Hockey, played in 1996 and 2004. The United States won in 1996 and Canada won in 2004.

Since the initial women's world championships in 1990 there have been fifteen tournaments. Women's hockey has been played at the Olympics since 1998. The 2006 Winter Olympic final between Canada and Sweden marked the only time the women's world championship or Olympic final did not involve both Canada and the United States.

Other ice hockey tournaments featuring national teams include the World U20 Championship, the World U18 Championships, the World U-17 Hockey Challenge, the World Junior A Challenge, the Ivan Hlinka Memorial Tournament, the World Women's U18 Championships and the 4 Nations Cup. The annual Euro Hockey Tour, an unofficial European championships between the national men's teams of the Czech Republic, Finland, Russia and Sweden have been played since 199697.

 Summary of men's national team tournaments with no restrictions on professional players 
 Year Competition Winner/Gold Runner-up/Silver Third/Bronze 
 1976 First Canada Cup opens up the hockey world Canada Cup 
 1981 [http://www.iihf.com/nc/home-of-hockey/news/news-singleview/article/who-are-the-heroes.html ] Canada Cup 
 1984 Canada Cup (2) (2) 
 1987 Canada Cup (3) 
 1991 Sunday Long Read: 1996 World Cup an American dream Canada Cup (4) 
 1996 World Cup of Hockey (2) (2) 
 1998 Lou Lamoriello's players still making their mark Olympics (2) (2) 
 2002 2014 Sochi Olympics - Team-by-bteam hockey breakdown (Canada) Olympics (5) (2) (3) 
 2004 World Cup of Hockey (6) (2) 
 2006 Olympics (2) (3) 
 2010 Olympics (7) (3) (3) 
 2014 Olympics (8) (2) (4) 

* - Numbers in parentheses indicates number of each type of medal won.
* - Unofficial; Based on standings of teams as no third-place game was played. 
*Additional sources: 

===International leagues===
KHL match

The National Hockey League (NHL), and specifically the Stanley Cup trophy, is the oldest still operating international competition, featuring clubs from the United States and Canada. The league has 30 teams, seven in Canada and twenty-three in the United States.

The Kontinental Hockey League (KHL) is an ice hockey league in Eurasia. The league is the successor to the Russian Super League and the Soviet League, the history of which dates back to the 1940s. The KHL was launched in 2008 with clubs from the post-Soviet states. The league expanded beyond the former Soviet countries, beginning in the 201112 season, with clubs in Croatia, the Czech Republic and Slovakia. The number of teams has since increased to 28 from eight different countries.

The Asia League Ice Hockey, an international ice hockey league featuring clubs from China, Japan and South Korea, is the successor to the Japan Ice Hockey League.

The Austrian Hockey League, called the Erste Bank Eishockey Liga (English: Erste Bank Hockey League) for sponsorship reasons, is the highest-level ice hockey league in Austria. The roots of the EBEL league go back to 1923 and changed to its current form in 1965. Starting in the 2005/06 season, non-Austrian teams were invited to compete for the "EBEL Champion" title. The league has subsequently added clubs from Slovenia, Hungary and the Czech Republic, reaching twelve teams in 2012.

There are also several annual tournaments for clubs, held outside of league play. Pre-season tournaments include the European Trophy, Tampere Cup and the Pajulahti Cup. One of the oldest international ice hockey competition for clubs is the Spengler Cup, held every year in Davos, Switzerland, between Christmas and New Year's Day. It was first awarded in 1923 to the Oxford University Ice Hockey Club. The Memorial Cup, a competition for junior-level clubs is held annually from a pool of junior championship teams in Canada and the United States.

International club competitions organized by the IIHF include the Continental Cup, the Victoria Cup and the European Women's Champions Cup. The World Junior Club Cup is an annual tournament of junior ice hockey clubs representing each of the top junior leagues.

===Leagues===

Several countries in Europe have their own top professional senior leagues. Many future KHL and NHL players start their professional careers in these leagues.

 Country League Notes 
 Czech Republic Czech Extraliga 
 Finland Liiga Until 2013, know as SM-Liiga 
 France Ligue Magnus 
 Germany Deutsche Eishockey Liga 
 Italy Elite.A Until 2013, known as Serie A 
 Norway GET-ligaen 
 Slovakia Slovak Extraliga 
 Sweden Swedish Hockey League Until 2013, known as Elitserien 
 Switzerland National League A 
 Ukraine Professional Hockey League Successor to Ukrainian Hockey Championship 
 United Kingdom Elite Ice Hockey League Teams in all of the home nations: England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland 

In North America, the American Hockey League (AHL), sometimes referred to as "The A," is the primary developmental professional league for players aspiring to enter the NHL. It comprises 30 teams from the United States and Canada. It is run as a "farm league" to the NHL, with the vast majority of AHL players under contract to an NHL team. The East Coast Hockey League (ECHL) is a mid-level minor league in the United States. Some ECHL players are under contract to NHL teams. The Southern Pro Hockey League (SPHL) is a developmental minor league in the United States. Most undrafted players get their start in this league.

The Australian Ice Hockey League and New Zealand Ice Hockey League are represented by nine and five teams respectively. As of 2012, the two top teams of the previous season from each league compete in the Trans-Tasman Champions League.

Several countries have leagues for players of junior-age, under the age of 20. The Canadian Hockey League is an umbrella organization comprising three major junior leagues: the Ontario Hockey League, the Western Hockey League, and the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League. It attracts players from Canada, the United States and Europe. There are also junior leagues in the United States and Russia, and several of the national professional leagues in Europe also have developmental leagues.

==Ice hockey in popular culture==

Ice hockey is the official winter sport of Canada. Ice hockey, partially because of its popularity as a major professional sport, has been a source of inspiration for numerous films, television episodes and songs in North American popular culture.

==Attendance records==

Attendance in the 30,000 range was once quite common for major international matches held outdoors in the 1940s and 50s in Moscow's Lenin Stadium. Figures of this type are still common in bandy, a relative of ice hockey played outdoors.

The record for a Stanley Cup playoff game is 28,183, set on April 23, 1996, at the Thunderdome during a Tampa Bay Lightning  Philadelphia Flyers game. 

A new record was set on December 11, 2010, when the University of Michigan's men's ice hockey team faced cross-state rival Michigan State in an event billed as "The Big Chill at the Big House." The game was played at Michigan's (American) football venue, Michigan Stadium in Ann Arbor, with a capacity of 109,901 as of the 2010 football season. When UM stopped sales to the general public on May 6, 2010, with plans to reserve remaining tickets for students, over 100,000 tickets had been sold for the event. Ultimately, a crowd announced by UM as 113,411, the largest in the stadium's history (including football), saw the homestanding Wolverines win 50. Guinness World Records, using a count of ticketed fans who actually entered the stadium instead of UM's figure of tickets sold, announced a final figure of 104,173. 

The record was approached but not broken at the 2014 NHL Winter Classic, which also held at Michigan Stadium, with the Detroit Red Wings as the home team and the Toronto Maple Leafs as the opposing team with an announced crowd of 105,491.

==Number of registered players by country==
Number of registered hockey players, including male, female and junior, provided by the respective countries' federations. Note that this list only includes the 32 of 72 IIHF member countries with more than 1,000 registered players as of December 2012. 

 Country Players % of population 
 617,107 1.799% 
 511,178 0.163% 
 95,094 0.934% 
 69,921 0.768% 
 64,326 0.047% 
 70,595 1.304% 
 27,068 0.033% 
 26,166 0.342% 
 19,975 0.016% 
 17,381 0.026% 
 11,202 0.136% 
 9,034 0.165% 
 6,893 0.146% 
 6,774 0.011% 
 5,119 0.008% 
 4,405 0.079% 
 4,067 0.023% 
 4,003 0.009% 
 3,979 0.182% 
 3,937 0.041% 
 3,721 0.017% 
 3,320 0.033% 
 2,842 0.017% 
 2,575 0.007% 
 1,636 0.003% 
 1,575 0.006% 
 1,568 0.001% 
 1,510 0.118% 
 1,490 0.014% 
 1,193 0.028% 
 1,093 0.005% 
 1,001 0.031% 
 Total 1,549,984 

==Further reading==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==References==
;Bibliography
*
* 
* 
* 
* 

;Notes

==External links==
* "Mandatory Equipment"

* 
* 
* SIHR  The Origins of Hockey
* History of ice hockey

 



[[IEEE 802.3]]

IEEE 802.3 is a working group and a collection of IEEE standards produced by the working group defining the physical layer and data link layer's media access control (MAC) of wired Ethernet. This is generally a local area network technology with some wide area network applications. Physical connections are made between nodes and/or infrastructure devices (hubs, switches, routers) by various types of copper or fiber cable.

802.3 is a technology that supports the IEEE 802.1 network architecture.

802.3 also defines LAN access method using CSMA/CD

== Communication Standards==

Ethernet Standard Date Description 
 ExperimentalEthernet 1973 2.94 Mbit/s (367 kB/s) over coaxial cable (coax) bus 
 Ethernet II(DIX v2.0) 1982 10 Mbit/s (1.25 MB/s) over thick coax. Frames have a Type field. This frame format is used on all forms of Ethernet by protocols in the Internet protocol suite. 
 IEEE 802.3 1983 10BASE5 10 Mbit/s (1.25 MB/s) over thick coax. Same as Ethernet II (above) except Type field is replaced by Length, and an 802.2 LLC header follows the 802.3 header. Based on the CSMA/CD Process. 
 802.3a 1985 10BASE2 10 Mbit/s (1.25 MB/s) over thin Coax (a.k.a. thinnet or cheapernet) 
 802.3b 1985 10BROAD36 
 802.3c 1985 10 Mbit/s (1.25 MB/s) repeater specs 
 802.3d 1987 Fiber-optic inter-repeater link 
 802.3e 1987 1BASE5 or StarLAN 
 802.3i 1990 10BASE-T 10 Mbit/s (1.25 MB/s) over twisted pair 
 802.3j 1993 10BASE-F 10 Mbit/s (1.25 MB/s) over Fiber-Optic 
 802.3u 1995 100BASE-TX, 100BASE-T4, 100BASE-FX Fast Ethernet at 100 Mbit/s (12.5 MB/s) w/autonegotiation 
 802.3x 1997 Full Duplex and flow control; also incorporates DIX framing, so there's no longer a DIX/802.3 split 
 802.3y 1998 100BASE-T2 100 Mbit/s (12.5 MB/s) over low quality twisted pair 
 802.3z 1998 1000BASE-X Gbit/s Ethernet over Fiber-Optic at 1 Gbit/s (125 MB/s) 
 802.3-1998 1998 A revision of base standard incorporating the above amendments and errata 
 802.3ab 1999 1000BASE-T Gbit/s Ethernet over twisted pair at 1 Gbit/s (125 MB/s) 
 802.3ac 1998 Max frame size extended to 1522 bytes (to allow \"Q-tag\") The Q-tag includes 802.1Q VLAN information and 802.1p priority information. 
 802.3ad 2000 Link aggregation for parallel links, since moved to IEEE 802.1AX 
 802.3-2002 2002 A revision of base standard incorporating the three prior amendments and errata 
 802.3ae 2002 10 Gbit/s (1,250 MB/s) Ethernet over fiber; 10GBASE-SR, 10GBASE-LR, 10GBASE-ER, 10GBASE-SW, 10GBASE-LW, 10GBASE-EW 
 802.3af 2003 Power over Ethernet (15.4 W) 
 802.3ah 2004 Ethernet in the First Mile 
 802.3ak 2004 10GBASE-CX4 10 Gbit/s (1,250 MB/s) Ethernet over twinaxial cables 
 802.3-2005 2005 A revision of base standard incorporating the four prior amendments and errata. 
 802.3an 2006 10GBASE-T 10 Gbit/s (1,250 MB/s) Ethernet over unshielded twisted pair (UTP) 
 802.3ap 2007 Backplane Ethernet (1 and 10 Gbit/s (125 and 1,250 MB/s) over printed circuit boards) 
 802.3aq 2006 10GBASE-LRM 10 Gbit/s (1,250 MB/s) Ethernet over multimode fiber 
 P802.3ar Cancelled Congestion management (withdrawn) 
 802.3as 2006 Frame expansion 
 802.3at 2009 Power over Ethernet enhancements (25.5 W) 
 802.3au 2006 Isolation requirements for Power over Ethernet (802.3-2005/Cor 1) 
 802.3av 2009 10 Gbit/s EPON 
 802.3aw 2007 Fixed an equation in the publication of 10GBASE-T (released as 802.3-2005/Cor 2) 
 802.3-2008 2008 A revision of base standard incorporating the 802.3an/ap/aq/as amendments, two corrigenda and errata. Link aggregation was moved to 802.1AX. 
 802.3az 2010 Energy Efficient Ethernet 
 802.3ba 2010 40 Gbit/s and 100 Gbit/s Ethernet. 40 Gbit/s over 1m backplane, 10 m Cu cable assembly (4x25 Gbit or 10x10 Gbit lanes) and 100 m of MMF and 100 Gbit/s up to 10 m of Cu cable assembly, 100 m of MMF or 40 km of SMF respectively 
 802.3-2008/Cor 1 2009 Increase Pause Reaction Delay timings which are insufficient for 10 Gbit/s (workgroup name was 802.3bb) 
 802.3bc 2009 Move and update Ethernet related TLVs (type, length, values), previously specified in Annex F of IEEE 802.1AB (LLDP) to 802.3. 
 802.3bd 2010 Priority-based Flow Control. An amendment by the IEEE 802.1 Data Center Bridging Task Group (802.1Qbb) to develop an amendment to IEEE Std 802.3 to add a MAC Control Frame to support IEEE 802.1Qbb Priority-based Flow Control. 
 802.3.1 2011 MIB definitions for Ethernet. It consolidates the Ethernet related MIBs present in Annex 30A&B, various IETF RFCs, and 802.1AB annex F into one master document with a machine readable extract. (workgroup name was P802.3be) 
 802.3bf 2011 Provide an accurate indication of the transmission and reception initiation times of certain packets as required to support IEEE P802.1AS. 
 802.3bg 2011 Provide a 40 Gbit/s PMD which is optically compatible with existing carrier SMF 40 Gbit/s client interfaces (OTU3/STM-256/OC-768/40G POS). 
 802.3-2012 2012 A revision of base standard incorporating the 802.3at/av/az/ba/bc/bd/bf/bg amendments, a corrigenda and errata. 
 802.3bj ~Mar 2014 Define a 4-lane 100 Gbit/s backplane PHY for operation over links consistent with copper traces on improved FR-4 (as defined by IEEE P802.3ap or better materials to be defined by the Task Force) with lengths up to at least 1m and a 4-lane 100 Gbit/s PHY for operation over links consistent with copper twinaxial cables with lengths up to at least 5m. 
 802.3bk 2013 This amendment to IEEE Std 802.3 defines the physical layer specifications and management parameters for EPON operation on point-to-multipoint passive optical networks supporting extended power budget classes of PX30, PX40, PRX40, and PR40 PMDs. 
 802.3bp ~May 2014 Gigabit Ethernet over a single twisted pair, automotive & industrial environments 
 802.3bq ~Feb 2016 40GBASE-T, 40 Gbit/s Ethernet for 4-pair balanced twisted-pair cabling with 2 connectors over 30 m distances 

==See also==
* IEEE 802
* IEEE 802.11, a set of wireless networking standards
* IEEE 802.16, a set of WiMAX standards
* IEEE Standards Association

==References==

* Ethernet: IEEE 802.3 Local Area Network (LAN) protocols 

==External links==
* The IEEE 802.3 Working Group
* Get IEEE 802.3 LAN/MAN CSMA/CD Access Method&mdash;Download 802.3 specifications.

IEEE 802.03



[[Integer (computer science)]]

In computer science, an integer is a datum of integral data type, a data type which represents some finite subset of the mathematical integers. Integral data types may be of different sizes and may or may not be allowed to contain negative values. Integers are commonly represented in a computer as a group of binary digits. The size of the grouping varies so the set of integer sizes available varies between different types of computers. Computer hardware, including virtual machines, nearly always provides a way to represent a processor register or memory address as an integer.

== Value and representation ==
The value of an item with an integral type is the mathematical integer that it corresponds to. Integral types may be unsigned (capable of representing only non-negative integers) or signed (capable of representing negative integers as well). 

An integer value is typically specified in the source code of a program as a sequence of digits optionally prefixed with + or . Some programming languages allow other notations, such as hexadecimal (base 16) or octal (base 8). Some programming languages also permit digit group separators. 

The internal representation of this datum is the way the value is stored in the computer's memory. Unlike mathematical integers, a typical datum in a computer has some minimal and maximum possible value. 

The most common representation of a positive integer is a string of bits, using the binary numeral system. The order of the memory bytes storing the bits varies; see endianness. The width or precision of an integral type is the number of bits in its representation. An integral type with n bits can encode 2n numbers; for example an unsigned type typically represents the non-negative values 0 through 2n1. Other encodings of integer values to bit patterns are sometimes used, for example Binary-coded decimal or Gray code, or as printed character codes such as ASCII.

There are four well-known ways to represent signed numbers in a binary computing system. The most common is two's complement, which allows a signed integral type with n bits to represent numbers from 2(n1) through 2(n1)1. Two's complement arithmetic is convenient because there is a perfect one-to-one correspondence between representations and values (in particular, no separate +0 and 0), and because addition, subtraction and multiplication do not need to distinguish between signed and unsigned types. Other possibilities include offset binary, sign-magnitude, and ones' complement.

Some computer languages define integer sizes in a machine-independent way; others have varying definitions depending on the underlying processor word size. Not all language implementations define variables of all integer sizes, and defined sizes may not even be distinct in a particular implementation. An integer in one programming language may be a different size in a different language or on a different processor.

== Common integral data types ==

 Bits Name Range (assuming two's complement for signed) Decimal Digits (approx.) Uses Implementations 
 C/C++ C# Pascal and Delphi Java SQL 
 4 nibble, semioctet Signed: From 8 to 7, from (23) to 23  1 1 Binary-coded decimal, single decimal digit representation. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 
 Unsigned: From 0 to 15 which equals 24  1 2 
 8 byte, octet Signed: From 128 to 127, from (27) to 27  1 3 ASCII characters int8_t, char sbyte Shortint byte tinyint 
 Unsigned: From 0 to 255 which equals 28  1 3 uint8_t, char byte Byte n/a unsigned tinyint 
 16 halfword, word, short Signed: From 32,768 to 32,767, from (215) to 215  1 5 UCS-2 characters int16_t, short, int short Smallint short smallint 
 Unsigned: From 0 to 65,535 which equals 216  1 5 uint16_t ushort Word char{{cref2|group=notejava|d}} unsigned smallint 
 32 word, long, doubleword, longword, int Signed: From 2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647, from (231) to 231  1 10 UTF-32 characters, True color with alpha, FourCC, pointers in 32-bit computing int32_t, int, long int LongInt; Integer int int 
 Unsigned: From 0 to 4,294,967,295 which equals 232  1 10 uint32_t uint LongWord; DWord; Cardinal n/a unsigned int 
 64 word, doubleword, longword, long long, quad, quadword, qword, int64 Signed: From 9,223,372,036,854,775,808 to 9,223,372,036,854,775,807, from (263) to 263  1 19 Time (milliseconds since the Unix epoch), pointers in 64-bit computing int64_t, long, long long long Int64 long bigint 
 Unsigned: From 0 to 18,446,744,073,709,551,615 which equals 264  1 20 uint64_t ulong UInt64; QWord n/a unsigned bigint 
 128 octaword, double quadword Signed: From 170,141,183,460,469,231,731,687,303,715,884,105,728 to 170,141,183,460,469,231,731,687,303,715,884,105,727, from (2127) to 2127  1 39 Complicated scientific calculations IPv6 addresses C: only available as non-standard compiler-specific extension n/a n/a n/a n/a 
 Unsigned: From 0 to 340,282,366,920,938,463,463,374,607,431,768,211,455 which equals 2128  1 39 
 n n-bit integer (general case) Signed: ((2n1)) to (2n1  1) (n  1) log10 2 Ada: range -2**(n-1)..2**(n-1)-1 
 Unsigned: 0 to (2n1) n log10 2 Ada: range 0..2**n-1, mod 2**n; standard libraries' or third-party arbitrary arithmetic libraries' BigDecimal or Decimal classes in many languages such as Python, C++, etc. 

Different CPUs support different integral data types. Typically, hardware will support both signed and unsigned types but only a small, fixed set of widths.

The table above lists integral type widths that are supported in hardware by common processors. High level programming languages provide more possibilities. It is common to have a 'double width' integral type that has twice as many bits as the biggest hardware-supported type. Many languages also have bit-field types (a specified number of bits, usually constrained to be less than the maximum hardware-supported width) and range types (which can represent only the integers in a specified range).

Some languages, such as Lisp, Smalltalk, REXX and Haskell, support arbitrary precision integers (also known as infinite precision integers or bignums). Other languages which do not support this concept as a top-level construct may have libraries available to represent very large numbers using arrays of smaller variables, such as Java's BigInteger class or Perl's "bigint" package. These use as much of the computer's memory as is necessary to store the numbers; however, a computer has only a finite amount of storage, so they too can only represent a finite subset of the mathematical integers. These schemes support very large numbers, for example one kilobyte of memory could be used to store numbers up to 2466 decimal digits long.

A Boolean or Flag type is a type which can represent only two values: 0 and 1, usually identified with false and true respectively. This type can be stored in memory using a single bit, but is often given a full byte for convenience of addressing and speed of access.

A four-bit quantity is known as a nibble (when eating, being smaller than a bite) or nybble (being a pun on the form of the word byte). One nibble corresponds to one digit in hexadecimal and holds one digit or a sign code in binary-coded decimal.

=== Bytes and octets ===

The term byte initially meant 'the smallest addressable unit of memory'. In the past, 5-, 6-, 7-, 8-, and 9-bit bytes have all been used. There have also been computers that could address individual bits ('bit-addressed machine'), or that could only address 16- or 32-bit quantities ('word-addressed machine'). The term byte was usually not used at all in connection with bit- and word-addressed machines.

The term octet always refers to an 8-bit quantity. It is mostly used in the field of computer networking, where computers with different byte widths might have to communicate. 

In modern usage byte almost invariably means eight bits, since all other sizes have fallen into disuse; thus byte has come to be synonymous with octet.

=== Words ===

The term 'word' is used for a small group of bits which are handled simultaneously by processors of a particular architecture. The size of a word is thus CPU-specific. Many different word sizes have been used, including 6-, 8-, 12-, 16-, 18-, 24-, 32-, 36-, 39-, 48-, 60-, and 64-bit. Since it is architectural, the size of a word is usually set by the first CPU in a family, rather than the characteristics of a later compatible CPU. The meanings of terms derived from word, such as longword, doubleword, quadword, and halfword, also vary with the CPU and OS. 

Practically all new desktop processors are capable of using 64-bit words, though embedded processors with 8- and 16-bit word size are still common. The 36-bit word length was common in the early days of computers.

One important cause of non-portability of software is the incorrect assumption that all computers have the same word size as the computer used by the programmer. For example, if a programmer using the C language incorrectly declares as int a variable that will be used to store values greater than 2151, the program will fail on computers with 16-bit integers. That variable should have been declared as long, which has at least 32 bits on any computer. Programmers may also incorrectly assume that a pointer can be converted to an integer without loss of information, which may work on (some) 32-bit computers, but fail on 64-bit computers with 64-bit pointers and 32-bit integers.

===Short integer===
A short integer can represent a whole number which may take less storage, while having a smaller range, compared with a standard integer on the same machine.

In C, it is denoted by short. It is required to be at least 16 bits, and is often smaller than a standard integer, but this is not required. A conforming program can assume that it can safely store values between (2151) and 2151, but it may not assume that the range isn't larger. In Java, a short is always a 16-bit integer. In the Windows API, the datatype SHORT is defined as a 16-bit signed integer on all machines. 

====Common short integer sizes====

 Programming language Platforms Data type name Signedness Storage in bytes Minimum value Maximum value 
 C and C++ common implementations short signed 2 32,768 +32,767 
 unsigned short unsigned 2 0 65,535 
 C# .NET CLR/CTS short signed 2 32,768 +32,767 
 ushort unsigned 2 0 65,535 
 Java Java platform short signed 2 32,768 +32,767 

===Long integer===
A long integer can represent a whole integer number whose range is greater than or equal to that of a standard integer on the same machine.

In C, it is denoted by long. It is required to be at least 32 bits, and may or may not be larger than a standard integer. A conforming program can assume that it can safely store values between (2311) and 2311, but it may not assume that the range isn't larger.

====Common long integer sizes====

 Programming language Approval Type Platforms Data type name Storage in bytes Signed range Unsigned range 
 C ISO/ANSI C99 International Standard Unix,16/32-bit systems Windows,16/32/64-bit systems long 4(minimum requirement 4) 2,147,483,648 to +2,147,483,647 0 to 4,294,967,295(minimum requirement) 
 C ISO/ANSI C99 International Standard Unix,64-bit systems long 8(minimum requirement 4) 9,223,372,036,854,775,808 to +9,223,372,036,854,775,807 0 to 18,446,744,073,709,551,615 
 C++ ISO/ANSI International Standard Unix, Windows,16/32-bit system long 4 (minimum requirement 4) 2,147,483,648 to +2,147,483,647 0 to 4,294,967,295(minimum requirement) 
 C++/CLI International StandardECMA-372 Unix, Windows,16/32-bit systems long 4 (minimum requirement 4) 2,147,483,648 to +2,147,483,647 0 to 4,294,967,295(minimum requirement) 
 VB Company Standard Windows Long 4 VB 6.0 help file 2,147,483,648 to +2,147,483,647 N/A 
 VBA Company Standard Windows, Mac OS Long 4 2,147,483,648 to +2,147,483,647 N/A 
 SQL Server Company Standard Windows BigInt 8 9,223,372,036,854,775,808 to +9,223,372,036,854,775,807 0 to 18,446,744,073,709,551,615 
 C#/ VB.NET ECMA International Standard Microsoft .NET long or Int64 8 9,223,372,036,854,775,808 to +9,223,372,036,854,775,807 0 to 18,446,744,073,709,551,615 
 Java International/Company Standard Java platform long 8 9,223,372,036,854,775,808 to +9,223,372,036,854,775,807 N/A 
 Pascal ? Windows, UNIX int64 8 9,223,372,036,854,775,808 to +9,223,372,036,854,775,807 0 to 18,446,744,073,709,551,615(Qword type) 

 the term long int is equivalent 

===Long long===
In the C99 version of the C programming language and the C++11 version of C++, a long long type is supported that has double the minimum capacity of the standard long, 64 bits. This type is not supported by compilers that require C code to be compliant with the previous C++ standard, C++03, because the long long type did not exist in C++03. For an ANSI/ISO compliant compiler the minimum requirements for the specified ranges, that is (231) to 2311 for signed and 0 to 2321 for unsigned, must be fulfilled; however, extending this range is permitted. This can be an issue when exchanging code and data between platforms, or doing direct hardware access. Thus, there are several sets of headers providing platform independent exact width types. The C standard library provides stdint.h; this was introduced in C99 and C++11.

== See also ==

*Signed number representations
*Binary-coded decimal, a representation of integers commonly used in mainframe financial applications and in databases.

== Notes ==



[[Inoculation]]

Inoculation (also known as variolation) was a historical method for the prevention of smallpox by deliberate introduction into the skin of material from smallpox pustules. This generally produced a less severe infection than naturally-acquired smallpox, but still induced immunity to it. The term entered medical English through horticultural usage meaning to graft a bud (or eye) from one plant into another. It is derived from the Latin in + oculus (eye). Though innoculation/innoculate is sometimes seen, this is incorrect, possibly erroneously thought to be related to innocuous, which is derive from the Latin in + nocuus (= not harmful).

The terms inoculation, vaccination, immunization and injection are often used synonymously to refer to artificial induction of immunity against various infectious diseases. This is supported by some dictionaries. However, there are some important historical and current differences. In English medicine inoculation referred only to the prevention of smallpox until the very early 1800s. When Edward Jenner introduced smallpox vaccine in 1798 this was initially called cowpox inoculation or vaccine inoculation. Soon, to avoid confusion, smallpox inoculation was referred to as variolation (from variola = smallpox) and cowpox inoculation was referred to as vaccination (from Jenner's use of Variolae vaccinae = smallpox of the cow). Then, in 1891 Louis Pasteur proposed that the terms vaccine/vaccination should be extended to include the new protective procedures being developed. Immunization refers to the use of all vaccines but also extends to the use of antitoxin, which contains preformed antibody to e.g. diphtheria or tetanus exotoxins. Inoculation is now more or less synonymous in nontechnical usage with injection etc., and the question e.g. 'Have you had your flu injection/vaccination/inoculation/immunization?' should not cause confusion. The focus is on what is being given and why, not the literal meaning of the technique used.

Inoculation also has a specific meaning for procedures done in vitro. These include the transfer of microorganisms into and from laboratory apparatus such as test tubes and petri dishes in research and diagnostic laboratories, and also in commercial applications such as brewing, baking and the production of antibiotics.

In almost all cases the material inoculated is called the inoculum, or less commonly the inoculant, although the term culture is also used for work done in vitro.

== Origins ==
===China===
The earliest hints of the practice of inoculation for smallpox in China come during the 10th century. Needham, Joseph. (2000). Science and Civilization in China: Volume 6, Biology and Biological Technology, Part 6, Medicine. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p.154 A Song Dynasty (960&ndash;1279) chancellor of China, Wang Dan (957&ndash;1017), lost his eldest son to smallpox and sought a means to spare the rest of his family from the disease, so he summoned physicians, wise men, and magicians from all across the empire to convene at the capital in Kaifeng and share ideas on how to cure patients of it until the gods sent a divine man from Mt. O-mei who carried out inoculation. However, the sinologist Joseph Needham states that this information comes from the Zhongdou xinfa () written in 1808 by Zhu Yiliang, centuries after the alleged events. 

The first clear and credible reference to smallpox inoculation in China comes from Wan Quan's (1499&ndash;1582) Douzhen xinfa () of 1549, which states that some women unexpectedly menstruate during the procedure, yet his text did not give details on techniques of inoculation. Inoculation was first vividly described by Yu Chang in his book Yuyi cao (), or Notes on My Judgment, published in 1643. Inoculation was reportedly not widely practised in China until the reign of the Longqing Emperor (r. 1567&ndash;1572) during the Ming Dynasty (1368&ndash;1644), as written by Yu Tianchi in his Shadou jijie () of 1727, which he alleges was based on Wang Zhangren's Douzhen jinjing lu () of 1579. Needham, Joseph. (2000). Science and Civilization in China: Volume 6, Biology and Biological Technology, Part 6, Medicine. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Page 134. From these accounts, it is known that the Chinese banned the practice of using smallpox material from patients who actually had the full-blown disease of Variola major (considered too dangerous); instead they used proxy material of a cotton plug inserted into the nose of a person who had already been inoculated and had only a few scabs, i.e. Variola minor. This was called "to implant the sprouts", an idea of transplanting the disease which fit their conception of beansprouts in germination. Needham quotes an account from Zhang Yan's Zhongdou xinshu (), or New book on smallpox inoculation, written in 1741 during the Qing Dynasty (1644&ndash;1912), which shows how the Chinese process had become refined up until that point:

::Method of storing the material. Wrap the scabs carefully in paper and put them into a small container bottle. Cork it tightly so that the activity is not dissipated. The container must not be exposed to sunlight or warmed beside a fire. It is best to carry it for some time on the person so that the scabs dry naturally and slowly. The container should be marked clearly with the date on which the contents were taken from the patient.

::In winter, the material has yang potency within it, so it remains active even after being kept from thirty to forty days. But in summer the yang potency will be lost in approximately twenty days. The best material is that which had not been left too long, for when the yang potency is abundant it will give a 'take' with nine persons out of ten peopleand finally it becomes completely inactive, and will not work at all. In situations where new scabs are rare and the requirement great, it is possible to mix new scabs with the more aged ones, but in this case more of the powder should be blown into the nostril when the inoculation is done. 

Two reports on the Chinese practice were received by the Royal Society in London in 1700; one by Dr. Martin Lister who received a report by an employee of the East India Company stationed in China and another by Clopton Havers. But no action was taken. 

 

===Circassia===
According to Voltaire (1742), the Turks derived their use of inoculation to neighbouring Circassia.
:The Circassian women have, from time immemorial, communicated the small-pox to their children when not above six months old by making an incision in the arm, and by putting into this incision a pustule, taken carefully from the body of another child. This pustule produces the same effect in the arm it is laid in as yeast in a piece of dough; it ferments, and diffuses through the whole mass of blood the qualities with which it is impregnated. The pustules of the child in whom the artificial small-pox has been thus inoculated are employed to communicate the same distemper to others. There is an almost perpetual circulation of it in Circassia; and when unhappily the small-pox has quite left the country, the inhabitants of it are in as great trouble and perplexity as other nations when their harvest has fallen short...The Circassians are poor, and their daughters are beautiful, and indeed, it is in them they chiefly trade. They furnish with beauties the seraglios of the Turkish Sultan, of the Persian Sophy, and of all those who are wealthy enough to purchase and maintain such precious merchandise. 

 

Voltaire does not speculate on where the Circassians derived their technique from, though he reports that the Chinese have practiced it "these hundred years". The Turkish practice was presented to the Royal Society in 1714 and 1716, when the physicians Emanuel Timoni and Giacomo Pylarini independently sent letters from Constantinople. 

 

===India===
Vial containing variolation material recovered from India during the early 1970s.
Variolation is documented in India from the eighteenth century, thanks to the 1767 account by J. Z. Holwell. Holwell's extensive 1767 description included the following statement, on p.25, that points to the connection between disease and "multitudes of imperceptible animalculae floating in the atmosphere":

They lay it down as a principle, that the immediate cause of the smallpox exists in the mortal part of every human and animal form; that the mediate (or second) acting cause, which stirs up the first, and throws it into a state of fermentation, is multitudes of imperceptible animalculae floating in the atmosphere; that these are the cause of all epidemical diseases, but more particularly of the small pox. 

Holwell ascribes this account to his Brahman informants. However, such a theory has not yet been discovered in any Sanskrit or vernacular treatise. Holwell's use of the word "animalculae" suggests that he may have been aware of the observations of Antonie van Leeuwenhoek made in about 1683. Other parts of Holwell's account, especially his use of the idea of "immediate" and "mediate" causation, and the concept of "fermentation," suggest a non-Indian source for his ideas outlined in this passage, which remain of great research interest.

Several historians have suggested that variolation may be older than the eighteenth century in India, E.g., but historical evidence for this assertion is lacking. The widespread rumour since the nineteenth century that vaccination was documented in India before the discoveries of Edward Jenner can all be traced to propaganda tracts written in Sanskrit and the Indian vernaculars by colonial officers, in the pious hope of convincing Indians to accept the newly discovered Jennerian procedure. A landmark anthropological study by Ralph Nicholas described the mid-twentieth century rituals of appeasement to tal, the Indian goddess of smallpox, in Bengal. 

Holwell's account proves beyond doubt that smallpox inoculation was practised in India in the eighteenth century. Yet no Sanskrit or vernacular Indian sources yet discovered mention the practice. That such a major medical procedure would not be documented by the normally verbose members of the Brahman caste remains a historical puzzle. Some details of the practice described by Holwell (sniffing) suggest Chinese practice.

===Ethiopia===
Early travellers to Ethiopia report that variolation was practiced by the Amhara and Tigray peoples. The first European to report this was Nathaniel Pearce, who noted in 1831, that it was performed by a debtera who would collect "a quantity of matter" from a person with the most sores from small pox, then he "cuts a small cross with a razor in the arm" of his subject and put "a little of the matter" into the cut which was afterwards bound up with a bandage. Subsequent visitors who described this practice included W.C. Harris and Dr. Petit of the French scientific mission of 1839-1841. Richard Pankhurst, An Introduction to the Medical History of Ethiopia (Trenton: Red Sea Press, 1999), pp. 26f 

===West Africa===
The knowledge of inoculating oneself against smallpox seems to have been known to West Africans, more specifically the Akan. A slave named Onesimus explained the inoculation procedure to Cotton Mather during the 18th century, he reported to have gotten the knowledge from Africa. Waldstreicher, David. Runaway America: Benjamin Franklin, Slavery, and the American Revolution. Macmillan; p. 40, ISBN 0-8090-8314-0 

==Importation to the West==
Mary Wortley Montagu, by Charles Jervas, after 1716
The practice was introduced to England by Lady Mary Wortley Montagu (May 26, 1689  August 21, 1762). Lady Montagu's husband, Edward Wortley Montagu, served as the British ambassador to the Ottoman Empire from 1716 to 1718. She witnessed firsthand the Turkish use of inoculation in Istanbul, and was greatly impressed: Donald R. Hopkins, Princes and Peasants: Smallpox in History (University of Chicago Press, 1983) she had lost a brother to smallpox and bore facial scars from the disease herself. When a smallpox epidemic threatened England in 1721, she called on her physician to inoculate her daughter. She invited friends to see her daughter, including Sir Hans Sloane, the King's physician. Sufficient interest arose that Maitland gained permission to test inoculation at Newgate prison in exchange for their freedom on six prisoners due to be hanged, an experiment which was witnessed by a number of notable doctors. All survived, and in 1722 the Prince of Wales' daughters received inoculations. 

The practice of inoculation slowly spread amongst the royal families of Europe, usually followed by more general adoption amongst the people.

The practice is documented in America as early as 1721, when Zabdiel Boylston, at the urging of Cotton Mather, successfully inoculated two slaves and his own son. Mather, a prominent Boston minister, had heard a description of the African practice of inoculation from his Sudanese slave, Onesimus, in 1706, and later from Timoni's report to the Royal Society, but had been previously unable to convince local physicians to attempt the procedure. Silverman, Kenneth. The Life and Times of Cotton Mather, Harper & Row, New York, 1984. ISBN 0-06-015231-1, p. 339. Following this initial success, Boylston began performing inoculations throughout Boston, despite much controversy and at least one attempt upon his life. The effectiveness of the procedure was proven when, of the nearly three hundred people Boylston inoculated during the outbreak, only six died, whereas the mortality rate among those who contracted the disease naturally was one in six. Boylston traveled to London in 1724. There he published his results and was elected to the Royal Society in 1726.

 Natural experiment in inoculationaround Boston, 1721 
 Total Died % Mortality 
 Variolated c 300 6 c 2% 
 Unvariolated c 6000 c 1000 \"about 14%\" 

In France, considerable opposition arose to the introduction of inoculation, and it was banned by the Parlement. Voltaire, in his Lettres Philosophiques, wrote a criticism of his countrymen for being opposed to inoculation and having so little regard for the welfare of their children, concluding that "had inoculation been practised in France it would have saved the lives of thousands.". Lettres Philosophiques. Voltaire. (English translation on-line ) 

Inoculation grew in popularity in Europe through the 18th century. Given the high prevalence and often severe consequences of smallpox in Europe in the 18th century (according to Voltaire, there was a 60% incidence of first infection, a 20% mortality rate, and a 20% incidence of severe scarring), In fact, the mortality rate of the Varoiola Minor form of smallpox then found in Europe was 13% as opposed to 3050% for the Variola Major type found elsewhere; however, blindness, infertility, and severe scarring were common. Figures from "The Search for Immunisation", In Our Time, BBC Radio 4 (2006). many parents felt that the benefits of inoculation outweighed the risks and so inoculated their children. Letter of Lady Montagu reproduced at http://www.foundersofscience.net/lady_mary_montagu.htm viewed 18 March 2006 

== Mechanism ==
Two forms of the disease of Smallpox were recognised, now known to be due to two strains of the Variola virus. Those contracting Variola Minor had a greatly reduced risk of death &ndash; 1&ndash;2% &ndash; compared to those contracting Variola Major with 30% mortality. Infection via inhaled viral particles in droplets spread the infection more widely than the deliberate infection through a small skin wound. The smaller, localised infection is adequate to stimulate the immune system to produce specific immunity to the virus, while requiring more generations of the virus to reach levels of infection likely to kill the patient. The rising immunity terminates the infection. So the twofold effect is to ensure the less fatal form of the disease is the one caught, and to give the immune system the best start possible in combating it.

Inoculation in the East was historically performed by blowing smallpox crusts into the nostril. In Britain, Europe and the American Colonies the preferred method was rubbing material from a smallpox pustule from a selected mild case (Variola minor) into a scratch between the thumb and forefinger. This would generally be performed when an individual was in normal good health, and thus at peak resistance. The recipient would develop smallpox; however, due to being introduced through the skin rather than the lungs, and possibly because of the inoculated individual's preexisting state of good health, the small inoculum, and the single point of initial infection, the resulting case of smallpox was generally milder than the naturally-occurring form, produced far less facial scarring, and had a far lower mortality rate. As with survivors of the natural disease, the inoculated individual was subsequently immune to re-infection.

== Obsolescence ==

Comparison of smallpox (left) and cowpox (right) inoculations 16 days after administration
In 1798, the English surgeon/scientist Edward Jenner published the results of his experiments and thus introduced the far superior and safer method of inoculation with cowpox virus, a mild infection that also induced immunity to smallpox. Jenner was not the first person to inoculate with cowpox nor the first to realize that infection with cowpox gave immunity to smallpox. However, he was the first to publish evidence that it was effective and to provide advice on its production. His efforts led to smallpox inoculation falling into disuse and eventually being banned in England in 1840. 

==See also==
*Stress inoculation

==Notes==

==References==
* Hopkins, Donald R. (2002). The Greatest Killer: Smallpox in history. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-35168-8.

== External links ==
* US National Library of Medicine
* Lettres Philosophiques. Voltaire (English translation)
* Inoculation in India An account of the manner of inoculating for the small pox in India. Holwell, J Z. RCP
* Edward Jenner and Vaccination. Harris
* A HISTORY OF THE WARFARE OF SCIENCE WITH THEOLOGY IN CHRISTENDOM Andrew Dickson White.
* Arm-to-Arm Against Bioterrorism by Donald W. Miller, Jr., MD
* The Science of Agricultural Inoculation by INTX Microbials



[[Icon]]

The Ladder of Divine Ascent icon showing monks ascending to Jesus in Heaven, top right. 12th century, Saint Catherine's Monastery
Russian icon of Holy Trinity
The icon of St Nicolas carved in stone. Between the 12 and 15th cc. Radomysl Castle, Ukraine Bogomolets O. Radomysl Castle-Museum on the Royal Road Via Regia".  Kyiv, 2013 ISBN 978-617-7031-15-3 

An icon (from Greek eikn "image") is a religious work of art, most commonly a painting, from Eastern Christianity and in certain Eastern Catholic churches. More broadly the term is used in a wide number of contexts for an image, picture, or representation; it is a sign or likeness that stands for an object by signifying or representing it either concretely or by analogy, as in semiotics; by extension, icon is also used, particularly in modern culture, in the general sense of symbol &mdash; i.e. a name, face, picture, edifice or even a person readily recognized as having some well-known significance or embodying certain qualities: one thing, an image or depiction, that represents something else of greater significance through literal or figurative meaning, usually associated with religious, cultural, political, or economic standing.

Throughout history, various religious cultures The Meaning of Icons, by Vladimir Lossky with Lonid Ouspensky, SVS Press, 1999. (ISBN 0-913836-99-0) have been inspired or supplemented by concrete images, whether in two dimensions or three. The degree to which images are used or permitted, and their functions  whether they are for instruction or inspiration, treated as sacred objects of veneration or worship, or simply applied as ornament  depend upon the tenets of a given religion in a given place and time.

In Eastern Christianity and other icon-painting Christian traditions, the icon is generally a flat panel painting depicting a holy being or object such as Jesus, Mary, Saints, Angels, or the cross. Icons may also be cast in metal, carved in stone, embroidered on cloth, painted on wood, done in mosaic or fresco work, printed on paper or metal, etc. Creating free-standing, three-dimensional sculptures of holy figures was resisted by Christians for many centuries, out of the belief that daimones inhabited pagan sculptures, and also to make a clear distinction between Christian and pagan art. To this day, in obedience to the commandment not to make "graven images", Orthodox icons may never be more than three-quarter bas relief. Comparable images from Western Christianity are generally not described as "icons", although "iconic" may be used to describe a static style of devotional image. Although common in translated works from Greek or Russian, in English iconography does not mean icon painting, and "iconographer" does not mean an artist of icons, which are painted or carved, not "written", as they are in those languages.

==Emergence of the Christian Icon==

Ceramic icons are rare. Saint Arethas, Byzantine, 10th century.
The first mention of "Christian" art is found near the beginning of the 2nd century in the writings of Tertullian (c. 160-220) and in Clement of Alexandria (c. 150-212). Tertullian, in his De Pudentia (On Modesty) 7:1-4 mentions the depiction of a shepherd on Christian cups, calling to mind the parable of the Good Shepherd and thus used as a symbol for Jesus. Clement of Alexandria, in his Paedagogus (The Pedagogue) 3.59.2-3.60, writes that Christians may wear a seal ring for the sealing of documents, and he specifies permissible depictions: "And let our seals be either a dove, or a fish, or a ship scudding before the wind, or a musical lyre, which Polycrates used, or a ship's anchor, which Seleucus got engraved as a device; and if there be one fishing, he will remember the apostle, and the children drawn out of the water. For we are not to delineate the faces of idols, we who are prohibited to cleave to them; nor a sword, nor a bow, following as we do, peace; nor drinking-cups, being temperate."

It is noteworthy that all of the images so mentioned by Tertullian and Clement were common Greco-Roman depictions used by non-Christians; but Christians adopted them for their own use, even giving a specifically Christian significance to some of them. The non-Christian prototype of the Good Shepherd image, for example, was the Kriophoros, the Ram-Bearer, which originally represented Hermes, the shepherd of souls.

The only Christian art for which we have approximate 1st-century written and physical evidence, therefore, is an art of symbols that could be used either in a non-Christian or in a Christian context. Consequently it is generally not possible to distinguish a Christian use of a given image on an object of that period from a non-Christian use. What is certain from the evidence, however, is that Christians of at least the latter part of that period did use, sometimes symbolically, a restricted range of images that already had non-Christian prototypes or parallels.

Though the word eikon ("image") is found in the New Testament (see below), it is never in the context of painted icons though it is used to mean portrait. There were Christian paintings and art in the early catacomb churches. Many can still be viewed today, such as those in the catacomb churches of Domitilla and San Callisto in Rome.

In Eastern Orthodoxy and other icon-painting Christian traditions, the icon is generally a flat panel (generally of wood) painting depicting a holy being or object such as Jesus, Mary, saints, angels, or the Cross. Icons may also be cast in metal, carved in stone, embroidered on cloth, done in mosaic work, printed on paper or metal, etc.

The earliest written records of Christian images treated like icons in a pagan or Gnostic context are offered by the 4th-century Christian Aelius Lampridius in the Life of Alexander Severus (xxix) that was part of the Augustan History. According to Lampridius, the emperor Alexander Severus (222235), who was not a Christian, had kept a domestic chapel for the veneration of images of deified emperors, of portraits of his ancestors, and of Christ, Apollonius, Orpheus and Abraham. Irenaeus, (c. 130202) in his Against Heresies (1:25;6) says scornfully of the Gnostic Carpocratians, "They also possess images, some of them painted, and others formed from different kinds of material; while they maintain that a likeness of Christ was made by Pilate at that time when Jesus lived among them. They crown these images, and set them up along with the images of the philosophers of the world that is to say, with the images of Pythagoras, and Plato, and Aristotle, and the rest. They have also other modes of honouring these images, after the same manner of the Gentiles ". St. Irenaeus on the other hand does not speak critically of icons or portraits in a general sense, only of certain gnostic sectarians use of icons.

Another criticism of image veneration is found in the non-canonical 2nd-century Acts of John (generally considered a gnostic work), in which the Apostle John discovers that one of his followers has had a portrait made of him, and is venerating it: (27) "...he went into the bedchamber, and saw the portrait of an old man crowned with garlands, and lamps and altars set before it. And he called him and said: Lycomedes, what do you mean by this matter of the portrait? Can it be one of thy gods that is painted here? For I see that you are still living in heathen fashion." Later in the passage John says, "But this that you have now done is childish and imperfect: you have drawn a dead likeness of the dead."

Image of the Saviour Not Made by Hand: a traditional Orthodox iconography in the interpretation of Simon Ushakov (1658).

Aside from the legend that Pilate had made an image of Christ, the 4th-century Eusebius of Caesarea, in his Church History, provides a more substantial reference to a "first" icon of Jesus. He relates that King Abgar of Edessa sent a letter to Jesus at Jerusalem, asking Jesus to come and heal him of an illness. In this version there is no image. In the later account found in the Syriac Doctrine of Addai, a painted image of Jesus is mentioned in the story; and even later, in the account given by Evagrius, the painted image is transformed into an image that miraculously appeared on a towel when Christ pressed the cloth to his wet face. Veronica and her Cloth, Kuryluk, Ewa, Basil Blackwell, Cambridge, 1991 Further legends relate that the cloth remained in Edessa until the 10th century, when it was taken to Constantinople. In 1204 it was lost when Constantinople was sacked by Crusaders, but its iconic type had been well fixed in numerous copies.

At least some of the hierarchy of the church was still strictly opposed to icons in the early 4th century. At the Spanish Synod of Elvira (c. 305) bishops concluded, "Pictures are not to be placed in churches, so that they do not become objects of worship and adoration". Bishop Epiphanius of Salamis, wrote his letter 51 to John, Bishop of Jerusalem (c. 394) in which he recounted how he tore down an image in a church and admonished the other bishop that such images are "opposed . . . to our religion". Paragraph 9, http://www.newadvent.org/fathers/3001051.htm 

Elsewhere in his Church History, Eusebius reports seeing what he took to be portraits of Jesus, Peter and Paul, and also mentions a bronze statue at Banias / Paneas, of which he wrote, "They say that this statue is an image of Jesus" (H.E. 7:18); further, he relates that locals thought the image to be a memorial of the healing of the woman with an issue of blood by Jesus (Luke 8:43-48), because it depicted a standing man wearing a double cloak and with arm outstretched, and a woman kneeling before him with arms reaching out as if in supplication. John Francis Wilson John Francis Wilson Caesarea Philippi: Banias, the Lost City of Pan I.B. Tauris, London, 2004. thinks it possible to have been a pagan bronze statue whose true identity had been forgotten; some have thought it to be Aesculapius, the god of healing, but the description of the standing figure and the woman kneeling in supplication is precisely that found on coins depicting the bearded emperor Hadrian reaching out to a female figure symbolizing a province kneeling before him.

When asked by Constantia (Emperor Constantine's sister) for an image of Jesus, Eusebius denied the request, replying that "To depict purely the human form of Christ before its transformation, on the other hand, is to break the commandment of God and to fall into pagan error". David M. Gwynn, From Iconoclasm to Arianism: The Construction of Christian Tradition in the Iconoclast Controversy Roman, and Byzantine Studies 47 (2007) 225251, p. 227. 

After Christianity was legalized by the emperor Constantine within the Roman Empire in 313, huge numbers of pagans became converts. This created the necessity for the transfer of allegiance and practice from the old gods and heroes to the new religion, and for the gradual adaptation of the old system of image making and veneration to a Christian context, in the process of Christianization. Robin Lane Fox states Fox, Pagans and Christians, Alfred A. Knopf, New York, 1989. "By the early fifth century, we know of the ownership of private icons of saints; by c. 480-500, we can be sure that the inside of a saint's shrine would be adorned with images and votive portraits, a practice which had probably begun earlier".

When Constantine converted to Christianity the majority of his subjects were still pagans and the Roman Imperial cult of the divinity of the emperor, expressed through the traditional burning of candles and the offering of incense to the emperors image, was tolerated for a period because it would have been politically dangerous to attempt to suppress it. Indeed, in the 5th century the portrait of the reigning emperor was still honoured this way in the courts of justice and municipal buildings of the empire and in 425 Philostorgius, an Arian Christian, charged the Orthodox Christians in Constantinople with idolatry because they still honored the image of the emperor Constantine the Great, the founder of the city, in this way. Dix notes that this was more than a century before we find the first reference to a similar honouring of the image of Christ or his saints, but that it would seem a natural progression for the image of Christ, the King of heaven and earth, to be eventually paid the same cultic veneration as that given to the earthly Roman emperor. Dom Gregory Dix, The Shape of the Liturgy (New York: Seabury Press, 1945) 413-414. 

==Constantine to Justinian==
Christ and Saint Menas. A 6th-century Coptic icon from Egypt (Muse du Louvre).

After adoption of Christianity as the only permissible Roman state religion under Theodosius I, Christian art began to change not only in quality and sophistication, but also in nature. This was in no small part due to Christians being free for the first time to express their faith openly without persecution from the state, in addition to the faith spreading to the non-poor segments of society. Paintings of martyrs and their feats began to appear, and early writers commented on their lifelike effect, one of the elements a few Christian writers criticized in pagan art &mdash; the ability to imitate life. The writers mostly criticized pagan works of art for pointing to false gods, thus encouraging idolatry. Statues in the round were avoided as being too close to the principal artistic focus of pagan cult practices, as they have continued to be (with some small-scale exceptions) throughout the history of Eastern Christianity.

Nilus of Sinai (d. c.430), in his Letter to Heliodorus Silentiarius, records a miracle in which St. Plato of Ankyra appeared to a Christian in a dream. The Saint was recognized because the young man had often seen his portrait. This recognition of a religious apparition from likeness to an image was also a characteristic of pagan pious accounts of appearances of gods to humans, and was a regular topos in hagiography. One critical recipient of a vision from Saint Demetrius of Thessaloniki apparently specified that the saint resembled the "more ancient" images of him - presumably the 7th century mosaics still in Hagios Demetrios. Another, an African bishop, had been rescued from Arab slavery by a young soldier called Demetrios, who told him to go to his house in Thessaloniki. Having discovered that most young soldiers in the city seemed to be called Demetrios, he gave up and went to the largest church in the city, to find his rescuer on the wall. Robin Cormack, "Writing in Gold, Byzantine Society and its Icons", 1985, George Philip, London, ISBN 0-540-01085-5 

The oldest icon of Christ Pantocrator, encaustic on panel, c. 6th century (Saint Catherine's Monastery, Mount Sinai).
During this period the church began to discourage all non-religious human images - the Emperor and donor figures counting as religious. This became largely effective, so that most of the population would only ever see religious images and those of the ruling class. The word icon referred to any and all images, not just religious ones, but there was barely a need for a separate word for these.

==Luke's portrait of Mary==
It is in a context attributed to the 5th century that the first mention of an image of Mary painted from life appears, though earlier paintings on cave walls bear resemblance to modern icons of Mary. Theodorus Lector, in his 6th-century History of the Church 1:1 Excerpted by Nicephorus Callistus Xanthopoulos; this passage is by some considered a later interpolation. stated that Eudokia (wife of Theodosius II, died 460) sent an image of "the Mother of God" named Icon of the Hodegetria from Jerusalem to Pulcheria, daughter of the Emperor Arcadius: the image was specified to have been "painted by the Apostle Luke."

Margherita Guarducci relates a tradition that the original icon of Mary attributed to Luke, sent by Eudokia to Pulcheria from Palestine, was a large circular icon only of her head. When the icon arrived in Constantinople it was fitted in as the head into a very large rectangular icon of her holding the Christ child and it is this composite icon that became the one historically known as the Hodegetria. She further states another tradition that when the last Latin Emperor of Constantinople, Baldwin II, was leaving Constantinople in 1261 he took this original circular portion of the icon with him. This remained in the possession of the Angevin dynasty who had it likewise inserted into a much larger image of Mary and the Christ child, which is presently enshrined above the high altar of the Benedictine Abbey church of Montevergine. http://www.avellinomagazine.it/foto%20home%20page/madonna.jpg http://www.mariadinazareth.it/www2005/Apparizioni/Montevergine4.jpg Unfortunately this icon has been over the subsequent centuries subjected to repeated repainting, so that it is difficult to determine what the original image of Marys face would have looked like. However, Guarducci also states that in 1950 an ancient image of Mary STblogs.org at the Church of Santa Francesca Romana was determined to be a very exact, but reverse mirror image of the original circular icon that was made in the 5th century and brought to Rome, where it has remained until the present. Margherita Guarducci, The Primacy of the Church of Rome, (San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 1991) 93-101. 

In later tradition the number of icons of Mary attributed to Luke would greatly multiply; James Hall, A History of Ideas and Images in Italian Art, p111, 1983, John Murray, London, ISBN 0-7195-3971-4 the Salus Populi Romani, the Theotokos of Vladimir, the Theotokos Iverskaya of Mount Athos, the Theotokos of Tikhvin, the Theotokos of Smolensk and the Black Madonna of Czstochowa are examples, and another is in the cathedral on St Thomas Mount, which is believed to be one of the seven painted by St.Luke the Evangelist and brought to India by St. Thomas. Father H. Hosten in his book Antiquities notes the following "The picture at the mount is one of the oldest, and, therefore, one of the most venerable Christian paintings to be had in India." Ethiopia has at least seven more. 

In the period before and during the Iconclastic Controversy, stories attributing the creation of icons to the New Testament period greatly increased, with several apostles and even the Virgin herself believed to have acted as the artist or commissioner of images (embroidered in the case of the Virgin).

==Acheiropoieta==

The tradition of acheiropoieta (, literally "not-made-by-hand") accrued to icons that are alleged to have come into existence miraculously, not by a human painter. Such images functioned as powerful relics as well as icons, and their images were naturally seen as especially authoritative as to the true appearance of the subject: naturally and especially because of the reluctance to accept mere human productions as embodying anything of the divine, a commonplace of Christian deprecation of man-made "idols". Like icons believed to be painted directly from the live subject, they therefore acted as important references for other images in the tradition. Beside the developed legend of the mandylion or Image of Edessa, was the tale of the Veil of Veronica, whose very name signifies "true icon" or "true image", the fear of a "false image" remaining strong. A familiar example of an icon of this type within Roman Catholicism is the icon of Our Lady of Guadalupe in the West.

==Theology==
A fairly elaborate Orthodox Christian icon corner as would be found in a private home.

Christianity teaches that the immaterial God took flesh in the human form of Jesus Christ, making it therefore possible to create depictions of the human form of the Son of God. It is on this basis that the Old Testament proscriptions against making images (see Deuteronomy 4) were overturned for the early Christians by their belief in the Incarnation. Also, the concept of archetype was redefined by the Early Church Fathers in order to better understand that when a person shows veneration toward an image, the intention is rather to honor the person depicted, not the substance of the icon. As St. Basil the Great says, "The honor shown the image passes over to the archetype." He also illustrates the concept by saying, "If I point to a statue of Caesar and ask you 'Who is that?', your answer would properly be, 'It is Caesar.' When you say such you do not mean that the stone itself is Caesar, but rather, the name and honor you ascribe to the statue passes over to the original, the archetype, Caesar himself." See also Price, S.R.F. Rituals and power: the Roman imperial cult in Asia Minor, (reprint, illustrated). Cambridge University Press, 1986, pp. 204-5, paraphrasing St. Basil, Homily 24: "on seeing an image of the king in the square, one does not allege that there are two kings". Veneration of the image venerates its original: a similar analogy is implicit in the images used for the Roman Imperial cult. It does not occur in the Gospels. So it is with an Icon.

In the Eastern Orthodox tradition, only flat panel or, mostly in small works such as ivories, bas relief images are used. Early Christianity, emerging from a Graeco-Roman culture where the most usual form of cult image was the three-dimensional statue, for long avoided these in Christian art, associating them with idolatry. Late Antique styles developed in which figures were stylized in a manner that emphasized their holiness rather than their humanity, and this tradition has been very largely maintained within Eastern Orthodoxy. The Western Church, on the other hand started in the 9th century to use religious figurative monumental sculpture, which became increasingly important in Western Christian art. Symbolism allowed the icon to present highly complex material in a very simple way, making it possible to educate even the illiterate in theology. The interiors of Orthodox churches may be largely covered in icons.

==Stylistic developments==
St Peter encaustic on panel, c. 6th century (Saint Catherine's Monastery).
Although there are earlier records of their use, no panel icons earlier than the few from the 6th century preserved at the Greek Orthodox Saint Catherine's Monastery in Egypt survive, G Schiller, Iconography of Christian Art, Vol. I,1971 (English trans from German), Lund Humphries, London, ISBN 0-85331-270-2 as the other examples in Rome have all been drasticly over-painted. The surviving evidence for the earliest depictions of Christ, Mary and saints therefore comes from wall-paintings, mosaics and some carvings. Beckwith, 80-95 covers all these, plus the few other stray painted images elsewhere They are realistic in appearance, in contrast to the later stylization. They are broadly similar in style, though often much superior in quality, to the mummy portraits done in wax (encaustic) and found at Fayyum in Egypt. As we may judge from such items, the first depictions of Jesus were generic rather than portrait images, generally representing him as a beardless young man. It was some time before the earliest examples of the long-haired, bearded face that was later to become standardized as the image of Jesus appeared. When they did begin to appear there was still variation. Augustine of Hippo (354-430) De Trinitatis 8:4-5. said that no one knew the appearance of Jesus or that of Mary. However, Augustine was not a resident of the Holy Land and therefore was not familiar with the local populations and their oral traditions. Gradually, paintings of Jesus took on characteristics of portrait images.

At this time the manner of depicting Jesus was not yet uniform, and there was some controversy over which of the two most common icons was to be favored. The first or "Semitic" form showed Jesus with short and "frizzy" hair; the second showed a bearded Jesus with hair parted in the middle, the manner in which the god Zeus was depicted. Theodorus Lector remarked Church History 1:15. that of the two, the one with short and frizzy hair was "more authentic". To support his assertion, he relates a story (excerpted by John of Damascus) that a pagan commissioned to paint an image of Jesus used the "Zeus" form instead of the "Semitic" form, and that as punishment his hands withered.

Though their development was gradual, we can date the full-blown appearance and general ecclesiastical (as opposed to simply popular or local) acceptance of Christian images as venerated and miracle-working objects to the 6th century, when, as Hans Belting writes, Belting, Likeness and Presence, University of Chicago Press, 1994. "we first hear of the church's use of religious images." "As we reach the second half of the sixth century, we find that images are attracting direct veneration and some of them are credited with the performance of miracles" Patricia Karlin-Hayter, The Oxford History of Byzantium, Oxford, 2002. Cyril Mango writes, Mango, The Art of the Byzantine Empire 312-1453, University of Toronto Press, 1986. "In the post-Justinianic period the icon assumes an ever increasing role in popular devotion, and there is a proliferation of miracle stories connected with icons, some of them rather shocking to our eyes". However, the earlier references by Eusebius and Irenaeus indicate veneration of images and reported miracles associated with them as early as the 2nd century. What might be shocking to our contemporary eyes may not have been viewed as such by the early Christians. Acts 5:15 reports that "people brought the sick into the streets and laid them on beds and mats so that at least Peter's shadow might fall on some of them as he passed by."

==Iconoclast period==

12th-century icon of Archangel Gabriel from Novgorod, called "Golden-Locked Angel", currently exhibited in the State Russian Museum.
There was a continuing opposition to images and their misuse within Christianity from very early times. "Whenever images threatened to gain undue influence within the church, theologians have sought to strip them of their power". Belting, Likeness and Presence, Chicago and London, 1994. Further,"there is no century between the fourth and the eighth in which there is not some evidence of opposition to images even within the Church". Ernst Kitzinger, The Cult of Images in the Age before Iconoclasm, Dumbarton Oaks, 1954, quoted by Pelikan, Jaroslav; The Spirit of Eastern Christendom 600-1700, University of Chicago Press, 1974. Nonetheless, popular favor for icons guaranteed their continued existence, while no systematic apologia for or against icons, or doctrinal authorization or condemnation of icons yet existed.

The use of icons was seriously challenged by Byzantine Imperial authority in the 8th century. Though by this time opposition to images was strongly entrenched in Judaism and Islam, attribution of the impetus toward an iconoclastic movement in Eastern Orthodoxy to Muslims or Jews "seems to have been highly exaggerated, both by contemporaries and by modern scholars". Pelikan, The Spirit of Eastern Christendom 

Though significant in the history of religious doctrine, the Byzantine controversy over images is not seen as of primary importance in Byzantine history. "Few historians still hold it to have been the greatest issue of the period..." Patricia Karlin-Hayter, Oxford History of Byzantium, Oxford University Press, 2002. 

The Iconoclastic Period began when images were banned by Emperor Leo III the Isaurian sometime between 726 and 730. Under his son Constantine V, a council forbidding image veneration was held at Hieria See Council of Hieria. near Constantinople in 754. Image veneration was later reinstated by the Empress Regent Irene, under whom another council was held reversing the decisions of the previous iconoclast council and taking its title as Seventh Ecumenical Council. The council anathemized all who hold to iconoclasm, i.e. those who held that veneration of images constitutes idolatry. Then the ban was enforced again by Leo V in 815. And finally icon veneration was decisively restored by Empress Regent Theodora.

From then on all Byzantine coins had a religious image or symbol on the reverse, usually an image of Christ for larger denominations, with the head of the Emperor on the obverse, reinforcing the bond of the state and the divine order. 

The "Theotokos of Vladimir" icon (12th century)

==Greek-speaking regions==

Today icons are used particularly among Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, and Eastern Catholic Churches.

Of the icon painting tradition that developed in Byzantium, with Constantinople as the chief city, we have only a few icons from the 11th century and none preceding them, in part because of the Iconoclastic reforms during which many were destroyed, and also because of plundering by Venetians in 1204 during the Fourth Crusade, and finally the taking of the city by the Islamic Turks in 1453.

It was only in the Comnenian period (10811185) that the cult of the icon became widespread in the Byzantine world, partly on account of the dearth of richer materials (such as mosaics, ivory, and enamels), but also because an iconostasis a special screen for icons was introduced then in ecclesiastical practice. The style of the time was severe, hieratic and distant.

In the late Comnenian period this severity softened, and emotion, formerly avoided, entered icon painting. Major monuments for this change include the murals at Daphni (ca. 1100) and Nerezi near Skopje (1164). The Theotokos of Vladimir (ca. 1115, illustration, right) is probably the most representative example of the new trend towards spirituality and emotion.

The tendency toward emotionalism in icons continued in the Paleologan period, which began in 1261. Paleologan art reached its pinnacle in mosaics such as those of the Kariye Camii (the former Chora Monastery). In the last half of the 14th century, Paleologan saints were painted in an exaggerated manner, very slim and in contorted positions, that is, in a style known as the Paleologan Mannerism, of which Ochrid's Annunciation is a superb example.

After 1453, the Byzantine tradition was carried on in regions previously influenced by its religion and culture  in the Balkans and Russia, Georgia in the caucasus, and, in the Greek-speaking realm, on Crete.

===Crete===

Crete was under Venetian control from 1204 and became a thriving center of art with eventually a Scuola di San Luca, or organized painter's guild on Western lines. Cretan painting was heavily patronized both by Catholics of Venetian territories and by Eastern Orthodox. For ease of transport, Cretan painters specialized in panel paintings, and developed the ability to work in many styles to fit the taste of various patrons. El Greco, who moved to Venice after establishing his reputation in Crete, is the most famous artist of the school, who continued to use many Byzantine conventions in his works. In 1669 the city of Heraklion, on Crete, which at one time boasted at least 120 painters, finally fell to the Turks, and from that time Greek icon painting went into a decline, with a revival attempted in the 20th century by art reformers such as Photios Kontoglou, who emphasized a return to earlier styles.

==Symbolism==
In the icons of Eastern Orthodoxy, and of the Early Medieval West, very little room is made for artistic license. Almost everything within the image has a symbolic aspect. Christ, the saints, and the angels all have halos. Angels (and often John the Baptist) have wings because they are messengers. Figures have consistent facial appearances, hold attributes personal to them, and use a few conventional poses.

Colour plays an important role as well. Gold represents the radiance of Heaven; red, divine life. Blue is the color of human life, white is the Uncreated Light of God, only used for resurrection and transfiguration of Christ. If you look at icons of Jesus and Mary: Jesus wears red undergarment with a blue outer garment (God become Human) and Mary wears a blue undergarment with a red overgarment (human was granted gifts by God), thus the doctrine of deification is conveyed by icons. Letters are symbols too. Most icons incorporate some calligraphic text naming the person or event depicted. Even this is often presented in a stylized manner.

In later Western depictions, much of the symbolism survives, though there is far less consistency. Artistic license allows the painter much more freedom over the depiction. Examples of this style abound. And yet, despite the imagination and brilliance of Michelangelo's Sistine Chapel, it is still quite easy to identify the saint depicted because the traditional attribute and appearance of Peter is still present.

==Russia==
Muscovite Mannerism: Harrowing of Hell, by Dionisius and his workshop.

Russian icons are typically paintings on wood, often small, though some in churches and monasteries may be as large as a table top. Many religious homes in Russia have icons hanging on the wall in the krasny ugol, the "red" or "beautiful" corner (see Icon Corner). There is a rich history and elaborate religious symbolism associated with icons. In Russian churches, the nave is typically separated from the sanctuary by an iconostasis (Russian ikonosts) a wall of icons.

Christ the Redeemer (1410s, by Andrei Rublev).

The use and making of icons entered Kievan Rus' following its conversion to Orthodox Christianity from the Eastern Roman (Byzantine) Empire in 988 AD. As a general rule, these icons strictly followed models and formulas hallowed by usage, some of which had originated in Constantinople. As time passed, the Russiansnotably Andrei Rublev and Dionisiuswidened the vocabulary of iconic types and styles far beyond anything found elsewhere. The personal, improvisatory and creative traditions of Western European religious art are largely lacking in Russia before the 17th century, when Simon Ushakov's painting became strongly influenced by religious paintings and engravings from Protestant as well as Catholic Europe.

In the mid-17th century, changes in liturgy and practice instituted by Patriarch Nikon resulted in a split in the Russian Orthodox Church. The traditionalists, the persecuted "Old Ritualists" or "Old Believers", continued the traditional stylization of icons, while the State Church modified its practice. From that time icons began to be painted not only in the traditional stylized and nonrealistic mode, but also in a mixture of Russian stylization and Western European realism, and in a Western European manner very much like that of Catholic religious art of the time. The Stroganov movement and the icons from Nevyansk rank among the last important schools of Russian icon-painting.

==Western Christianity==
A Western style icon of Archangel Michael on the Greek Catholic iconostasis of Hajddorog
 An icon of Black Madonna of Czstochowa, one of the national symbols of Poland. Until the 13th century, icons followed a broadly similar pattern in West and East - although very few survive from this early from either tradition. Western icons, which are not usually so termed, were largely patterned on Byzantine works, and equally conventional in composition and depiction. From this point on the western tradition came slowly to allow the artist far more flexibility, and a more realist approach to the figures. If only because there was a much smaller number of skilled artists, the quantity of icons, in the sense of panel paintings, was much smaller in the West, and in most Western settings a single diptych as an altarpiece, or in a domestic room, probably stood in place of the larger collections typical of Orthodox "icon corners".

Only in the 15th century did production of painted icons begin to approach Eastern levels, supplemented by mass-produced imports from the Cretan school in both Western and Eastern styles, and in this century the use of icons in the West was enormously increased by the introduction of prints on paper, mostly woodcuts which were produced in vast numbers (although hardly any survive). They were mostly sold, hand-coloured, by churches, and the smallest sizes (often only an inch high) were affordable even by peasants, who glued or pinned them straight onto a wall.

Icon of the Melanesian Brotherhood Martyrs at Canterbury Cathedral (Anglican Communion)With the Reformation, after an initial uncertainty among early Lutherans, who painted a few "icon"-like depictions of leading Reformers, and continued to paint scenes from Scripture, Protestants came down firmly against icon-like portraits, especially larger ones, even of Christ. Many Protestants found these "idolatrous". Narrative Biblical scenes, especially as book illustrations, remained acceptable, and were encouraged. Roman Catholics maintained, even intensified the traditional use of icons, both printed and on paper, now using the different styles of the Renaissance and Baroque. Popular Catholic imagery to a certain extent has remained attached to a Baroque style of about 1650, especially in Italy and Spain. Anglicans also continued to extensively use sacred imagery, keeping in line with the Western Catholic Tradition.

==Traditions in other regions==
A key piece of the Paleologan Mannerism - the Annunciation icon from Ohrid in the Republic of Macedonia.

In Romania, icons painted as reversed images behind glass and set in frames were common in the 19th century and are still made. The process is known as Reverse painting on glass. "In the Transylvanian countryside, the expensive icons on panels imported from Moldavia, Wallachia, and Mt. Athos were gradually replaced by small, locally produced icons on glass, which were much less expensive and thus accessible to the Transylvanian peasants..." Dancu, Juliana and Dumitru Dancu, Romanian Icons on Glass, Wayne State University Press, 1982. 

The Egyptian Coptic Church and the Ethiopian Church also have distinctive, living icon painting traditions. Coptic icons have their origin in the Hellenistic art of Egyptian Late Antiquity, as exemplified by the Fayum mummy portraits. Beginning in the 4th century, churches painted their walls and made icons to reflect an authentic expression of their faith.

==Protestant Reformation==
The abundant use and veneration historically accorded images in the Roman Catholic Church was a point of contention for Protestant reformers, who varied in their attitudes toward images. In the consequent religious struggles many works of art were destroyed, and there was also iconoclasm, or destruction of images, often by force, in all Protestant regions. Notable episodes were in England during the English Reformation, and then more severely in the English Civil War, in Flanders in the Beeldenstorm, and in France during the Wars of Religion.

Though followers of Zwingli and Calvin were more severe in their rejection, Lutherans tended to be moderate: many of their parishes displayed statues and crucifixes. A recent joint Lutheran-Orthodox statement made in the 7th Plenary of the Lutheran-Orthodox Joint Commission, on July 1993 in Helsinki, reaffirmed the Ecumenical council decisions on the nature of Christ and the veneration of images:

7. As Lutherans and Orthodox we affirm that the teachings of the ecumenical councils are authoritative for our churches. The ecumenical councils maintain the integrity of the teaching of the undivided Church concerning the saving, illuminating/justifying and glorifying acts of God and reject heresies which subvert the saving work of God in Christ. Orthodox and Lutherans, however, have different histories. Lutherans have received the Nicaeno-Constantinopolitan Creed with the addition of the filioque. The Seventh Ecumenical Council, the Second Council of Nicaea in 787, which rejected iconoclasm and restored the veneration of icons in the churches, was not part of the tradition received by the Reformation. Lutherans, however, rejected the iconoclasm of the 16th century, and affirmed the distinction between adoration due to the Triune God alone and all other forms of veneration (CA 21). Through historical research this council has become better known. Nevertheless it does not have the same significance for Lutherans as it does for the Orthodox. Yet, Lutherans and Orthodox are in agreement that the Second Council of Nicaea confirms the christological teaching of the earlier councils and in setting forth the role of images (icons) in the lives of the faithful reaffirms the reality of the incarnation of the eternal Word of God, when it states: "The more frequently, Christ, Mary, the mother of God, and the saints are seen, the more are those who see them drawn to remember and long for those who serve as models, and to pay these icons the tribute of salutation and respectful veneration. Certainly this is not the full adoration in accordance with our faith, which is properly paid only to the divine nature, but it resembles that given to the figure of the honored and life-giving cross, and also to the holy books of the gospels and to other sacred objects" (Definition of the Second Council of Nicaea).

==Contemporary Christianity==
A modern metal icon of St. Nicholas by the Bulgarian artist Georgi 'Chapa' Chapkanov. This depiction differs radically from traditional Orthodox iconography (Gilbert House, Stanley, Falkland Islands).

Today attitudes can vary even from church to church within a given denomination, whether Catholic or Protestant. Protestants generally use religious art for teaching and for inspiration, but such images are not venerated as in Orthodoxy, and many Protestant church sanctuaries contain no imagery at all.

After the Second Vatican Council declared that the use of statues and pictures in churches should be moderate, most statuary was removed and even destroyed from many Catholic Churches. Eastern Orthodoxy, however, continues to give such strong importance to the use and veneration of icons that they are often seen as the chief symbol of Orthodoxy. Catholicism has a long tradition of valuing the arts and was the prime patron of artists even after the Renaissance. Present-day imagery within Roman Catholicism varies in style from traditional to modern, and is affected by trends in the art world in general.

Icons are often illuminated with a candle or jar of oil with a wick. (Beeswax for candles and olive oil for oil lamps are preferred because they burn very cleanly, although other materials are sometimes used.) The illumination of religious images with lamps or candles is an ancient practice pre-dating Christianity.

==Miracles==
Our Lady of St. Theodore, a 1703 copy of the 11th-century icon, following the same Byzantine "Tender Mercy" type as the Vladimirskaya above.

In the Eastern Orthodox Christian tradition there are reports of particular, Wonderworking icons that exude myrrh (fragrant, healing oil), or perform miracles upon petition by believers. When such reports are verified by the Orthodox hierarchy, they are understood as miracles performed by God through the prayers of the saint, rather than being magical properties of the painted wood itself. Theologically, all icons are considered to be sacred, and are miraculous by nature, being a means of spiritual communion between the heavenly and earthly realms. However, it is not uncommon for specific icons to be characterised as "miracle-working", meaning that God has chosen to glorify them by working miracles through them. Such icons are often given particular names (especially those of the Virgin Mary), and even taken from city to city where believers gather to venerate them and pray before them. Islands like that of Tinos are renowned for possessing such "miraculous" icons, and are visited every year by thousands of pilgrims.

==Eastern Orthodox teaching==
Icons are used particularly in Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, and Eastern Catholic churches.

The Eastern Orthodox view of the origin of icons is generally quite different from that of most secular scholars and from some in contemporary Roman Catholic circles: "The Orthodox Church maintains and teaches that the sacred image has existed from the beginning of Christianity", Lonid Ouspensky has written. Leonid Ouspensky, Theology of the Icon", St. Vladimir's Seminary Press, 1978. Accounts that some non-Orthodox writers consider legendary are accepted as history within Eastern Orthodoxy, because they are a part of church tradition. Thus accounts such as that of the miraculous "Image Not Made by Hands", and the weeping and moving "Mother of God of the Sign" of Novgorod are accepted as fact: "Church Tradition tells us, for example, of the existence of an Icon of the Savior during His lifetime (the "Icon-Made-Without-Hands") and of Icons of the Most-Holy Theotokos immediately after Him." These Truths We Hold, St. Tikhon's Seminary Press, 1986. Eastern Orthodoxy further teaches that "a clear understanding of the importance of Icons" was part of the church from its very beginning, and has never changed, although explanations of their importance may have developed over time. This is because icon painting is rooted in the theology of the Incarnation (Christ being the eikon of God) which didn't change, though its subsequent clarification within the Church occurred over the period of the first seven Ecumenical Councils. Also, icons served as tools of edification for the illiterate faithful during most of the history of Christendom.

Eastern Orthodox find the first instance of an image or icon in the Bible when God made man in His own image (Septuagint Greek eikona), in Genesis 1:26-27. In Exodus, God commanded that the Israelites not make any graven image; but soon afterwards, he commanded that they make graven images of cherubim and other like things, both as statues and woven on tapestries. Later, Solomon included still more such imagery when he built the first temple. Eastern Orthodox believe these qualify as icons, in that they were visible images depicting heavenly beings and, in the case of the cherubim, used to indirectly indicate God's presence above the Ark.

In the Book of Numbers it is written that God told Moses to make a bronze serpent, Nehushtan, and hold it up, so that anyone looking at the snake would be healed of their snakebites. In John 3, Jesus refers to the same serpent, saying that he must be lifted up in the same way that the serpent was. John of Damascus also regarded the brazen serpent as an icon. Further, Jesus Christ himself is called the "image of the invisible God" in Colossians 1:15, and is therefore in one sense an icon. As people are also made in God's images, people are also considered to be living icons, and are therefore "censed" along with painted icons during Orthodox prayer services.

A somewhat disinterested treatment of the emotional subject and painstaking attention to the throne and other details of the material world distinguish this work by a medieval Sicilian master from works by imperial icon-painters of Constantinople.

According to John of Damascus, anyone who tries to destroy icons "is the enemy of Christ, the Holy Mother of God and the saints, and is the defender of the Devil and his demons." This is because the theology behind icons is closely tied to the Incarnational theology of the humanity and divinity of Jesus, so that attacks on icons typically have the effect of undermining or attacking the Incarnation of Jesus himself as elucidated in the Ecumenical Councils.

The Eastern Orthodox teaching regarding veneration of icons is that the praise and veneration shown to the icon passes over to the archetype (Basil of Caesarea,On the Holy Spirit 18:45: "The honor paid to the image passes to the prototype"). Thus to kiss an icon of Christ, in the Eastern Orthodox view, is to show love towards Christ Jesus himself, not mere wood and paint making up the physical substance of the icon. Worship of the icon as somehow entirely separate from its prototype is expressly forbidden by the Seventh Ecumenical Council; standard teaching in the Eastern Orthodox and Roman Catholic churches alike conforms to this principle. The Catholic Church accepts the same Councils and the canons therein which codified the teaching of icon veneration.

The Latin Church of the West, which after 1054 was to become known separately as the Roman Catholic Church, accepted the decrees of the iconodule Seventh Ecumenical Council regarding images. There is some minor difference, however, in the Catholic attitude to images from that of the Orthodox. Following Gregory the Great, Catholics emphasize the role of images as the Biblia Pauperum, the "Bible of the Poor," from which those who could not read could nonetheless learn. This view of images as educational is shared by most Protestants.

Catholics also, however, accept in principle the Eastern Orthodox veneration of images, believing that whenever approached, sacred images are to be reverenced. Though using both flat wooden panel and stretched canvas paintings, Catholics traditionally have also favored images in the form of three-dimensional statuary, whereas in the East statuary is much less widely employed.

==Septuagint==
The Greek word eikon means an image or likeness that represents something else. An eikon does not necessarily imply sanctity or veneration.

The Septuagint is the Greek translation of the Hebrew Scriptures used by the early Christians, and Eastern Orthodox consider it the only authoritative text of those Scriptures. In it the word eikon is used for everything from man being made in the divine image to the "molten idol" placed by Manasses in the Temple.
#Genesis 1:26-27;
#Genesis 5:1-3;
#Genesis 9:6;
#Exodus 25:1820
#Numbers 21:89
#Deuteronomy 4:16
#1 Samuel (1 Kings) 6:11 (Alexandrian manuscript);
#2 Kings 11:18;
#1 Chronicles 28:1819;
#2 Chronicles 33:7;
#Psalm 38:7
#Psalm 72:20;
#Isaiah 40, 19-20;
#Ezekiel 7:20;
#Ezekiel 8:5 (Alexandrian manuscript);
#Ezekiel 16:17;
#Ezekiel 23:14;
#Ezekiel 41:1718;
#Daniel 2:31,32,34,35;
#Daniel 3:1,2,3,5,7,11,12,14,15,18;
#Hosea 13:2

Be aware that Septuagint numberings and names and the English Bible numberings and names are not uniformly identical.

==New Testament==
In the New Testament the term is used for everything from Jesus as the image of the invisible God (Colossians 1:15) to the image of Caesar on a Roman coin () to the image of the Beast in the Apocalypse (Revelation 14:19). Here is a complete listing:

#;
#Mark 12:16
#Luke 20:24
#John 5:39
#Romans 1:23;
#Romans 8:29;
#1 Corinthians 11:7;
#1 Corinthians 15:49
#2 Corinthians 3:18;
#2 Corinthians 4:4;
#Colossians 1:15;
#Colossians 3:10;
#Hebrews 10:1;
#Revelation 13:14;
#Revelation 13:15;
#Revelation 14:9;
#Revelation 14:11
#Revelation 15:2
#Revelation 16:2
#Revelation 19:20;
#Revelation 20:4.

==Other religious traditions==
Sunni Islam severely limits the use of visual representations (see Islamic art). Hinduism has a very rich iconography called murti. Though Hinduism is commonly represented by anthropomorphic religious images, aniconism is equally represented with such abstract symbols of God such as the Shiva linga and the saligrama. Hinduism: Beliefs and Practices, by Jeanne Fowler, pgs. 42-43, at Books.Google.com and Flipside of Hindu symbolism, by M. K. V. Narayan at pgs. 84-85 at Books.Google.com Moreover, Hindus have found it easier to focus on anthropmorphic icons, because Lord Krishna said in the Bhagavad Gita, Chapter 12, Verse 5, that it is much more difficult to focus on God as the unmanifested than God with form, due to human beings having the need to perceive via the senses. 

==See also==

* Religious image
* Analogion
* Chora Church
* Christian symbolism

* Ideogram
* Isaac Fanous
* Orans
* Podea

* Panagia
* Prokhor
* Proskynetarion
* Russian symbolism

==Notes==

==References==
*Beckwith, John, Early Christian and Byzantine Art, Penguin History of Art (now Yale), 2nd edn. 1979, ISBN 0-14-056033-5

==Further reading==
*
*

== External links ==

=== Orthodox ===
*Orthodox Iconography by Elias Damianakis
*A Discourse in Iconography by St. John of Shanghai and San Francisco
*The Iconic and Symbolic in Orthodox Iconography
*Icon & worship - Icons of Karakallou Monastery, Mt.Athos
*Contemporary Byzantine icon studio, iconography school and orthodox resources
*Iconography Guide -free eLearning site
*Orthodox iconography by Fr. Theodore Koufos
*On the difference of Western Religious Art and Orthodox Iconography
*Church of the Nativity - Explanation of Orthodox Christian Icons
*Concerning the Veneration of Icons
*Holy Icons: Theology in Color (Antiochian Orthodox Archdiocese)
*Icons by Sergei Fyodorov

=== Catholic ===
*"Veneration of Images" article from The Catholic Encyclopedia
*Age of spirituality : late antique and early Christian art, third to seventh century from The Metropolitan Museum of Art

=== Pictures ===
*Icons of Mount Athos
*Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America: Icons
*Gallery of icons, murals and mosaics (mostly Russian) from 11th to 20th century
*www.eikonografos.com A huge collection of Byzantine Icons
*Contemporary Orthodox Byzantine style murals. Large gallery.

 



[[Icon (programming language)]]

Icon is a very high-level programming language featuring goal directed execution and many facilities for managing strings and textual patterns. It is related to SNOBOL and SL5, string processing languages. Icon is not object-oriented, but an object-oriented extension called Idol was developed in 1996 which eventually became Unicon.

==Basic syntax==
The Icon language is derived from the ALGOL-class of structured programming languages, and thus has syntax similar to C or Pascal. Icon is most similar to Pascal, using := syntax for assignments, the procedure keyword and similar syntax. On the other hand, Icon uses C-style brackets for structuring execution groups, and programs start by running a procedure called "main".

In many ways Icon also shares features with most scripting programming languages (as well as SNOBOL and SL5, from which they were taken): variables do not have to be declared, types are cast automatically, and numbers can be converted to strings and back automatically. Another feature common to many scripting languages, but not all, is the lack of a line-ending character; in Icon, lines not ended by a semicolon get ended by an implied semicolon if it makes sense.

Procedures are the basic building blocks of Icon programs, and although they use Pascal naming they work more like C functions and can return values; there is no function keyword in Icon.

 procedure doSomething(aString)
 write(aString)
 end

==Goal-directed execution==
One of Icon's key concepts is that control structures are based on the "success" or "failure" of expressions, rather than on boolean logic, as in most other programming languages. Under this model, simple comparisons like if&nbsp;a&nbsp;<&nbsp;b do not mean "if the operations to the right evaluate to true" as they would under most languages; instead it means something more like "if the operations to the right succeed". In this case the < operator succeeds if the comparison is true, so the end result is the same. In addition, the < operator returns its second argument if it succeeds, allowing things like if&nbsp;a&nbsp;<&nbsp;b&nbsp;<&nbsp;c, a common type of comparison that in most languages must be written as a conjunction of two inequalities like if&nbsp;a&nbsp;<&nbsp;b&nbsp;&amp;&amp;&nbsp;b&nbsp;<&nbsp;c.

The utility of this concept becomes much clearer when you consider real-world examples. Since Icon uses success or failure for all flow control, this simple code:

if a := read() then write(a)

will copy one line of the standard input to standard output. What's interesting about this example is that the code will work even if the read() causes an error, for instance, if the file does not exist. In that case the statement a := read() will fail, and write will simply not be called.

Success and failure are passed "up" through functions, meaning that a failure inside a nested function will cause the functions calling it to fail as well. For instance, we can write a program to copy an entire input file to output in a single line:

while write(read())

When the read() command fails, at the end of file for instance, the failure will be passed up the chain and write() will fail as well. The while, being a control structure, stops on failure, meaning it stops when the file is empty. For comparison, consider a similar example written in Java-based pseudocode:

 try {
 while ((a = read()) != EOF) {
 write(a);
 }
 } catch (Exception e) {
 // do nothing, exit the loop
 }

In this case there are two comparisons needed, one for end of file (EOF) and another for all other errors. Since Java does not allow errors to be compared as logic elements, as under Icon, the lengthy try/catch syntax must be used instead. Try blocks also impose a performance penalty for simply using them, even if no error occurs, a distributed cost that Icon avoids.

Icon refers to this concept as goal-directed execution, referring to the way that execution continues until some goal is reached. In the example above the goal is to read the entire file; the read command continues to succeed while there is more information to be read, and fails when there isn't. The goal is thus coded directly in the language, instead of using statements checking return codes or similar constructs.

==Generators==
Expressions in Icon often return a single value, for instance, x < 5 will evaluate and succeed if the value of x is less than 5 or fail. However several of the examples below rely on the fact that many expressions do not immediately return success or failure, returning values in the meantime. This drives the examples with every and to; every causes to to continue to return values until it fails. 

This is a key concept in Icon, known as generators. Generators drive much of the loop functionality in the language, but do so more directly; the programmer does not write a loop and then pull out and compare values, Icon will do all of this for you.

Within the parlance of Icon, the evaluation of an expression or function results in a result sequence. A result sequence contains all the possible values that can be generated by the expression or function. When the result sequence is exhausted (e.g. there are no more values within the result sequence), the expression or function fails. Iteration over the result sequence is achieved either implicitly via Icon's goal directed evaluation or explicitly via the every clause. 

Icon includes several generator-builders. The alternator syntax allows a series of items to be generated in sequence until one fails: 

 1 | "hello" | x < 5 
can generate "1", "hello", and "5" if x is less than 5. Alternators can be read as "or" in many cases, for instance:

 if y < (x | 5) then write("y=", y)

will write out the value of y if it is smaller than x or 5. Internally Icon checks every value from left to right until one succeeds or the list empties and it returns a failure. Remember that functions will not be called unless the calls within do not fail, so this example can be shortened to:

 write("y=", (x | 5) > y)

Another simple generator is the to, which generates lists of integers; every write(1 to 10) will do exactly what it seems to. The bang syntax generates every item of a list; every write(!aString) will output each character of aString on a new line.

To demonstrate the power of this concept, consider string operations. Most languages include a function known as find or indexOf that returns the location of a string within another. Consider:

 s = "All the world's a stage. And all the men and women merely players";
 i = indexOf("the", s)

This code will return 4, the position of the first occurrence of the word "the". To get the next instance of "the" an alternate form must be used, 

 i = indexOf("the", s, 5)
the 5 at the end saying it should look from position 5 on. In order to extract all the occurrences of "the", a loop must be used...

 s = "All the world's a stage. And all the men and women merely players";
 i = indexOf("the", s)
 while i != -1 {
 write(i);
 i = indexOf("the", s, i+1);
 }

Under Icon the find function is a generator, and will return the next instance of the string each time it is resumed before finally failing after it passes the end of the string. The same code under Icon can be written:

 s := "All the world's a stage. And all the men and women merely players"
 every write(find("the",s))

find will return the index of the next instance of "the" each time it is resumed by every, eventually passing the end of the string and failing. As in the prior example, this will cause write to fail, and the (one-line) every loop to exit. 

Of course there are times where you deliberately want to find a string after some point in input, for instance, you might be scanning a text file containing data in multiple columns. Goal-directed execution works here as well, and can be used this way:

 write(5 < find("the", s))

The position will only be returned if "the" appears after position 5, the comparison will fail otherwise, passing that failure to write() as before. There is one small "trick" to this code that needs to be considered: comparisons return the right hand result, so it is important to put the find on the right hand side of the comparison. If the 5 were placed on the right, 5 would be written.

Icon adds several control structures for looping through 
generators. The every operator is similar to while, looping through every item returned by a generator and exiting on failure:

 every k := i to j do
 write(someFunction(k))

Why use every instead of a while loop in this case? 
Because while re-evaluates the first result,
but every produces all results.
The every syntax actually injects values into the function in a fashion similar to blocks under Smalltalk. For instance, the above loop can be re-written this way:

 every write(someFunction(i to j))

Users can build new generators easily using the suspend keyword:

 procedure findOnlyOdd(pattern, theString)
 every i := find(pattern, theString) do
 if i % 2 = 1 then suspend i
 end

This example loops over theString using find to look for pattern. When one is found, and the position is odd, the location is returned from the function with suspend. Unlike return, suspend writes down where it is in the internal generators as well, allowing it to pick up where it left off on the next iteration.

==Strings==
In keeping with its script-like functionality, Icon adds a number of features to make working with strings easier. Most notable among these is the scanning system, which repeatedly calls functions on a string:

s ? write(find("the"))

is a short form of the examples shown earlier. In this case the subject of the find function is placed outside the parameters in front of the question-mark. Icon functions are deliberately (as opposed to automatically) written to identify the subject in parameter lists and allow them to be pulled out in this fashion.

Substrings can be extracted from a string by using a range specification within brackets. A range specification can return a point to a single character, or a slice of the string. Strings can be indexed from either the right or the left. It is important to note that positions within a string are between the characters 1A2B3C4 and can be specified from the right -3A-2B-1C0

For example

 "Wikipedia"[1] ==> "W"
 "Wikipedia"[3] ==> "k"
 "Wikipedia"[0] ==> "a"
 "Wikipedia"[1:3] ==> "Wi"
 "Wikipedia"[-2:0] ==> "ia"
 "Wikipedia"[2+:3] ==> "iki"

Where the last example shows using a length instead of an ending position

The subscripting specification can be used as a Lvalue within an expression. This can be used to insert strings into another string or delete parts of a string. For example,

 s := "abc"
 s[2] := "123" 
 s now has a value of "a123c"
 s := "abcdefg"
 s[3:5] := "ABCD" 
 s now has a value of "abABCDefg"
 s := "abcdefg"
 s[3:5] := ""
 s now has a value of "abefg"

==Other structures==
Icon also allows the user to easily construct their own lists (or arrays):

aCat := ["muffins", "tabby", 2002, 8]

The items within a list can be of any sort, including other structures. To quickly build larger lists, Icon includes the list generator; i := list(10, "word") generates a list containing 10 copies of "word".

Like arrays in other languages, Icon allows items to be looked up by position, e.g., weight := aCat[4].

The bang-syntax, e.g., every write(!aCat), will print out four lines, each with one element.

Icon includes stack-like functions, push and pop to allow them to form the basis of stacks and queues.

Icon also includes functionality for sets and tables (known as hashes, associative arrays, dictionaries, etc.):

 symbols := table(0)
 symbols["there"] := 1
 symbols["here"] := 2

This code creates a table that will use zero as the default value of any unknown key. It then adds two items into it, with the keys "there" and "here", and values 1 and 2.

==String scanning==
One of the powerful features of Icon is string scanning. The scan string operator, ? saves the current string scanning environment and creates a new string scanning environment. The string scanning environment consists of two keyword variables, &subject and &pos. Where &subject is the string being scanned, and &pos is the cursor or current position within the subject string. 

For example

 s := "this is a string"
 s ? write("subject=[",&subject,"] pos=[",&pos,"]")

would produce

subject=[this is a string] pos=[1]

Built-in and user defined functions can be used to move around within the string being scanned. Many of the built in functions will default to &subject and &pos (for example the find function). The following, for example, will write all blank delimited "words" in a string.

 s := "this is a string"
 s ? { # Establish string scanning environment 
 while not pos(0) do { # Test for end of string 
 tab(many(' ')) # Skip past any blanks
 word := tab(upto(' ') | 0) # the next word is up to the next blank -or- the end of the line
 write(word) # write the word
 }
 }

A more complicated example demonstrates the integration of generators and string scanning within the language.

 procedure main()
 s := "Mon Dec 8"
 s ? write(Mdate() | "not a valid date")
 end
 # Define a matching function that returns
 # a string that matches a day month dayofmonth
 procedure Mdate()
 # Define some initial values
 static dates
 static days
 initial {
 days := ["Mon","Tue","Wed","Thr","Fri","Sat","Sun"]
 dates := ["Jan","Feb","Mar","Apr","May","Jun",
 "Jul","Aug","Sep","Oct","Nov","Dec"]
 }
 every suspend (retval <- tab(match(!days)) || # Match a day
 =" " || # Followed by a blank
 tab(match(!dates)) || # Followed by the month
 =" " || # Followed by a blank
 matchdigits(2) # Followed by at least 2 digits 
 ) &
 (=" " | pos(0) ) & # Either a blank or the end of the string
 retval # And finally return the string
 end
 # Matching function that returns a string of n digits
 procedure matchdigits(n)
 suspend (v := tab(many(&digits)) & *v <= n) & v
 end

The idiom of expr<sub>1</sub> & expr<sub>2</sub> & expr<sub>3</sub> returns the value of the last expression

==See also==
*Unicon programming language (a descendant/enhancement of Icon)
*CLU by Barbara Liskov
*coroutines
*Generator

==References==
The definitive work is The Icon Programming Language (third edition) by Griswold and Griswold, ISBN 1-57398-001-3.
It is out of print but can be downloaded in PDF form.

Icon also has co-expressions, providing non-local exits for program execution. Please see The Icon Programming language and also Shamim Mohamed's article Co-expressions in Icon. (This topic should probably be expanded).

==External links==

* Icon homepage
* Oral history interview with Stephen Wampler, Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota. Wampler discusses his work on the development of the Icon programming language in the late 1970s at the University of Arizona under Ralph Griswold.
* Oral history interview with Robert Goldberg, Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota. Goldberg discusses his interaction with Ralph Griswold when working on the Icon programming language in the classroom at Illinois Institute of Technology.
* Oral history interview with Kenneth Walker, Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota. Walker describes the work environment of the Icon project, his interactions with Ralph Griswold, and his own work on an Icon compiler.
* The Icon Programming Language page on The Rosetta Code comparative programming tasks project site



[[Indian massacre]]

In the history of the European colonization of North America, the term "Indian massacre" was often used to describe either mass killings of people of European descent by indigenous people of the North American continent (Indians) or mass killings of indigenous people perpetrated by the people of European descent and/or other indigenous people.

== Overview ==

Determining how many people died in these massacres overall is difficult. In the book The Wild Frontier: Atrocities during the American-Indian War from Jamestown Colony to Wounded Knee, lawyer and amateur historian William M. Osborn tallied every recorded incident he considered an atrocity in the area that would eventually become the continental United States, from first contact (1511) to the closing of the frontier (1890), and determined that 7,193 people died from atrocities perpetrated by whites, and 9,156 people died from atrocities perpetrated by Native Americans. Osborn, William M. (2001). The Wild Frontier: Atrocities During The American-Indian War from Jamestown Colony to Wounded Knee. Garden City, NY: Random House. ISBN 978-0-375-50374-0. Osborn has been criticized by Anthony Day of the Los Angeles Times as being biased towards whites and against Native Americans. Day, Anthony (January 12, 2001). "One-Sided Take on the Old West". Los Angeles Times. 

== List of massacres ==
This is a listing of some of the events reported then or referred to now as "Indian massacre".

=== Prehistoric ===

 Year Date Name Description Claimants 
 1325 Crow Creek massacre 486 known dead near Chamberlain, South Dakota, at an archaeological site and a U.S. National Historic Landmark number 66000710 was an internal Native American eradication. 
 

=== 15001830 ===

 Year Date Name Description Claimants 
 1539 Napituca Massacre After defeating resisting Timucuan warriors, Hernando de Soto had 200 executed, in the first large-scale massacre by Europeans on what became American soil. 
 1540 October 18 Mabila Massacre The Choctaw retaliated against Hernando de Soto's expedition, Clayton, Lawrence A., \"Hernando de Soto: A Brief\". killing 200 soldiers, as well as many of their horses and pigs, for their having burned down Mabila compound and killed c. 2,500 warriors who had hidden in houses of a fake village. Wilford, John Noble, \"De Soto's Trail: Courage and Cruelty Come Alive\", New York Times, 19 May 1987 Steele, Ian Kenneth, Warpaths: Invasions of North America, Oxford University Press, 1994. pp. 15, 47, 116. 
 154142 Tiguex Massacres After the invading Spaniards seized the houses, food and clothing of the Tiguex, and raped their women, the Tiguex resisted. The Spanish attacked them, burning at the stake 50 people who had surrendered. Francisco Vsquez de Coronado's men laid siege to the Moho Pueblo, and after a months-long siege, they killed 200 fleeing warriors. Sauer, C., Sixteenth Century North America; the land and the people as seen by the Europeans, University of California Press, 1971, p. 141. Flint, R., No settlement, no conquest : a history of the Coronado Entrada, University of New Mexico Press, 2008, pp. 144153. 
 1599 January 2224 Acoma Massacre In retaliation for the killing of 11 Spanish soldiers, Juan de Oate led a punitive expedition against the natives in a three-day battle at the Acoma Pueblo, killing approximately 800. King Philip III later punished Oate for his excesses. \"Conquistador Statue Stirs Hispanic Pride and Indian Rage\" Weber, David J., The Spanish Frontier in North America, Yale University Press, New Haven, 1992, pp. 8586. 
 1601 Sandia Mountains Spanish troops destroyed 3 Indian villages in the Sandia Mountains, New Mexico. According to Spanish sources, 900 Tompiro Indians were killed. Riley, Carroll, L., Rio del Norte: People of the Upper Rio Grande from Earliest Times to the Pueblo Revolt, University of Utah Press, 2007, p. 252, ISBN 978-0-87480-496-6 
 1622 March 22 Jamestown Massacre Powhatan (Pamunkey) killed 347 English men, women and children throughout the Virginia colony, almost one-third of the English population of the Jamestown colony, in an effort to push the English out of Virginia. Americans at War: 15001815 Summary 
 1623 May 12 Pamunkey Peace Talks The English poisoned the wine at a \"peace conference\" with Powhatan leaders, killing about 200; they physically attacked and killed another 50. 
 1637 May 26 Mystic Massacre In the Pequot War, English colonists commanded by John Mason, with Mohegan and Narragansett allies, launched a night attack on a large Pequot village on the Mystic River in present-day Connecticut, where they burned the inhabitants in their homes and killed all survivors, for total fatalities of about 600700. Cave, Alfred A., The Pequot War, University of Massachusetts Press, 1996, pp. 144154. 
 1643 February 25 Pavonia Massacre In 1643 the Mohawk attacked a band of Wappinger and Tappan, who fled to New Amsterdam seeking the protection of New Netherland governor, William Kieft. Kieft dispersed them to Pavonia Wm Kieft and Pavonia and Corlears Hook. They were later attacked, 129 being killed. This prompted the beginning of Kieft's War, driven by mercenary John Underhill. Churchill 1997, p. 198 
 1643 August Hutchinson Massacre As part of Kieft's War in New Netherland, near the Split Rock (now northeastern Bronx in New York City), local Lenape (or Siwanoy) killed Anne Hutchinson, six of her children, a son-in-law, and as many as seven others (servants). Susanna, one of Hutchinson's daughters, was taken captive and lived with the natives for several years. 
 1644 March Pound Ridge Massacre As part of Kieft's War in New Netherland, at present day Pound Ridge, New York, John Underhill, hired by the Dutch, attacked and burned a sleeping village of Lenape, killing about 500 Indians. Trelease, A., Indian Affairs in Colonial New York; The Seventeenth Century, pp. 7980. 
 1655 September 1115 Peach Tree War In retaliation for Director-General of New Netherland Peter Stuyvesant's attacks to their trading partners and allies at New Sweden, united bands of natives attacked Pavonia, Staten Island, Colen Donck and other areas of New Netherland. 
 1675 September 18 Bloody Brook Massacre During King Philip's War, Indian warriors killed 60 soldiers of Deerfield, Massachusetts. Find A Grave website 
 1675 December 19 Great Swamp Massacre Colonial militia attacked a Narragansett fort near South Kingstown, Rhode Island. At least 40 warriors were killed and 300 women, children and elder men burnt in the village. Ellis, George W., Morris, John E., King Philip's War, Grafton Historical Series, The Grafton Press, 1906, pp. 152155 
 1676 March 26 Nine Men's Misery During King Philip's War, warriors subjected nine captive soldiers to ritual torture and death. Nine Men's Misery Marker, Joseph Bucklin Society, accessdate 17 February 2013 Franko, Victor, Nine Men's Misery Part 2 Historical Research, 2003, Joseph Bucklin Society, accessdate 17 February 2013 
 1676 May 10 Turner Falls Massacre Captain William Turner and 150 militia volunteers attacked a fishing Indian camp at present-day Turners Falls, Massachusetts. At least 100 women and children were killed in the attack. Mandell, Daniel R., King Philip's War: the conflict over New England, Chelsea House Publishers, 2007, p. 100, ISBN 978-0-7910-9346-7 
 1676 July 2 Rhode Island Militia volunteers under Major Talcott attacked a band of Narragansetts on Rhode Island, killing 34 men and 92 women and children. Kiernan 2007, p. 239 
 1680 August 10 Pueblo Revolt Pueblo warriors killed 380 Spanish settlers, and drove other Spaniards from New Mexico. Resistance and Accommodation in New Mexico 
 1689 August 5 Lachine massacre 1,500 Mohawk warriors attacked the small settlement of Lachine, New France and killed more than 90 of the village's 375 French residents, following widespread French attacks on Mohawk villages in present-day New York. 
 1689 Zia Pueblo Governor Jironza de Cruzate destroyed the pueblo of Zia, New Mexico. 600 Indians were killed and 70 survivors enslaved. Preucel, Robert W., Archaeologies of the Pueblo revolt: identity, meaning, and renewal in the Pueblo world, University of New Mexico Press, 2007, p. 56, ISBN 978-0-8263-2247-0 
 1690 February 8 Schenectady Massacre As part of the Beaver Wars, French and Algonquins destroyed Schenectady, New York, killing 60 Dutch and English settlers, including ten women and at least twelve children. Konstantin 2002, p. 33 
 1692 January 24 Candlemas Massacre During King William's War, 200-300 Abenaki and Canadiens killed 75, took 100 prisoner and burned the town of York, Maine district of the Province of Massachusetts Bay Banks, Charles Edward, History of York, Maine, successively known as Bristol (1632), Agamentious (1641), Gorgeana (1642), and York (1652). With contributions on topography and land titles by Angevine W. Gowen. Sketches by the author. Baltimore, Regional Publishing Company, 1967 reprint of first edition: Charles E. Banks, Boston, 1931 Vol. 1 
 1704 Apalachee Massacre Former Carolina Governor James Moore launched a series of brutal attacks on the Apalachee villages of Northern Florida. They killed 1000 Apalachees and enslaved at least 2000 survivors. Gallay 2003, pp. 147148 
 1704 February 29 Deerfield Massacre During Queen Anne's War, a force composed of Abenaki, Kanienkehaka, Wyandot and Pocumtuck, led by a small contingent of French-Canadian militia, sacked the town of Deerfield, Massachusetts, killing 56 civilians and taking more than 100 as captives. Konstantin 2002, p. 48 
 1712 May Fox Indian Massacre French troops and Indian allies slaughtered around 1,000 Fox Indians men, women and children in a five-day massacre near the head of the Detroit River. Ashlee, Laura R. Traveling Through Time: A Guide to Michigan's Historical Markers, University of Michigan Press, 2005, p. 502, ISBN 978-0-47203-066-8 
 1713 March 2023 Fort Neoheroka Militia volunteers and Indian allies under Colonel James Moore attacked Ft. Neoheroka, the main stronghold of the Tuscarora Indians. 200 Tuscaroras were burned to death in the village and 9001000 others were subsequently killed or captured. Gallay 2003, p. 284 Read, Milton, The tar heel state: a history of North Carolina, University of South Carolina Press, 2005, pp. 3637, ISBN 978-1-57003-591-3 
 1715 April 15 Pocotaligo Massacre Yamassee Indians killed 4 British traders and representatives of Carolina at Pocotaligo, near present-day Yemassee, South Carolina. 90 other traders were killed in the following weeks. Gallay 2003, p. 328 
 1724 August 24 Norridgewock Massacre Captains Jeremiah Moulton and Johnson Harmon led 200 rangers to the Abenaki village of Norridgewock, Maine to kill Father Sebastian Rale and destroy the Indian settlement. The rangers massacred 80 Abenakis (including two dozen women and children). Grenier, John The Far Reaches of Empire: War in Nova Scotia, 1710-1760, University of Oklahoma Press, 2008, p. 84, ISBN 978-0-80613-876-3 
 1729 November 29 Natchez Massacre Natchez Indians attacked French settlements near present-day Natchez, Mississippi, killing more than 200 French colonists. Barnett, James F., The Natchez Indians: a history to 1735, University Press of Mississippi, 2007, p. 105, ISBN 978-1-57806-988-0 
 1730 September 9 Massacre at Fox Fort A French army of 1,400 soldiers and its Indian allies massacred about 500 Fox Indians (including 300 women and children) as they tried to flee their besieged camp. Edmunds, R. Davids and Peyser, Joseph L. The Fox Wars: Mesquakie Challenge to New France, University of Oklahoma Press, 1993, pp. 151-156, ISBN 978-0-80612-551-0 
 1747 October Chama River Spanish troops ambushed a group of Utes on the Chama River, killing 111 Indians and taking 206 as captives . Blackhawk, Ned, Violence over the Land: Indians and Empires in the Early American West, Harvard University Press, 2006, p. 50, ISBN 978-0-67402-290-4 
 1755 Jul 8 Draper's Meadow massacre 5 settlers killed by Shawnee Indians at Draper's Meadow, Virginia 
 1757 August 9 Battle of Fort William Henry Following the fall of Fort William Henry during the Seven Years' War, Indians allied with the French killed between 70 and 180 British and colonial prisoners. Konstantin 2002, p. 224 
 1758 March 16 San Saba Mission Massacre A large party of Comanche, Tonkawa and Hasinai Indians attacked the mission of San Saba, Texas, killing 8 people and burning down the mission. Hamalainen 2008, pp. 58-59 
 1759 October 4 St. Francis Raid During the Seven Years' War, in retaliation for the rumored murder of a captured Stockbridge man and detention of Captain Quinten Kennedy of the Rogers' Rangers, Major Robert Rogers led a party of approximately 150 English regulars, volunteers and Mahican into the village of Odanak, Quebec. They killed up to 30 Abenaki people, among them women and children, as confirmed via conflicting reports. Bruchac, Marge, Reading Abenaki Traditions and European Records of Rogers' Raid, August 2006, pp. 3-4 
 1763 September 14 Devil's Hole Massacre During the Seven Years' War, Seneca allied with the French attacked a British supply train and soldiers just south of Fort Niagara. They killed 21 teamsters from the supply train and 81 soldiers who attempted to rescue the train. Konstantin 2002, p. 260 
 1763 December Killings by the Paxton Boys In response to Pontiac's Rebellion, frontier Pennsylvania settlers killed 20 peaceful Susquehannock. Taylor, Alan, American Colonies, New York: Viking Press, 2001 \"A Narrative of the Late Massacres...\", Benjamin Franklin's account of the massacre and criticism of the Paxton Boys \"A Disquisition Portraying the History Relative to the Enoch Brown Incident\", Greencastle Museum 
 1764 July 26 Enoch Brown school massacre Four Delaware killed a schoolmaster, 10 pupils and a pregnant woman. Two pupils were scalped but survived. 
 1774 September Spanish Peaks Spanish troops surprised a large fortified Comanche village near Spanish Peaks (Raton, New Mexico). They killed nearly 300 Indians (men, women and children) and took 100 captives. Hamalainen 2008, p. 78 
 1774 April 30 Yellow Creek Massacre Daniel Greathouse killed members of Chief Logan's family. Konstantin 2002, p. 106 
 1777 September 26 The Grave Creek Massacre A milita company under Captain William Foreman is ambushed and killed by Indians south of Wheeling, West Virginia. De Haas, Wills. History of the early settlement and Indian wars of Western Virginia; embracing an account of the various expeditions in the West, previous to 1795. Philadelphia: King & Baird. 1851. 
 1778 July 3 Battle of Wyoming During the American Revolutionary War, following a battle with rebel defenders of Forty Fort, Iroquois allies of Loyalist forces hunted and killed those who fled; they were later accused of using ritual torture to kill those soldiers who surrendered. These claims were denied by Iroquois and British leaders at the time. The Battle of Wyoming and Hartley's Expedition Wallace, Paul A. W., Indians in Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania Historical & Museum Commission, 2007, 200 pages, pp. 162-164, ISBN 978-0-89271-017-1 
 1778 August 31 Stockbridge Massacre An ambush by the British during the American Revolutionary War that left nearly 40 natives dead. Konstantin 2002, p. 246 
 1778 November 11 Cherry Valley Massacre British and Seneca forces attacked the fort and village at Cherry Valley, New York, killing 16 rebel troops and more than 30 settlers. Konstantin 2002, p. 321 
 1781 September 1 Dietz Massacre During the Revolution, Iroquois allied with the British attacked the home of Johannes Dietz, Berne, New York, killing and scalping Dietz, his wife, their daughter-in-law, four children of their son's family, and a servant girl. Priest, Josiah, Stories of the Revolution with an account of the lost child of the Delaware, 1836, Hoffman and White Albany, New York, accessdate 17 February 2013 Dietz Massacre 
 1781 September 1 Long Run Massacre Thirty-two settlers killed by 50 Miami people while trying to move to safety, additionally approximately 15 settlers and 17 soldiers were killed attempting to bury the initial victims. Wilcox, G.T., An account of the Long Run Massacre and Floyd's Defeat as told by G. T. Wilcox, Squire Boone's Grandson in a letter to Hon. Thos. W. Bullitt. Kentucky Genealogy 28, June 2000, accessdate 28 December 2012. Akers, Vincent J. History of Painted Stone Station. Painted Stone Settlers Organization. 2012, accessdate 28 December 2012. 
 1782 March 8 Gnadenhtten massacre During the Revolution, Pennsylvania militiamen massacred nearly 100 non-combatant Christian Lenape, mostly women and children; they killed and scalped all but two young boys. Tuscarawas Konstantin 2002, p. 57 
 1782 May 10 Corbly Family Massacre During the Revolution, Indians allied with the British attacked the family of John Corbly, a Christian minister in Greene County, Pennsylvania. His wife and three of their children were killed; and two daughters were scalped, but survived. The Reverend Corbly escaped. Daughters of the American Revolution Magazine, R.R. Bowker Co., 1925, Volume 59, 1925, JanuaryJune p. 234 
 1791 November 4 Fort Recovery Massacre At present day Fort Recovery, Ohio, an army of 1,500 Americans led by Arthur St. Clair, was ambushed by an army of Miami Indians led by chief Little Turtle. Before retreating, 700 of the 1,500 American soldiers were slaughtered. Fairfax Downed, Indian Wars of the U.S. Army 1776-1865 (1963), pp. 54-59 
 1805 January Canyon del Muerto Spanish soldiers led by Antonio Narbona massacred 115 Navajo Indians (mostly women, children and old men) in Canyon del Muerto, northeastern Arizona. Denetdale, Jennifer Nez, Reclaiming Din History: The Legacies of Navajo Chief Manuelito and Juanita, University of Arizona Press; 2007, p. 56. ISBN 978-0-81652-660-4. 
 1812 August 15 Fort Dearborn Massacre(Battle of Fort Dearborn) During the War of 1812, Indians allied with the British killed American soldiers and settlers evacuating Fort Dearborn (site of present-day Chicago, Illinois). In all, 26 soldiers, two officers, two women and 12 children, and 12 trappers and settlers hired as scouts, were killed. Konstantin 2002, p. 231 
 1812 September 3 Pigeon Roost Massacre During the War of 1812, twenty four settlers, including fifteen children, were massacred by a war party of Native Americans (mostly Shawnee, but possibly including some Delawares and Potawatomis) in a surprise attack on a small village located in what is today Scott County, Indiana. Allison, Harold (1986, Harold Allison). The Tragic Saga of the Indiana Indians. Turner Publishing Company, Paducah. 
 1812 September 10 Zimmer Massacre During the War of 1812, four settlers were killed in an attack believed to be by aggrieved Lenape, in Ashland County, Ohio. Howe, Henry., Howe's Historical Collections of Ohio, Volume 1, pp. 257258, 1907 
 1812 September 15 Copus Massacre During the War of 1812, Northwest Indians attacked the Ashland County, Ohio homestead of Rev. James Copus, killing three militiamen and one settler; and wounding two militiamen and a settler's daughter; settlers killed two Indians. Howe, Henry., Howe's Historical Collections of Ohio, Volume 1, pp. 258259, 1907 
 1813 January 22 River Raisin Massacre During the War of 1812, Indians allied with the British killed between 30 and 60 Kentucky militia after their surrender. Konstantin 2002, p. 20 
 1813 August 18 Dilbone Massacre During the War of 1812, an Indian allegedly killed three settlers (David Garrard and Henry Dilbone and wife) in Miami County, Ohio. Settlers later killed the Indian they suspected of the murders. Sutton, R., The History of Shelby County Ohio, 1883, p. 122 
 1813 August 30 Fort Mims Massacre After Creek were attacked by US forces in the Battle of Burnt Corn (which the Creek won), a band of Red Sticks sacked Fort Mims, Alabama, killing 400 civilians and taking 250 scalps. This action brought the US into the internal Creek War, at the same time as the War of 1812. Konstantin 2002, p. 245 
 1813 November 18 Hillabee Massacre Tennessee troops under General White launched a dawn attacked on an unsuspecting Creek town (the village leaders were engaged in peace negotiations with General Andrew Jackson). About 65 Creek Indians were shot or bayoneted. Heidler D.S., Heidler J.T., Encyclopedia of the War of 1812, Naval Institute Press, 2004, p. 239, ISBN 978-0-87436-968-7 
 1813 November 29 Autossee Massacre (Battle of Autossee) Georgia Militia General Floyd attacked a Creek town on Tallapoosa River, in Macon County, Alabama, killing 200 Indians before setting the village afire. McKenney, T.L., Indian Tribes of America, Applewood Books, 2010, p. 307, ISBN 978-1-4290-2265-1 
 1818 April 22 Chehaw Affair During the First Seminole War, U.S. troops attacked a non-hostile Muscogee village, killing an estimated 10 to 50 men, women and children. Andrew Jackson Learns of the Chehaw Affair , The Gilder Lehrman Institute of American History 
 1824 March 22 Fall Creek Massacre Six settlers in Madison County, Indiana killed and robbed eight Seneca. One suspect escaped trial and another was a witness at subsequent trial. Of those charged with murder, one man was hanged 12 January 1825, and two were hanged 2 June 1825. The last defendant was pardoned at the last minute. 
 1826 Dressing Point Massacre A posse of Anglo-Texan settlers massacred a large community of Karankawa Indians near the mouth of the Colorado River in Matagorda County, Texas. Between 40 and 50 Karankawas were killed. Himmel 1999, p. 50 
 

=== 18301911 ===

 Year Date Name Description Claimants 
 1832 May 20 Indian Creek Massacre A party of Potawatomi, with a few Sauk allies, killed fifteen men, women and children and kidnapped two young women, who were later ransomed. Konstantin 2002, p. 128 
 1832 May 24 St. Vrain massacre 4 killed by Ho-Chunk while delivering dispatches during Black Hawk War near present day Pearl City, Illinois during Black Hawk War Armstrong, Perry A. The Sauks and the Black Hawk War, in H.W. Rokker, 1887, pp. 415-416, accessdate 27 December 2012 
 1832 June 14 Spafford Farm massacre Five men were attacked by a Kickapoo war party, four whites and one Indian died, during Black Hawk War, near present day South Wayne, Wisconsin Lewis, James, The Black Hawk War of 1832, Abraham Lincoln Digitization Project, Northern Illinois University. Retrieved 1 August 2007. 
 1832 August 1 Battle of Bad Axe Soldiers under General Henry Atkinson and armed volunteers killed around 150 Indian men, women and children near present-day Victory, Wisconsin. Konstantin 2002, p. 213 
 1833 Exact date unknown Cutthroat Gap Massacre Osage tribe attacked a Kiowa camp west of the Wichita Mountains in southwest Oklahoma where one hundred and fifty Kiowa tribal inhabitants were brutally slaughtered in the Osage attack. May, Jon D., \"Battle of Cutthroat Gap\" Encyclopedia of Oklahoma History and Culture, retrieved 24 May 2012. 
 1835 December 28 Dade Massacre During the Second Seminole War, Seminole killed almost all of a command of 110 American soldiers in Central Florida. All but two of the soldiers were killed; and one survivor died a few months later from his wounds. Axelrod, Alan, Chronicle of the Indian Wars, p. 146 Meltzer, Milton. 2004. Hunted Like A Wolf. Pineapple Press. p.89 
 1836 May 19 Fort Parker Massacre Comanche killed seven European Americans in Limestone County, Texas. The five captured included Cynthia Ann Parker. Konstantin 2002, p. 127 
 1837 April 22 Johnson Massacre At least 20 Apaches were killed near Santa Rita del Cobre, New Mexico while traiding with a group of American settlers led by John Johnson. The Anglos blasted the Apaches with a canon loaded with musket balls, nails and pieces of glass and finished off the wounded. Sweeney, Edwin R. Cochise: Chiricahua Apache Chief, University of Oklahoma Press, 1995, p. 33, ISBN 978-0806126067 
 1838 October 5 Killough Massacre Indians massacred eighteen members and relatives of the Killough family in Texas. Dean, Kenneth Remembering The Killough Massacre, 21 June 2010, East Texas News, Tyler Paper, accessed February 16, 2013. 
 1838 or 1839 Exact date unknown Webster Massacre Comanche killed a party of settlers attempting to ford the Bushy Creek near present day Leander, Texas. All of the Anglo men were killed and Mrs. Webster and her two children were captured. Abbott, Peyton O., Webster massacre, Texas State Historical Association, Handbook of Texas Online, accessed 16 February 2013. 
 1840 March 19 Council House Massacre The 12 leaders of a Comanche delegation (65 people including 35 women and children) were shot in San Antonio, Texas, while trying to escape the local jail. 23 others including 5 women and children were killed in or around the city. Anderson 2005, pp. 182-183 
 1840 August 7 Indian Key Massacre During the Seminole Wars, Florida Seminole attacked and destroyed an Indian Key settlement, killing 13 inhabitants, including noted horticulturist Dr. Henry Perrine. Knetsch, Joe., Florida's Seminole Wars 18171858, Arcadia Publishing (18 September 2012), p. 128 
 1840 October 24 Colorado River Volunteer Rangers under Colonel Moore massacred 140 Comanches (men, women and children) in their village on the Colorado and captured 35 others (mostly small children). Anderson 2005, pp. 190-191 
 1840 Exact date unknown Clear Lake Massacre A posse led by Mexican Salvador Vallejo massacred 150 Pomo and Wappo Indians on Clear Lake, California. Perez, Vincent, Remembering the Hacienda: History and Memory in the Mexican American Southwest, Texas A&M University Press, 2006, p. 85, ISBN 978-1-58544-511-0 
 1846 March Sacramento River Captain Frmont's men attacked a peaceful band of Indians (probably Yanas) on the Sacramento River in California, killing between 120 and 200 Indians. Kiernan 2007, p. 352 
 1846 December Pauma massacre 11 Californios killed by Indians at Escondido, California led to the Temecula massacre. Parker, Horace, The Historic Valley of Temecula. The Temecula Massacre 24 pages, Paisano Press (1971), 286593 
 1846 December Temecula massacre 33 to 40 Indians killed in revenge for the Pauma Massacre at Escondido, California. 
 1847 February 34 Storming of Pueblo de Taos In response to a New Mexican-instigated uprising in Taos, American troops attacked the heavily fortified Pueblo of Taos with artillery, killing nearly 150, some being Indians. Between 25 and 30 prisoners were shot by firing squads. Mcwilliams, Carey, North From Mexico: The Spanish-Speaking People of the United States, Praeger, 1990, p. 115, ISBN 978-0275932244 
 1847 November 29 Whitman massacre Cayuse and Umatilla killed the missionaries Dr. Marcus Whitman, Mrs. Narcissa Whitman and twelve others at Walla Walla, Washington, triggering the Cayuse War. Konstantin 2002, p. 336 
 1848 April Brazos River A hunting party of 26 friendly Wichita and Caddo Indians was massacred by Texas Rangers under Captain Samuel Highsmithe, in a valley south of Brazos River. 25 men and boys were killed, only one child managed to escape. Anderson 2005, pp. 226-227 
 1850 May 15 Bloody Island Massacre Nathaniel Lyon and his U. S. Army detachment of cavalry killed 60100 Pomo people on Bo-no-po-ti island near Clear Lake, (Lake Co., California); they believed the Pomo had killed two Clear Lake settlers who had been abusing and murdering Pomo people. (The Island Pomo had no connections to the enslaved Pomo). This incident led to a general outbreak of settler attacks against and mass killing of native people all over Northern California. Site is California Registered Historical Landmark #427 Letter, Brevet Capt. N. Lyon to Major E.R.S. Canby, 22 May 1850 Heizer 1993, pp. 244246 Key, Karen. Bloody Island (Bo-no-po-ti) The Historical Marker Database. 18 June 2007, accessdate 26 December 2012 
 1851 Old Shasta Town Miners killed 300 Wintu Indians near Old Shasta, California and burned down their tribal council meeting house. Heizer, Robert, Handbook of North American Indians: California, Volume 8, William Sturtevant, General Editor, Smithsonian Institution, 1978, pp. 324325 
 1852 Hynes Bay Massacre Texas militiamen attacked a village of 50 Karankawas, killing 45 of them. Himmel 1999, p. 101 
 1852 April 23 Bridge Gulch Massacre 70 American men led by Trinity County sheriff William H. Dixon killed more than 150 Wintu people in the Hayfork Valley of California, in retaliation for the killing of Col. John Anderson. Norton 1979, pp. 5154 
 1852 November Wright Massacre White settlers led by a notorious Indian hunter named Ben Wright massacred 41 Modocs during a \"peace parley\". Thrapp,Dan L, Encyclopedia of Frontier Biography, Volume 3: P-Z, University of Nebraska Press, 1991, p. 1276, ISBN 978-0803294202 
 1853 Yontoket Massacre A posse of settlers attacked and burnt a Tolowa rancheria at Yontocket, California. 450 Tolowa Indians killed during prayer ceremony by company of volunteers. Thornton 1990, p. 206 Norton 1979 
 1853 Achulet Massacre White settlers launched an attack on a Tolowa village near Lake Earl in California, killing between 65 and 150 Indians at dawn. Norton 1979, pp. 5657 
 1853 Before December 31 \"Ox\" incident US forces attacked and killed an unreported number of Indians in the Four Creeks area (Tulare County, California) in what was referred to by officers as \"our little difficulty\" and \"the chastisement they have received\". Heizer 1993, Letter, Bvt. 2nd Lieut. John Nugens to Lieut T. Wright, 31 December 1853, pp. 1213,. 
 1854 August 19 Grattan Massacre After a detachment of 30 U.S. soldiers in the Nebraska Territory opened fire on an encampment of 4,000 Brul Sioux, killing Chief Conquering Bear, warriors attacked and killed all the soldiers and their civilian interpreter. Michno 2003, p. 27 
 1854 August 20 Ward Massacre Shoshone killed 18 of the 20 members of the Alexander Ward party, attacking them on the Oregon Trail in western Idaho. This event led the U.S. eventually to abandon Fort Boise and Fort Hall, in favor of the use of military escorts for emigrant wagon trains. Oregon Trail in IdahoWard Massacre Site idahohistory.net Ward Massacre washingtonwars.net Michno 2003, pp. 2829 
 1855 January 22 Klamath River massacres In retaliation for the murder of six settlers and the theft of some cattle, whites commenced a \"war of extermination against the Indians\" in Humboldt County, California. Heizer 1993, Crescent City Herald, quoted in Sacramento newspaper., pp. 3536 
 1855 September 2 Harney Massacre US troops under Brigadier General William S. Harney killed 86 Sioux, men, women and children at Blue Water Creek, in present-day Nebraska. About 70 women and children were taken prisoner. Sprague, Donovin A. Rosebud Sioux (Images of America: South Dakota), Arcadia Publishing, 2005, p. 21. 978-0738534473 
 1855 October 8 Lupton Massacre A group of settlers and miners launched a night attack on an Indian village near Upper Table Rock, Oregon, killing 23 Indians (mostly elderly men, women and children). Schwartz, E. A, The Rogue River Indian War and its aftermath, 18501980, University of Oklahoma Press, 1997, pp. 8688, ISBN 978-0-8061-2906-8 
 1855 December 23 Little Butte Creek Oregon volunteers launched a dawn attack on a Tututni and Takelma camp on the Rogue River. Between 19 to 26 Indians were slaughtered. Madley 2012, p. 121 
 1856 June Grande Ronde River Valley Massacre Washington Territorial Volunteers under Colonel Benjamin Shaw attacked a peaceful Cayuse and Walla Walla Indians on the Grande Ronde River in Oregon. 60 Indians, mostly women, old men and children were killed. Massacre on the Grande Ronde River in Oregon, sos.wa.gov 
 1856 March Shingletown In reprisal for Indian stock theft, white settlers massacred at least 20 Yana men, women and children near Shingletown, California. Madley 2012b, pp. 21-22 
 1857 Mar 812 Spirit Lake Massacre Thirty-five to 40 killed and 4 taken captive by Santee Sioux in the last Native American attack on settlers in Iowa. Gardner-Sharp, Abbie History of the Spirit Lake Massacre and Captivity of Miss Abbie Gardner, Des Moines: Iowa Printing, 1885 (reprinted 1892, 1910), accessdate 28 December 2012 
 1858-1859 Round Valley Massacres White settlers slaughtered 150 Yuki Indians in Round Valley, California. Massacres continued through the spring and summer of 1859. In April 1859, in revenge for the killing of 3 cows and 1 stallion belonging to a white man, California militiamen massacred 240 Indians on the Eel River. On 1 May, Major Johnson reported that six hundred Yukis had been massacred by white settlers \"in the last year\". Madley, Benjamin Californias Yuki Indians: Defining Genocide in Native American History in Western Historical Quarterly 39 (Autumn 2008): 303-332, pp. 317-318 Lindsay, Brendan C., Murder State: California's Native American Genocide, 1846-1873,University of Nebraska Press, 2012, p.192-193, ISBN 978-0803224803 
 1859 September Pit River White settlers massacred 70 Achomawi Indians (10 men and 60 women and children) in their village on Pit River in California. Madley 2012, pp. 118-119 
 1859 Chico Creek White settlers attacked a Maidu camp near Chico Creek in California, killing indiscriminately 40 Indians. Madley 2012, p. 117 
 1860 Exact date unknown Massacre at Bloody Rock A group of 65 Yuki Indians were surrounded and massacred by white settlers at Bloody Rock, in Mendocino County, California. Yuki Indians Killed at Bloody Rock 
 1860 February 26 Indian Island Massacre In three nearly simultaneous assaults on the Wiyot, at Indian Island, Eureka, Rio Dell, and near Hydesville, California white settlers killed between 200 and 250 Wiyot in Humboldt County, California. Victims were mostly women, children and elders, as reported by Bret Harte at Arcata newspaper. Other villages massacred within two days. The main site is National Register of Historic Places in the United States #66000208. Heizer 1993 \"In 1860 six murderers nearly wiped out the Wiyot Indian tribein 2004 its members have found ways to heal\", SFGate.com Michno 2003, pp. 7273 
 1860 December 18 Pease River Massacre Texas Rangers under Captain Sul Ross attacked a Comanche village in Foard County, Texas, killing indiscriminately a considerable number of Indians. Anderson 2005, pp. 331-332 
 1860 September 8 Otter Massacre Near Sinker Creek Idaho, 11 persons of the last wagon train of the year were killed and several others were subsequently killed. Some that escaped the initial massacre starved to death Owyhee County Cattlemen, pages 172 - 180 
 1861 Horse Canyon Massacre White settlers and Indian allies attacked a Wailaki village in Horse Canyon (Round Valley, California), killing up to 240 Wailakis. Baumgardner 2006, pp. 204206 
 1861 Cookes Canyon Massacres Apaches massacred hundreds of Americans and Mexicans in and around Cookes Canyon, New Mexico over the course of several months. Thrapp, Dan L. (1979). The Conquest of Apacheria. Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press. ISBN 0-8061-1286-7. 
 1861 Sep 2 Gallinas Massacre Four Confederate soldiers killed by Chiricahua Apache warriors. Thompson, Jerry Don, Colonel John Robert Baylor: Texas Indian Fighter and Confederate Soldier. Hillsboro, Texas: Hill Junior College Press, 1971. 
 1862 Upper Station Massacre California settlers killed at least 20 Wailakis in Round Valley, California. Baumgardner 2006, p. 243 
 1862 Big Antelope Creek Massacre California settlers led by notorious Indian hunter Hi Good launched a dawn attack on a Yana village, massacring about 25 Indians. Madley 2012b, p. 34 
 1862 AugustSeptember Dakota War of 1862 As part of the U.S.-Dakota War, the Sioux killed as many as 800 white settlers and soldiers throughout Minnesota. Some 40,000 white settlers fled their homes on the frontier. University of Cincinnati News: Tolzmann Edits Pioneer Accounts of Sioux 
 1862 October 24 Tonkawa Massacre During the U.S. Civil War, a detachment of irregular Union Indians, mainly Kickapoo, Delaware and Shawnee, accompanied by Caddo allies, attempted to destroy the Tonkawa tribe in Indian Territory. They killed 240 of 390 Tonkawa, leaving only 150 survivors. Michno 2003, pp. 105106 
 1863 January 29 Bear River Massacre Col. Patrick Connor led a United States Army regiment killing 280 Shoshone men, women and children near Preston, Idaho. Kiernan 2007, p. 356 Hart, Newell, The Bear River Massacre. Cache Valley Newsletter Publishing Company, Preston, Idaho. 1982. ISBN 0-941462-01-3 
 1863 April 19 Keyesville Massacre American militia and members of the California cavalry killed 35 Tehachapi men in Kern County, California. Keyesville Indian Massacre of April 19, 1863 
 1863 - 1865 Mowry massacres 16 settlers killed in a series of Indian raids at Mowry, Arizona Territory Browne, R. John, Adventures in the Apache County: a tour through Arizona and Sonora with notes on the silver regions of Nevada. 1869. New York: Harpers & Brothers Publishers. 
 1864 Cottonwood 20 Yanas of both sexes killed by white settlers in the town of Cottonwood, California. Madley 2012b, p. 40 
 1864 Massacre at Bloody Tanks A group of white settlers led by King S. Woolsey killed 19 Apaches at a \"peace parley\". McGinnis, Ralph and Smith, Calvin, Abraham Lincoln and the western territories, Rowman and Littlefield Publishers, 1994, p. 90, ISBN 978-0-8304-1247-1 Thrapp 1975, pp. 2931 
 1864 Oak Run Massacre California settlers massacred 300 Yana Indians who had gathered near the head of Oak Run, California for spiritual ceremony. 
 1864 Skull Valley Massacre A group of Yavapai families was lured into a trap and massacred by soldiers under Lt. Monteith in a valley west of Prescott, Arizona (Arizona). The place was named Skull Valley after the heads of the dead Indians left unburied. Braatz 2003, pp. 89-90, p. 105 Newton C.H., The reasons why place names in Arizona are so named, Tecolote Press, 1978, p. 40, ISBN 978-0-915030-25-5 
 1864 November 29 Sand Creek Massacre Members of the Colorado Militia attacked a peaceful village of Cheyenne, killing at least 160 men, women and children at Sand Creek in Kiowa County. Michno 2003, pp. 157159 Smiley, Brenda \"Sand Creek Massacre\", Archeology magazine. Archaeological Institute of America, accessdate 26 December 2012. 
 1865 March 14 Mud Lake Massacre US troops under Captain Wells attacked a Paiute camp near Winnemucca Lake, killing 32 Indians. One soldier was slightly wounded during the attack. Egan, Ferol Sand in a whirlwind, 30th Anniversary Edition: The Paiute Indian War of 1860, University of Nevada Press, 1985, p. 226. ISBN 978-0-87417-097-9 
 1865 Owens Lake Massacre White vigilantes attacked a Paiute camp on Owens Lake in California, killing about 40 men, women and children. Fradkin, Philip L., The seven states of California: a natural and human history, University of California Press, 1997, p. 31, ISBN 978-0-520-20942-8 
 1866 Three Knolls Massacre White settlers massacred a Yana community at Three Knolls on the Mill Creek, California. Thornton 1990, p. 110 Scheper-Hughes 2003, p. 55 
 1866 April 21 Circleville Massacre Mormon militiamen killed 16 Paiute men and women at Circleville, Utah. 6 men were shot, allegedly while trying to escape. The others (3 men and 7 women) had their throats cut. 4 small children were spared. Knack, Martha, Boundaries Between: The Southern Paiutes, 17751995, University of Nebraska Press, 2004, p. 85, ISBN 0-8032-7818-7 
 1867 Aquarius Mountains Yavapai County Rangers killed 23 Indians (men, women and children) in the southern Aquarius Mountains, Arizona. Thrapp 1975, pp. 3738 
 1867 July 2 Kidder Massacre Cheyenne and Sioux ambushed and killed a 2nd US Cavalry detachment of eleven men and their Indian guide near Beaver Creek in Sherman County, Kansas. General Custer was an after-the-fact witness at the scene. Michno 2003, pp. 201202 Cooper, Marilyn, Kidder Massacre, Sherman County Historical Society, retrieved 16 February 2013. \"Kidder Massacre\", photo of historic marker, Garry Owen Website, accessdate 28 December 2012. 
 1868 Campo Seco A posse of white settlers massacred 33 Yahis in a cave north of Mill Creek, California. Thornton 1990, p. 111 ScheperHughe 2003, p. 56 
 1868 November 27 Washita Massacre(Battle of Washita River) During the American Indian Wars, Lt. Col. G.A.Custer's 7th U.S. Cavalry attacked a village of sleeping Cheyenne led by Black Kettle. Custer reported 103  later revised to 140  warriors, \"some\" women and \"few\" children killed, and 53 women and children taken hostage. Other casualty estimates by cavalry members, scouts and Indians vary widely, with the number of men killed ranging as low as 11 and the numbers of women and children ranging as high as 75. Before returning to their base, the cavalry killed several hundred Indian ponies and burned the village. The 140th Anniversary of the Washita Massacre of Nov. 27, 1868 \"Washita\", The West, PBS \"Cherry Creek Massacre recognized in magazine\", The Saint Francis Herald (St. Francis, KS), 17 November 2005 Zeman, Scott C., Chronology of the American West from 23,000 B.C.E. through the Twentieth Century, ABC-CLIO, 2002, 381 pages, p. 155, ISBN 978-1-57607-207-3 
 1870 January 23 Marias Massacre US troops killed 173 Piegan, mainly women, children and the elderly after being led to the wrong camp by a soldier who wanted to protect his Indian wife's family. Michno 2003, p. 241 
 1871 Kingsley Cave Massacre 4 settlers killed 30 Yahi Indians in Tehama County, California about two miles from Wild Horse Corral in the Ishi Wilderness. It is estimated that this massacre left only 15 members of the Yahi tribe alive Ishi in Two Worlds California State Parks Video Transcript 
 1871 April 30 Camp Grant Massacre Led by the ex-Mayor of Tucson, William Oury, eight Americans, 48 Mexicans and more than 100 allied Pima attacked Apache men, women and children at Camp Grant, Arizona Territory killing 144, with 1 survivor at scene and 29 children sold to slavery. All but eight of the dead were Apache women or children. Terrell, J., Land Grab, pp. 410. Colwell-Chanthaphonh, Chip, Western Apache Oral Histories and Traditions of the Camp Grant Massacre. The American Indian Quarterly - Volume 27, Number 3&4, Summer/Fall 2003, pp. 639-666., accessdate 26 December 2012 
 1871 November 5 Wickenburg massacre Indians attacked an Arizona stagecoach, killing the driver and his five passengers, leaving two wounded survivors. 
 1872 Between August and October Jordan Massacre 3 settlers killed, 1 woman abducted, apparently by Indians at Middle Fork of Walnut Creek, Kansas Congressional Record. February 3, 1873. Fazzini, P., \"Mrs Jordan captured by Indians 1872 Kansas\", GenForum, genealogy.com. 11 February 2012. 
 1872 December 28 Skeleton Cave Massacre U.S. troops and Indian scouts killed 76 Yavapai Indians men, women and children in a remote cave in Arizona's Salt River Canyon. Braatz 2003, pp. 23; p. 138 
 1873 June 1 Cypress Hills Massacre Following a dispute over stolen horses, American wolfers killed approximately 20 Nakoda in Saskatchewan. 
 1875 April 10 Sappa Creek Massacre Soldiers under Lt Austin Henly trapped a group of 27 Cheyenne, (19 men, 8 women and children) on the Sappa Creek, in Kansas and killed them all. Churchill 1997, p. 237 
 1877 August 8 Big Hole Massacre US troops under Colonel John Gibbon attacked a Nez Perce village at Big Hole, in Montana Territory. They killed 89 men, women and children before being repulsed by the Indians. 
 1879 January 921 Fort Robinson Massacre Northern Cheyenne under Dull Knife attempted to escape from confinement in Fort Robinson, Nebraska; U.S. Army forces hunted them down, killing 77 of them. The remains of those killed were repatriated in 1994. Michno 2003, pp. 322323 Boye, Alan, Holding Stone Hands: On the Trail of the Cheyenne Exodus, University of Nebraska Press, 2001, pp. 6667, ISBN 978-0-8032-1294-7 
 1879 September 30 Meeker Massacre In the beginning of the Ute War, the Ute killed the US Indian Agent Nathan Meeker and 10 others. They also attacked a military unit, killing 13 and wounding 43. 
 1880 April 28 Alma Massacre The Apache chief Victorio led warriors in an attack on settlers at Alma, New Mexico. On December 19, 1885, the Apache killed an officer and four enlisted men of the 8th Cavalry Regiment near Alma. \"The Alma Massacre, Alma, New Mexico\" from the WPA Writers Project, archived 7 October 2008 by Internet Archive 
 1889 November 2 Kelvin Grade Massacre The Apache Kid (Haskay-bay-nay-ntayl) and his gang escaped police custody, killing two sheriffs and wounding one settler near present-day Globe, Arizona. Hayes, Jess G. Apache Vengeance: The true story of Apache Kid. (1954). University of New Mexico Press. Albuquerque, New Mexico, 
 1890 December 10 Buffalo Gap Massacre Several wagonloads of Sioux were killed by South Dakota Home Guard militiamen near French Creek, South Dakota, while visiting a white friend in Buffalo Gap. Gonzalez 1998, p. 294 
 1890 December Stronghold South Dakota Home Guard militiamen ambushed and massacred 75 Sioux at the Stronghold, in the northern portion of Pine Ridge Indian Reservation. 
 1890 December 29 Wounded Knee Massacre Members of the U.S. 7th Cavalry attacked and killed between 130 and 250 Sioux men, women and children at Wounded Knee, South Dakota. Michno 2003, p. 351 Jensen, Richard, Paul, Eli and Hanson, James, Eyewitness at Wounded Knee, University of Nebraska Press, 1991, p. 20, ISBN 978-0-8032-1409-5 
 1911 January 19 Last Massacre A group of Shoshone killed four ranchers in Washoe County, Nevada. On 26 February 1911, an American posse killed eight of the Shoshone suspects and captured four children from the band. Early Native Americans nevada-history.org Book Review, The Last Massacre, New York Times, 17 January 1988 \"Policeman Edward Hogle, Nevada State Police\" The Officer Down Memorial Page 
 

== See also ==
* American Indian Wars
* Population history of indigenous peoples of the Americas
* List of events named massacres
* List of massacres in the United States
* List of conflicts in the United States

== References ==

== Books ==
* Anderson, Gary C., The Conquest of Texas: Ethnic cleansing in the Promised Land, 1820-1875, University of Oklahoma Press, 2005, 544 pages, ISBN 978-0-89096-867-3
* Baumgardner, Frank, Killing for Land in Early California  Indian Blood at Round Valley, Algora Publishing, 2006, 312 pages, ISBN 978-0-87586-364-1
* Braatz, Timothy, Surviving conquest: a history of the Yavapai peoples,University of Nebraska Press, 2003, 336 pages, ISBN 978-0-8032-2242-7
* Churchill, Ward, A Little Matter of Genocide: Holocaust and Denial in the Americas, 1492 to the Present, City Lights, 1997, 381 pages, ISBN 978-0-87286-323-1
* Heizer, Robert F., The Destruction of California Indians, University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln and London, 1993, 321 pages, ISBN 978-0-8032-7262-0
* Gallay, Alan, The Indian Slave Trade: The rise of the English Empire in the American South, Yale University Press, 2003, 464 pages, ISBN 978-0-300-10193-5
* Gonzalez, Mario and Cook-Lynn, Elizabeth, The Politics of Hallowed Ground: Wounded Knee and the Struggle for Indian Sovereignty, University of Illinois Press, 1998, 448 pages, ISBN 978-0-25206-669-6
* Hamalainen, Pekka, The Comanche Empire, Yale University Press, 2008, 512 pages, ISBN 978-0-30012-654-9
* Himmel, Kelly F., The Conquest of the Karankawas and the Tonkawas, 18211859, TAMU Press, 1999, 216 pages, ISBN 978-0-89096-867-3
* Kiernan, Ben, "Blood and Soil: a World History of Genocide and Massacre from Sparta to Darfur", Yale University Press, 2007, 768 pages, ISBN 978-0-300-10098-3
* Konstantin, Phil, This Day in North American Indian History: Events in the History of North America's Native Peoples, Da Capo Press, 2002, 480 pages, ISBN 978-0-306-81170-8
* Madley, Benjamin, Tactics of Nineteenth Century Colonial Massacre: Tasmania, California and Beyond in Philips G. Dwyer and Lyndall Ryan, eds., Theatres of Violence: Massacres, Mass Killing and Atrocity Throughout History, Berghan Books, 2012, 350 pages, ISBN 978-0-85745-299-3
* Madley, Benjamin, The Genocide of California's Yana Indians in Samuel Totten and Williams S. Parsons, eds., Centuries of Genocide: Essays and Eyewitness Accounts, Routledge, 2012, pp. 16-53, 611 pages, ISBN 978-0-415871-921 
* Michno, Gregory F., Encyclopedia of Indian Wars: Western Battles and Skirmishes 18501890, Mountain Press Publishing Co., 2003, 448 pages, ISBN 978-0-87842-468-9
* Norton, Jack, "Genocide in Northwestern California : when our worlds cried", Indian Historian Press, San Francisco, 1979, 
* Scheper-Hughes, Nancy, "Violence in War and Peace: An Anthology", Wiley-Blackwell, 2003, 512 pages, ISBN 978-0-631-22349-8 
* Thornton, Russell, "American Indian Holocaust and Survival: a Population History since 1492", University of Oklahoma Press, 1990, 312 pages, ISBN 978-0-8061-2220-5 
* Thrapp, Dan, "The Conquest of Apacheria", University of Oklahoma Press, 1975, 422 pages, ISBN 978-0-8061-1286-2 

 



[[Islamic calendar]]

 

The Islamic calendar, Muslim calendar or Hijri calendar (AH) at-taqwm al-hijr Hijra Calendar is a lunar calendar consisting of 12 months in a year of 354 or 355 days.

It is used to date events in many Muslim countries (concurrently with the Gregorian calendar), and used by Muslims everywhere to determine the proper days on which to observe the annual fast (see Ramadan), to attend Hajj, and to celebrate other Islamic holidays and festivals.

The first year was the Islamic year beginning in AD 622 during which the emigration of the Islamic Prophet Muhammad from Mecca to Medina, known as the Hijra, occurred. Each numbered year is designated either "H" for Hijra or "AH" for the Latin anno Hegirae ("in the year of the Hijra"); hence, Muslims typically call their calendar the Hijri calendar.

The current Islamic year is 1435 AH. In the Gregorian calendar, 1435 AH runs from approximately 3 November 2013 (evening) to 23 October 2014 (evening).

== Months ==

Four of the twelve Hijri months are considered sacred, although there is disagreement over the designated months, such as between proponents for the sequences {7,11,12,1} vs. {12,1,2,3}. The twelve Hijri months are named as follows in Arabic: 

# [[Muharram|]] ( meaning "forbidden"), so called because battle was forbidden (haram) during this month. Muharram includes the Day of Ashura.
# [[Safar|]] ( meaning "void"), supposedly named thus because pagan Arab houses were empty this time of year while their occupants gathered food.
# Rab I (, ) meaning "the first spring".
# Rab II ( or ) meaning "the second (or last) spring".
# Jumd I (, meaning "the first month of parched land"). Often considered the pre-Islamic "summer".
# Jumd II ( or ) meaning "the second (or last) month of parched land".
# Rajab ( meaning "respect", "honor"). This is another sacred month in which fighting was traditionally forbidden.
# [[Sha'aban|]] ( meaning "scattered"). Marked the time of year when Arab tribes dispersed to find water.
# (calendar month)|] ( meaning "scorched"). Ramadan is the most venerated month of the Hijri calendar. During this time, Muslims must fast from dawn till sunset and should give charity to the poor.
# [[Shawwal|]] ( meaning "raised"). She-camels normally would be in calf at this time of year.
# al-Qi'dah|] ( meaning "the one of truce"). Dhu al-Qa'da was another month during which war was banned.
# [[Dhu'l-Hijjah|]] ( meaning "the one of pilgrimage"). The month in which the annual Muslim pilgrimage to Mecca (the Hajj) occurs.

== Days of the week ==

In Arabic, as in Hebrew, the "first day" of the week corresponds with Sunday of the planetary week. The Islamic weekdays, like those in the Hebrew and Baha'i calendars, begin at sunset, whereas the medieval Christian and planetary weekdays begin at the following midnight. Trawicky (2000) p. 232 The Christian liturgical day, however, kept in monasteries, begins with vespers (see vesper), which is evening, in line with the other Abrahamic traditions. Muslims gather for worship at a mosque at noon on "gathering day" (, meaning "day") which corresponds with Friday. Thus "gathering day" is often regarded as the weekly day of rest. This is frequently made official, with many Muslim countries adopting Friday and Saturday (e.g. Egypt, Saudi Arabia) or Thursday and Friday as official weekends, during which offices are closed; other countries (e.g. Iran) choose to make Friday alone a day of rest. A few others (e.g. Turkey, Pakistan) have adopted the Western Saturday-Sunday weekend while making Friday a working day with a long midday break to allow time off for worship.

 Arabic English Maltese Turkish Somali Persian Urdu Hindi Sindhi Malayalam Bengali Kannada Hebrew Indonesian Malay Filipino Pashto Tamil Telugu Kashmiri Hausa Yorb Kurdish 
 1 (first day) Sunday Il-add Pazar Axad Yek-Shanbeh Itwaar Ravivaar Aacherritavra Aitvaar Itwaar aayar Robibar Bhaanuvaara / Ravivaara / Aadityavaara /  /  Yom Rishon  Minggu Ahad Linggo gyayitrukkilamai Aadivaaram A'ath'war Lahadi j k  Yak sham 
 2 (second day) Monday It-Tnejn Pazartesi Isniin Do-Shanbeh Piir Somvaar Soomarsmara Somvaar Piir thikal Shombar Somavaara Yom Sheni  Senin Isnin Lunes /  Dwanay/gul thingatkkilamai Somavaaram Chender'r'war Litinin j Aj  Du sham 
 3 (third day) Tuesday It-Tlieta Sal Talaado Seh-Shanbeh  Mangal Mangalvaar Angaromagala Mangalvaar Mangal chovva Monggolbar Mangalavaara Yom Shlishi  Selasa Selasa Martes / Manzanay/nahia sevvaikkilamai Mangalavaaram Bo'um'war Talata j gun  Se sham 
 4 (fourth day) Wednesday L-Erbga arsamba Arbaco Chahar-Shanbeh Budh/Chaha-Shanbeh Budhvaar Arbbabudhara Buddhavaar Budh budhan Budhbar Budhavaara Yom Revi'i  Rabu Rabu Miyerkules / Salanay/shoro buthankilamai Budhavaaram Bo'dh'war Laraba j-rr/jr  Chwar Sham 
 5 (fifth day) Thursday Il-amis Perembe Khamiis Panj-Shanbeh Jumehraat Guruvaar / Brahaspativaar Khameesavispati Veervaar Jumehraat vyazham Brihshpotibar Guruvaara Yom Khamishi  Kamis Khamis Huwebes / Panzanay/ziyarat viyalakkilamai Guruvaaram Bres'war Alhamis jb/j  Dy  Pench sham 
 6 (gathering day) Friday Il-imga Cuma Jimco Jome / Adineh  /  Jumah Shukravaar Jum'ojumho Shukkarvaar Jumah vei Shukrobar  Shukravaara Yom Shishi  Jumat Jumaat Biyernes / Adina/juma vellikkilamai Shukravaaram Jum'mah Juma'a j t Haeney 
 7 (seventh day) Saturday Is-Sibt Cumartesi Sabti Hafta / Shanbeh Hafta / Shanivaar Chhanchherchhachhara Chhanichharvaar Hafta / shani Shonibar Shanivaara Yom Shabbat  Sabtu Sabtu Sabado Sabtu/khalee sanikkilamai Shanivaaram Butt'war alah Asabar j b Mta Shamma 

== Months ==

===Names of months===
Parentheses indicate the number of days in a month during a leap year.

 No. Islamic calendar Length 
 1 Muharram 30 
 2 Safar 29 
 3 Rabi' I 30 
 4 Rabi' II 29 
 5 Jumada I 30 
 6 Jumada II 29 
 7 Rajab 30 
 8 Sha'aban 29 
 9 Ramadan 30 
 10 Shawwal 29 
 11 Dhu al-Qi'dah 30 
 12 Dhu al-Hijjah 29/(30) 
 Total 354/(355) 

== History ==

===Pre-Islamic calendar===
Inscriptions of the ancient South Arabian calendars reveal the use of a number of local calendars. At least some of these calendars followed the lunisolar system. For Central Arabia, especially Mecca, there is a lack of epigraphical evidence but details are found in the writings of Muslim authors of the Abbasid era. Both al-Biruni and al-Mas'udi suggest that the Ancient Arabs used the same month names as the Muslims, though they also record other month names used by the pagan Arabs. 
 
The Islamic tradition is unanimous in stating that Arabs of Tihamah, Hejaz, and Najd distinguished between two types of months, permitted (all) and forbidden (arm) months. The forbidden months were four months during which fighting is forbidden, listed as Rajab and the three months around the pilgrimage season, Dh al-Qida, Dh al-ijja, and Muarram. Information about the forbidden months is also found in the writings of Procopius, where he describes an armistice with the Eastern Arabs of the Lakhmid al-Mundhir which happened in the summer of 541 AD. However, Muslim historians do not link these months to a particular season. The Qur'an links the four forbidden months with Nas, a word that literally means "postponement". According to Muslim tradition, the decision of postponement was administered by the tribe of Kinanah, by a man known as the al-Qalammas of Kinanah and his descendants (pl. qalmisa). 

Different interpretations of the concept of Nas have been proposed. For an overview of the various theories and a discussion of the problem of "hindsight chronology" in early and pre-Islamic sources, see Maurice A. McPartlan, The Contribution of Qu'rn and Hadt to Early Islamic Chronology (Durham, 1997). Some scholars, both Muslim Mahmud Effendi (1858), as discussed in Sherrard Beaumont Burnaby, Elements of the Jewish and Muhammadan calendars (London: 1901), pp. 460470. According to "Tradition", repeatedly cited by F.C. De Blois. and Western, F.C. De Blois, "TARKH": I.1.iv. "Pre-Islamic and agricultural calendars of the Arabian peninsula", The Encyclopaedia of Islam, 2nd edition, X:260. A. Moberg, "NASI'", The Encyclopaedia of Islam, 2nd, VII:977. maintain that the pre-Islamic calendar used in Central Arabia was a purely lunar calendar similar to the modern Islamic calendar. According to this view, Nas is related to the Pagan practices of the Meccan Arabs, where they would alter the distribution of the forbidden months within a given year without implying a calendar manipulation. This interpretation is supported by Arab historians and lexicographers, like Ibn Hisham, Ibn Manzur, and the corpus of Qur'anic exegesis. It is also corroborated by an early Sabaic inscription, where a religious ritual was "postponed" (ns'w) due to war. According to the context of this inscription, the verb ns' has nothing to do with intercalation, but only with moving religious events within the calendar itself. The similarity between the religious concept of this ancient inscription and the Qur'an suggests that non-calendaring postponement is also the Qur'anic meaning of Nas. Thus the Encyclopaedia of Islam concludes that the "The Arabic system of can only have been intended to move the Hajj and the fairs associated with it in the vicinity of Mecca to a suitable season of the year. It was not intended to establish a fixed calendar to be generally observed." The Encyclopedia of Islam, 2nd edition, Index, p. 441 
 
Others concur that it was originally a lunar calendar, but suggest that about 200 years before the Hijra it was transformed into a lunisolar calendar containing an intercalary month added from time to time to keep the pilgrimage within the season of the year when merchandise was most abundant. This interpretation was first proposed by the medieval Muslim astrologer and astronomer Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi, and later by al-Biruni, Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi (787886), Kitab al-Uluf, Journal Asiatique, series 5, xi (1858) 168+. al-Biruni, "Intercalation of the Ancient Arabs", The Chronology of Ancient Nations, tr. C. Edward Sachau, (London: William H. Allen, 1000/1879) 1314, 7374. al-Mas'udi, and some Western scholars. A. Moberg, "NASI'", E.J. Brill's first encyclopaedia of Islam This interpretation considers Nas to be a synonym to the Arabic word for "intercalation" (kabsa). It also suggests that every second or third year the beginning of the year was postponed by one month. The intercalation doubled the month of the pilgrimage, that is, the month of the pilgrimage and the following month were given the same name, postponing the names and the sanctity of all subsequent months in the year by one. The first intercalation doubled the first month Muharram, then three years later the second month Safar was doubled, continuing until the intercalation had passed through all twelve months of the year and returned to Muharram, when it was repeated. The Arabs, according to one explanation mentioned by Abu Ma'shar, learned of this type of intercalation from the Jews. For a comparison between the Islamic and pre-Islamic calendars, see Islamic and Jahili months.

===Prohibiting Nas===

Muhammad prohibiting nas. Found in an illustrated copy of Al-Brn's The Remaining Signs of Past Centuries (17th-century copy of an early 14th-century Ilkhanid manuscript). From an illustrated manuscript of Al-Biruni's 11th-century Vestiges of the Past (Bibliothque Nationale, Paris, Arabe 1489 fol. 5v. (Bibliothque Nationale on-line catalog). See also: Robert Hillenbrand, "Images of Muhammad in al-Brn's Chronology of Ancient Nations", in: R. Hillenbrand (ed.), Persian Painting from the Mongols to the Qajars: Studies in Honour of Basil W. Robinson (Londen/New York: I.B. Tauris Publishers, 2000), pp. 129146. 

In the tenth year of the Hijra, as documented in the Qur'an (sura 9:3637), God revealed the "prohibition of the Nas".

The prohibition of Nas would presumably have been announced when the intercalated month had returned to its position just before the month of Nasi' began. If Nas meant intercalation, then the number and the position of the intercalary months between 1 AH and 10 AH are uncertain; Western calendar dates commonly cited for key events in early Islam such as the Hijra, the Battle of Badr, the Battle of Uhud and the Battle of the Trench, should be viewed with caution as they might be in error by one, two or even three lunar months.

This prohibition was mentioned by Muhammad during the farewell sermon which was delivered on 9 Dhu al-Hijja 10 AH (Julian date Friday 6 March, AD 632) on Mount Arafat during the farewell pilgrimage to Mecca.

The three successive forbidden months mentioned by Muhammad (months in which battles are forbidden) are Dhu al-Qi'dah, Dhu al-Hijjah, and Muharram, months 11, 12, and 1. The single forbidden month is Rajab, month 7.

== Year numbering ==

In pre-Islamic Arabia, it was customary to identify a year after a major event which took place in it. Thus, according to Islamic tradition, Abraha, governor of Yemen, then a province of the Christian Kingdom of Aksum (Ethiopia), attempted to destroy the Kaaba with an army which included several elephants. The raid was unsuccessful, but that year became known as the Year of the Elephant, during which Muhammad was born (sura al-Fil). Most equate this to the year AD 570, but a minority use AD 571.

The first ten years of the Hijra were not numbered, but were named after events in the life of Muhammad according to Ab Rayn al-Brn: Sherrard Beaumont Burnaby, Elements of the Jewish and Muhammadan calendars (1901) 376. 
# The year of permission.
# The year of the order of fighting.
# The year of the trial.
# The year of congratulation on marriage.
# The year of the earthquake.
# The year of enquiring.
# The year of gaining victory.
# The year of equality.
# The year of exemption.
# The year of farewell.

In AD 638 (17 AH), Abu Musa Ashaari, one of the officials of the Caliph Umar in Basrah, complained about the absence of any years on the correspondence he received from Umar, making it difficult for him to determine which instructions were most recent. This report convinced Umar of the need to introduce an era for Muslims. After debating the issue with his counsellors, he decided that the first year should include the date of Muhammad's arrival at Medina (known as Yathrib, before Muhammad's arrival). Uthman ibn Affan then suggested that the months begin with Muharram, in line with the established custom of the Arabs at that time. Appreciating Islamic History (Microsoft Word document, 569KB) The years of the Islamic calendar thus began with the month of Muharram in the year of Muhammad's arrival at the city of Medina, even though the actual emigration took place in Safar and Rabi' I. Because of the Hijra, the calendar was named the Hijra calendar.

The first day of the first month of the Islamic calendar (1 Muharram 1 AH) was Friday, 16 July AD 622, the equivalent civil tabular date (same daylight period) in the Julian calendar. Sherrard Beaumont Burnaby, Elements of the Jewish and Muhammadan calendars (1901) pp.3735, 3824. Calendrica The Islamic day began at the preceding sunset on the evening of 15 July. This Julian date (16 July) was determined by medieval Muslim astronomers by projecting back in time their own tabular Islamic calendar, which had alternating 30- and 29-day months in each lunar year plus eleven leap days every 30 years. For example, al-Biruni mentioned this Julian date in the year AD 1000. al-Biruni, The chronology of ancient nations, tr. C. Edward Sachau (1000/1879) 327. Although not used by either medieval Muslim astronomers or modern scholars to determine the Islamic epoch, the thin crescent moon would have also first become visible (assuming clouds did not obscure it) shortly after the preceding sunset on the evening of 15 July, 1.5 days after the associated dark moon (astronomical new moon) on the morning of 14 July. NASA phases of the moon 601700 

Though Cook and Crone in cite a coin from 17 AH, the first surviving attested use of a Hijri calendar date alongside a date in another calendar (Coptic) is on a papyrus from Egypt in 22 AH, PERF 558.

== Astronomical considerations ==

The Islamic calendar is not to be confused with a lunar calendar that is based on astronomical calculations. The latter is based on a year of 12 months adding up to 354.37 days. Each lunar month begins at the time of the monthly "conjunction", when the Moon is located on a straight line between the Earth and the Sun. The month is defined as the average duration of a revolution of the Moon around the Earth (29.53 days). By convention, months of 30 days and 29 days succeed each other, adding up over two successive months to 59 full days. This leaves only a small monthly variation of 44 minutes to account for, which adds up to a total of 24 hours (i.e. the equivalent of one full day) in 2.73 years. To settle accounts, it is sufficient to add one day every three years to the lunar calendar, in the same way that one adds one day to the Gregorian calendar every four years. Emile Bimont, Rythmes du temps, Astronomie et calendriers, De Borck, 2000, 393p The technical details of the adjustment are described in Tabular Islamic calendar.

The Islamic calendar, however, is based on a different set of conventions. Khalid Chraibi: Issues in the Islamic Calendar, Tabsir.net Each month has either 29 or 30 days, but usually in no discernible order. Traditionally, the first day of each month is the day (beginning at sunset) of the first sighting of the hilal (crescent moon) shortly after sunset. If the hilal is not observed immediately after the 29th day of a month (either because clouds block its view or because the western sky is still too bright when the moon sets), then the day that begins at that sunset is the 30th. Such a sighting has to be made by one or more trustworthy men testifying before a committee of Muslim leaders. Determining the most likely day that the hilal could be observed was a motivation for Muslim interest in astronomy, which put Islam in the forefront of that science for many centuries.

This traditional practice is still followed in the overwhelming majority of Muslim countries. Each Islamic state proceeds with its own monthly observation of the new moon (or, failing that, awaits the completion of 30 days) before declaring the beginning of a new month on its territory. But, the lunar crescent becomes visible only some 17 hours after the conjunction, and only subject to the existence of a number of favourable conditions relative to weather, time, geographic location, as well as various astronomical parameters. Karim Meziane et Nidhal Guessoum: La visibilit du croissant lunaire et le ramadan, La Recherche n 316, janvier 1999, pp. 6671 Given the fact that the moon sets progressively later than the sun as one goes west, with a corresponding increase in its "age" since conjunction, Western Muslim countries may, under favorable conditions, observe the new moon one day earlier than eastern Muslim countries. Due to the interplay of all these factors, the beginning of each month differs from one Muslim country to another, during the 48 h period following the conjunction. The information provided by the calendar in any country does not extend beyond the current month.

A number of Muslim countries try to overcome some of these difficulties by applying different astronomy-related rules to determine the beginning of months. Thus, Malaysia, Indonesia, and a few others begin each month at sunset on the first day that the moon sets after the sun (moonset after sunset). In Egypt, the month begins at sunset on the first day that the moon sets at least five minutes after the sun. A detailed analysis of the available data shows, however, that there are major discrepancies between what countries say they do on this subject, and what they actually do. Moonsighting.com  Methods for beginning of Islamic months in different countries Khalid Chraibi: Le mois islamique est-il universel ou national ? 

== Theological considerations ==

If the Islamic calendar were prepared using astronomical calculations, Muslims throughout the Muslim world could use it to meet all their needs, the way they use the Gregorian calendar today. But, there are divergent views on whether it is licit to do so. Allal el Fassi : Aljawab assahih wannass-hi al-khaliss an nazilati fas wama yataallaqo bimabda-i acchouhouri al-islamiyati al-arabiyah , " and the beginning of Islamic Arab months", report prepared at the request of King Hassan II of Morocco, Rabat, 1965 (36 p.), with no indication of editor. 

A majority of theologians oppose the use of calculations (beyond the constraint that each month must be not less than 29 nor more than 30 days) on the grounds that the latter would not conform with Muhammad's recommendation to observe the new moon of Ramadan and Shawal in order to determine the beginning of these months. Muhammad Mutawalla al-Sharawi : Fiqh al-halal wal haram (edited by Ahmad Azzabi), Dar al-Qalam, Beyrouth, 2000, p. 88. Some theologians also interpret Surah al-Baqarah 2:185 as requiring direct sighting, but they represent only a minority. The Quranic verse reads as follows : "185. The month of Ramadn in which was revealed the Qur'n, a guidance for mankind and clear proofs for the guidance and the criterion (between right and wrong). So whoever of you sights (the crescent on the first night of) the month (of Ramadn i.e. is present at his home), he must observe Saum (fasts) that month, and whoever is ill or on a journey, the same number days which one did not observe Saum (fasts) must be made up from other days. God intends for you ease, and He does not want to make things difficult for you. (He wants that you) must complete the same number (of days), and that you must magnify God to say Takbr ("Allhu-Akbar", "God is the Most Great") on seeing the crescent of the months of Ramadn and Shawwl for having guided you so that you may be grateful to Him." Interpretation of the Meaning of The Noble Quran Translated into the English Language By Dr. Muhammad Taqi-ud-Din Al-Hilali Ph.D. & Dr. Muhammad Muhsin Khan 

However, some jurists see no contradiction between Muhammad's teachings and the use of calculations to determine the beginnings of lunar months. Abderrahman al-Haj : The faqih, the politician and the determination of lunar months (in arabic) They consider that Muhammad's recommendation was adapted to the culture of the times, and should not be confused with the acts of worship. Allal el Fassi : "Aljawab assahih..." op. cit. The dynasty of Fatimids in Egypt used a tabular pre-calculated calendar over a period of two centuries, between the 10th and 12th centuries, before a change of political regime reactivated the procedure of observation of the new moon. Helmer Aslaksen: The Islamic calendar 

Thus the jurists Ahmad Muhammad Shakir and Yusuf al-Qaradawi both endorsed the use of calculations to determine the beginning of all months of the Islamic calendar, in 1939 and 2004 respectively. Ahmad Shakir : The beginning of arab months  is it legal to determine it using astronomical calculations? (published in arabic in 1939) reproduced in the Arab daily Al-Madina , 13 october 2006 (n 15878) Yusuf al-Qaradawi : Astronomical calculations and determination of the beginning of months (in arabic) For a detailed discussion of Shakir's legal opinion on the subject, see "Issue N 9" in Khalid Chraibi: Issues in the Islamic Calendar, Tabsir.net So did the "Fiqh Council of North America" (FCNA) in 2006 Fiqh Council of North America Islamic lunar calendar Zulfikar Ali Shah The astronomical calculations: a fiqhi discussion and the "European Council for Fatwa and Research" (ECFR) in 2007. Islamic Center of Boston, Wayland For a detailed discussion of the issues and the FCNA and ECFR positions, see : Khalid Chraibi: Can the Umm al Qura calendar serve as a global Islamic calendar? Tabsir.net 

The major Muslim associations of France also announced in 2012 that they would henceforth use a calendar based on astronomical calculations, taking into account the criteria of the possibility of crescent sighting in any place on Earth. Franais du Culte Musulman (CFCM): Ramadan moubarak http://oumma.com/13434/ramadan-moubarak and Nidhal Guessoum: Quel sera le premier jour du mois de Ramadan 2012 ? (On which date will Ramadan 2012 begin) ? http://oummatv.tv/13306/sera-premier-jour-mois-de-ramadan But, shortly after the official adoption of this rule by the French Council of the Moslem Religion (CFCM) in 2013, the new leadership of the association decided, on the eve of ramadan 2013, to follow the Saudi announcement rather than to apply the rule just adopted. This resulted in a division of the Muslim community of France in two camps, with some members following the new rule, and others following the Saudi announcement.

Turkish Muslims also use an Islamic calendar which is calculated several years in advance (currently up to 1437 AH/2015 CE) by the Turkish Presidency of Religious Affairs (Diyanet Isleri Baskanligi). Since 1 Muharrem 1400 AH (21 November 1979) the computed Turkish lunar calendar is based on the following rule: The lunar month is assumed to begin on the evening when, within some region of the terrestrial globe, the computed centre of the lunar crescent at local sunset is more than 5 above the local horizon and (geocentrically) more than 8 from the Sun. Robert H. van Gent: The Islamic Calendar of Turkey 

Fatimid Dawoodi Bohra and Qutbi Bohra a sub sect of Dawoodi Bohra follow the tabular Islamic calendar (see section below) prepared on the basis of astronomical calculations from the days of Fatimid imams.

== Saudi Arabia's Umm al-Qura calendar ==

Saudi Arabia uses the sighting method to determine the beginning of each month of the Hijri calendar. Since AH 1419 (1998/99) several official hilal sighting committees have been set up by the government to determine the first visual sighting of the lunar crescent at the beginning of each lunar month. Nevertheless, the religious authorities also allow the testimony of less experienced observers and thus often announce the sighting of the lunar crescent on a date when none of the official committees could see it.

The country also uses the Umm al-Qura calendar, based on astronomical calculations, but this is restricted to administrative purposes. The parameters used in the establishment of this calendar underwent significant changes over the past decade. The Umm al-Qura Calendar of Saudi Arabia by Robert Harry van Gent 

Before AH 1420 (before 18 April 1999), if the moon's age at sunset in Riyadh was at least 12 hours, then the day ending at that sunset was the first day of the month. This often caused the Saudis to celebrate holy days one or even two days before other predominantly Muslim countries, including the dates for the Hajj, which can only be dated using Saudi dates because it is performed in Mecca.

For AH 142022, if moonset occurred after sunset at Mecca, then the day beginning at that sunset was the first day of a Saudi month, essentially the same rule used by Malaysia, Indonesia, and others (except for the location from which the hilal was observed).

Since the beginning of AH 1423 (16 March 2002), the rule has been clarified a little by requiring the geocentric conjunction of the sun and moon to occur before sunset, in addition to requiring moonset to occur after sunset at Mecca. This ensures that the moon has moved past the sun by sunset, even though the sky may still be too bright immediately before moonset to actually see the crescent.

In 2007, the Islamic Society of North America, the Fiqh Council of North America and the European Council for Fatwa and Research announced that they will henceforth use a calendar based on calculations using the same parameters as the Umm al-Qura calendar to determine (well in advance) the beginning of all lunar months (and therefore the days associated with all religious observances). This was intended as a first step on the way to unify, at some future time, Muslims' calendars throughout the world. Ramadan and Eid announcement by the Fiqh Council of North America (revised) Khalid Chraibi : Can the Umm al Qura calendar serve as a global Islamic calendar? 

== Other calendars using the Islamic era ==

The Solar Hejri is a solar calendar used in Iran and Afghanistan which counts its years from the Hijra or migration of Muhammad from Mecca to Medina in AD 622.

== Tabular Islamic calendar ==

The Tabular Islamic calendar is a rule-based variation of the Islamic calendar, in which months are worked out by arithmetic rules rather than by observation or astronomical calculation. It has a 30-year cycle with 11 leap years of 355 days and 19 years of 354 days. In the long term, it is accurate to one day in about 2,500 years. It also deviates up to about one or two days in the short term.

===Kuwaiti algorithm===

Microsoft uses the "Kuwaiti algorithm", a variant of the tabular Islamic calendar, The "Kuwaiti Algorithm" (Robert van Gent) to convert Gregorian dates to the Islamic ones. Microsoft claims that the variant is based on a statistical analysis of historical data from Kuwait.

== Notable dates ==

Important dates in the Islamic (Hijri) year are:
* 1 Muharram (Islamic New Year)
* 10 Muharram (Day of Ashura) For Sunnis, the crossing of the Red Sea by Moses occurred on this day. (Musa). For Shia, the martyrdom of Husayn ibn Ali, the grandson of Muhammad, and his followers.
* 12 Rabi al Awal (Mawlid an Nabi) for most Sunnis
* 17 Rabi al Awal (Mawlid an Nabi for Twelvers and some Sunnis)
* 27 Rajab (Isra and Mi'raj for majority of Muslims)
* 15 Sha'ban (Mid-Sha'ban, or Night of Forgiveness), and for Twelvers the birthday of Muhammad al-Mahdi (The Twelfth Imam)
* 1 Ramadan (First day of fasting)
* 27 Ramadan (Nuzul Al-Qur'an) The day Muhammad received the first verses of the Qur'an (17 Ramadan in Indonesia and Malaysia)
* Last third of Ramadan which includes Laylat al-Qadr
* 1 Shawwal (Eid ul-Fitr)
* 813 Dhu al-Hijjah (the Hajj to Mecca)
* 9 Dhu al-Hijjah (Day of Arafa)
* 10 Dhu al-Hijjah (Eid al-Adha)

Days considered important predominantly for Shia Muslims:
* 21 Ramadan Ali ibn Abi Talib's martyrdom.
* 3 Sha'ban (Birthday of Husayn ibn Ali.)
* 13 Rajab (Birthday of Ali ibn Abi Talib)

Days considered important predominantly for Sunni Muslims(especially in India & parts of Asia):
* 6 Rajab Urs of Khwaja Moinuddin Chisti.(Generally 6th Day of Every Month is celebrated and observed as Chatthi)
* 11 Rabi Ul Aakhir Urs of Gaus E Aazam Dastagir (Generally 11th Day of Every Month is celebrated and observed as Gyarvi)

== Converting Hijri to Gregorian date or vice versa ==
Civil and Hijri establishment dates of a library in Old City, Jerusalem

Conversions may be made online (see list below), by using the Tabular Islamic calendar (see Tabular Islamic calendar), or, for greatest accuracy (one day in 15,186 years), via the Jewish calendar. Theoretically, the days of the months correspond in both calendars if the displacements which are a feature of the Jewish system are ignored. The table below gives, for nineteen years, the Muslim month which corresponds to the first Jewish month.

 Year AD Year AH Muslimmonth 2011 1432 5 2012 1433 5 2013 1434 5 2014 1435 6 2015 1436 6 2016 1437 7 2017 1438 7 2018 1439 7 2019 1440 8 2020 1441 8 Year AD Year AH Muslimmonth 2021 1442 8 2022 1443 9 2023 1444 9 2024 1445 10 2025 1446 10 2026 1447 10 2027 1448 11 2028 1449 11 2029 1450 11 

This table may be extended since every nineteen years the Muslim month number increases by seven. When it goes above twelve, subtract twelve and add one to the year AH. From AD412 to AD632 inclusive the month number is 1 and the calculation gives the month correct to a month or so. AD622 corresponds to BH1 and AH1. For earlier years, year BH = (623 or 622)  year AD).

An example calculation: What is the civil date and year AH of the first day of the first month in the year AD 20875?

We first find the Muslim month number corresponding to the first month of the Jewish year which begins in AD20874. Dividing 20874 by 19 gives quotient 1098 and remainder 12. Dividing 2026 by 19 gives quotient 106 and remainder 12. The two years are therefore (1098106)=992x19 years apart. The Muslim month number corresponding to the first Jewish month is therefore (992x7)=6944 higher than in 2026. To convert into years and months divide by twelve  6944/12=578 years and 8 months. Adding, we get 1447y 10m + 20874y  2026y + 578y 8m = 20874y 6m. Therefore, the first month of the Jewish year beginning in AD20874 corresponds to the sixth month of the Muslim year AH20874. The worked example in Conversion between Jewish and civil dates, shows that the civil date of the first day of this month (ignoring the displacements) is Friday, 14 June. The year AH20875 will therefore begin seven months later, on the first day of the eighth Jewish month, which the worked example shows to be 7 January, AD20875 (again ignoring the displacements). The date given by this method, being calculated, may differ by a day from the actual date, which is determined by observation.

A reading of the section which follows will show that the year AH20875 is wholly contained within the year AD20875, also that in the Gregorian calendar this correspondence will occur one year earlier. The reason for the discrepancy is that the Gregorian year (like the Julian) is slightly too long, so the Gregorian date for a given AH date will be earlier and the Muslim calendar catches up sooner.

===Current correlations===
An Islamic year will be entirely within a Gregorian year of the same number in the year 20874, after which year the number of the Islamic year will always be greater than the number of the concurrent civil year. The Islamic calendar year of 1429 occurred entirely within the civil calendar year of 2008. Such years occur once every 33 or 34 Islamic years (32 or 33 civil years). More are listed here:

 Islamic year within civil year Islamic Civil Difference 
 1060 1650 590 1093 1682 589 1127 1715 588 1161 1748 587 1194 1780 586 1228 1813 585 1261 1845 584 1295 1878 583 1329 1911 582 1362 1943 581 1396 1976 580 1429 2008 579 1463 2041 578 1496 2073 577 1530 2106 576 1564 2139 575 

Because a hijri or Islamic lunar year is between 10 and 12 days shorter than a civil year, it begins 1012 days earlier in the civil year following the civil year in which the previous hijri year began. Once every 33 or 34 hijri years, or once every 32 or 33 civil years, the beginning of a hijri year (1 Muharram) coincides with one of the first ten days of January. Subsequent hijri New Years move backward through the civil year back to the beginning of January again, passing through each civil month from December to January.

== Uses ==

The Islamic calendar is now used primarily for religious purposes, and for official dating of public events and documents in Muslim countries. Mughal, Muhammad Aurang Zeb. 2012. Temporal rhythm of change in Village Jhokwala, Pakistan: Ethnographic insights from calendars. Giovanni Bennardo (ed.), Cultural Models of Nature and the Environment: Self, Space, and Causality Workshop. ESE Working Paper No. 1. DeKalb, IL: Institute for the Study of the Environment, Sustainability, and Energy, Northern Illinois University, pp. 61-65. Because of its nature as a purely lunar calendar, it cannot be used for agricultural purposes and historically Islamic communities have used other calendars for this purpose: the Egyptian calendar was formerly widespread in Islamic countries, and the Iranian calendar and the 1789 Ottoman calendar (a modified Julian calendar) were also used for agriculture in their countries. In the Levant and Iraq the Aramaic names of the Babylonian calendar are still used for all secular matters. In Morocco, the Berber calendar (another Julian calendar) is still used by farmers in the countryside. These local solar calendars have receded in importance with the near-universal adoption of the Gregorian calendar for civil purposes. As noted above, Saudi Arabia uses the Islamic calendar to date religious occasions such as Ramadan, Hajj, etc. and the Umm-al-Qura calendar, based on calculations, for administrative purposes and daily government business. Glass, Cyril (2001). The New Encyclopedia of Islam, pp. 9899. Rowman Altamira. ISBN 0-7591-0190-6. In Indonesia, the Javanese calendar, created by Sultan Agung in 1633, combines elements of the Islamic and pre-Islamic Saka calendars.

British author Nicholas Hagger writes that after seizing control of Libya, Muammar Gaddafi "declared" on 1 December 1978 "that the Muslim calendar should start with the death of the prophet Mohammed in 632 rather than the hijra (Mohammed's 'emigration' from Mecca to Medina) in 622". This put the country ten solar years behind the standard Muslim calendar. However, according to the 2006 Encyclopedia of the Developing World, "More confusing still is Qaddafi's unique Libyan calendar, which counts the years from the Prophet's birth, or sometimes from his death. The months July and August, named after Julius and Augustus Caesar, are now Nasser and Hannibal respectively." Encyclopedia of the Developing World (2007), volume 3, p. 1338. Reflecting on a 2001 visit to the country, American reporter Neil MacFarquhar observed, "Life in Libya was so unpredictable that people weren't even sure what year it was. The year of my visit was officially 1369. But just two years earlier Libyans had been living through 1429. No one could quite name for me the day the count changed, especially since both remained in play. ... Event organizers threw up their hands and put the Western year in parentheses somewhere in their announcements." Neil MacFarquhar, The Media Relations Department of Hizbollah Wishes You a Happy Birthday (2009), p. 27. 

== References ==

== External links ==
*
*Helmer Aslaksen The Islamic Calendar
*Khalid Chraibi, The reform of the Islamic calendar: the terms of the debate, Tabsir.net, September 2012

===Calendar-date converters=== 
*Calendar Converter
*The Umm Al-Qura (Mecca) Calendar (in Arabic, English explanation here)
*The Umm al-Qura Calendar of Saudi Arabia (with date converter valid from 1937 to 2077)
*The Islamic Calendar/Hijri Calendar for Makkah
*Online Alavi Taiyebi Calendar
*Interactive Islamic Gregorian Calendar
*Islamic / Western Calendar Converter (supports all known variants of the tabular Islamic calendar)

== See also ==
* Islamic and Jahili months

 

[[Interquartile range]]

Boxplot (with an interquartile range) and a probability density function (pdf) of a Normal Population

In descriptive statistics, the interquartile range (IQR), also called the midspread or middle fifty, is a measure of statistical dispersion, being equal to the difference between the upper and lower quartiles, IQR = Q3  Q1. In other words, the IQR is the 1st quartile subtracted from the 3rd quartile; these quartiles can be clearly seen on a box plot on the data. It is a trimmed estimator, defined as the 25% trimmed mid-range, and is the most significant basic robust measure of scale. 

==Use==
Unlike (total) range, the interquartile range has a breakdown point of 25%, and is thus often preferred to the total range.

The IQR is used to build box plots, simple graphical representations of a probability distribution.

For a symmetric distribution (where the median equals the midhinge, the average of the first and third quartiles), half the IQR equals the median absolute deviation (MAD).

The median is the corresponding measure of central tendency.

Filtering of outliers (see below).

==Examples==
===Data set in a table===
:

 i x Quartile 
 1 102 
 2 104 
 3 105 Q1 
 4 107 
 5 108 
 6 109 Q2 (median) 
 7 110 
 8 112 
 9 115 Q3 
 10 116 
 11 118 
 

For the data in this table the interquartile range is IQR = 115 &minus; 105 = 10.

===Data set in a plain-text box plot===

 
 +-----+-+ 
 o * |-------| | |---|
 +-----+-+ 
 
 +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+ number line
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 

For the data set in this box plot:
* lower (first) quartile Q1 = 7
* median (second quartile) Q2 = 8.5
* upper (third) quartile Q3 = 9
* interquartile range, IQR = Q3  Q1 = 2

==Interquartile range of distributions==
The interquartile range of a continuous distribution can be calculated by integrating the probability density function (which yields the cumulative distribution function  any other means of calculating the CDF will also work). The lower quartile, Q1, is a number such that integral of the PDF from - to Q1 equals 0.25, while the upper quartile, Q3, is such a number that the integral from - to Q3 equals 0.75; in terms of the CDF, the quartiles can be defined as follows:

:

:

where CDF1 is the quantile function.

The interquartile range and median of some common distributions are shown below

 Distribution Median IQR 
 Normal  2 &minus;1(0.75)  1.349 
 Laplace  2b ln(2)  1.386b 
 Cauchy  2 

===Interquartile range test for normality of distribution===

The IQR, mean, and standard deviation of a population P can be used in a simple test of whether or not P is normally distributed, or Gaussian. If P is normally distributed, then the standard score of the first quartile, z1, is -0.67, and the standard score of the third quartile, z3, is +0.67. Given mean = X and standard deviation =  for P, if P is normally distributed, the first quartile 

:

and the third quartile

:

If the actual values of the first or third quartiles differ substantially from the calculated values, P is not normally distributed.

==Interquartile range and outliers==

Figure 3. Box-and-whisker plot with four close and one far away extreme values, defined as outliers above Q3 + 1.5(IQR) and Q3 + 3(IQR), respectively.
The interquartile range is often used to find outliers in data. Outliers are observations that fall below Q1 - 1.5(IQR) or above Q3 + 1.5(IQR). In a boxplot, the highest and lowest occurring value within this limit are drawn as bar of the whiskers, and the outliers as individual points.

==See also==
* Midhinge
* Interdecile range
* Robust measures of scale

==References==



[[Indiana Jones]]

Dr. Henry Walton "Indiana" Jones, Jr., The character's full name is stated in the Corey Carrier narration of the feature-length episode My First Adventure from The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles. often shortened to "Indy", is the title character of the Indiana Jones franchise. George Lucas created the character in homage to the action heroes of 1930s film serials. The character first appeared in the 1981 film Raiders of the Lost Ark, to be followed by Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom in 1984, Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade in 1989, The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles from 1992 to 1996, and Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull in 2008. Alongside the more widely known films and television programs, the character is also featured in novels, comics, video games, and other media. Jones is also featured in the Disney theme park attraction; Indiana Jones Adventure at Disneyland and Tokyo DisneySea, as well as the Disneyland Paris attraction Indiana Jones et le Temple du Pril.

Jones is most famously played by Harrison Ford and has also been portrayed by River Phoenix (as the young Jones in The Last Crusade) and in the television series The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles by Corey Carrier, Sean Patrick Flanery, and George Hall. Doug Lee has supplied Jones's voice to two LucasArts video games, Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis and Indiana Jones and the Infernal Machine, while David Esch supplied his voice to Indiana Jones and the Emperor's Tomb and John Armstrong in Indiana Jones and the Staff of Kings. Indiana Jones and the Staff of Kings (Video Game 2009)  IMDb 

Particularly notable facets of the character include his iconic look (bullwhip, fedora, and leather jacket), sense of humor, deep knowledge of many ancient civilizations and languages, and fear of snakes.

Since his first appearance in Raiders of the Lost Ark, Indiana Jones has become a worldwide star and remains one of cinema's most revered film characters. In 2003, the American Film Institute ranked him as the second greatest film hero of all time. He was also named the 6th Greatest Movie Character by Empire magazine. Entertainment Weekly ranked Indy 2nd on their list of The All-Time Coolest Heroes in Pop Culture. Premiere magazine also placed Indy at number 7 on their list of The 100 Greatest Movie Characters of All Time. On their list of the 100 Greatest Fictional Characters, Fandomania.com ranked Indy at number 10. 

==Appearances==
Young Indiana Jones in The Last Crusade, played by River Phoenix

A native of Princeton, New Jersey, Indiana Jones was introduced in the 1981 film Raiders of the Lost Ark, set in 1936. The character is an adventurer reminiscent of the 1930s film serial treasure hunters and pulp action heroes, whose research is funded by Marshall College (named after producer Frank Marshall), a fictional college in Connecticut, where he is a professor of archaeology. In this first adventure, he is pitted against the Nazis, traveling the world to prevent them from recovering the Ark of the Covenant (see also Biblical archaeology). He is aided by Marion Ravenwood and Sallah. The Nazis are led by Jones's archrival, a Nazi-sympathizing French archaeologist named Ren Belloq, and Arnold Toht, a sinister Gestapo agent.

In the 1984 prequel, Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom, set in 1935, Jones travels to India and attempts to free enslaved children and the three Sankara stones from the bloodthirsty Thuggee cult. He is aided by Short Round, a young boy, and is accompanied by singer Willie Scott (Kate Capshaw).

The third film, 1989's Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade, set in 1938, returned to the formula of the original, reintroducing characters such as Sallah and Marcus Brody, a scene from Professor Jones's classroom (he now teaches at Barnett College), the globe trotting element of multiple locations, and the return of the infamous Nazi mystics, this time trying to find the Holy Grail. The film's introduction, set in 1912, provided some back story to the character, specifically the origin of his fear of snakes, his use of a bullwhip, the scar on his chin, and his hat; the film's epilogue also reveals that "Indiana" is not Jones's first name, but a nickname he took from the family dog. The film was a buddy movie of sorts, teaming Jones with his father, often to comical effect. Although Lucas intended to make five Indiana Jones films, Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade was the last for over eighteen years, as he could not think of a good plot element to drive the next installment. 

The 2008 film, Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull, is the latest film in the series. Set in 1957, 19 years after the third film, it pits an older, wiser Indiana Jones against Soviet agents bent on harnessing the power of a crystal skull associated with extraterrestrials discovered in South America by his former colleague Harold Oxley (John Hurt). Jones is aided in his adventure by his former lover, Marion Ravenwood (Karen Allen), and her sona young greaser named Henry "Mutt" Williams (Shia LaBeouf), later revealed to be Jones's biological child, Henry Jones III. There were rumors that Harrison Ford will not return for any future installments and LaBeouf will take over the Indy franchise. This film also reveals that Jones was recruited by the Office of Strategic Services (a predecessor department to the Central Intelligence Agency) during World War II, attaining the rank of Colonel in the United States Army and running covert operations with MI6 agent George McHale on the Soviet Union.

===Television===

From 1992 to 1996, George Lucas executive-produced a television series named The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles, aimed mainly at teenagers and older children, which showed many of the important events and historical figures of the early 20th century through the prism of Indiana Jones' life.
Sean Patrick Flanery as the young adult Indiana Jones

The show initially featured the formula of an elderly (93 to 94 years of age) lndiana Jones played by George Hall introducing a story from his youth by way of an anecdote: the main part of the episode then featured an adventure with either a young adult Indy (16 to 21 years of age) played by Sean Patrick Flanery or a child Indy (8 to 11 years) played by Corey Carrier. One episode, "Young Indiana Jones and the Mystery of the Blues", is bookended by Harrison Ford as Indiana Jones, rather than Hall. Later episodes and telemovies did not have this bookend format.

The bulk of the series centers around the young adult Indiana Jones and his activities during World War I as a 1617 year old soldier in the Belgian Army and then as an intelligence officer and spy seconded to French intelligence. The child Indy episodes follow the boy's travels around the globe as he accompanies his parents on his father's worldwide lecture tour from 1908 to 1910.

The show provided some backstory for the films, as well as new information regarding the character. Indiana Jones was born July 1, 1899, and his middle name is Walton (Lucas's middle name). It is also mentioned that he had a sister called Suzie who died as an infant of fever, and that he eventually has a daughter and grandchildren who appear in some episode introductions and epilogues. His relationship with his father, first introduced in Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade, was further fleshed out with stories about his travels with his father as a young boy. Indy damages or loses his right eye sometime between the events in 1957 and the early 1990s, when the "Old Indy" segments take place, as the elderly Indiana Jones wears an eyepatch.

In 1999, Lucas removed the episode introductions and epilogues by George Hall for the VHS and DVD releases, and re-edited the episodes into chronologically ordered feature-length stories. The series title was also changed to The Adventures of Young Indiana Jones.

===Video games===
The character has appeared in several officially licensed games, including LEGO Indiana Jones video games, beginning with adaptations of Raiders of the Lost Ark, Temple of Doom, two adaptations of The Last Crusade (one with purely action mechanics, one with an adventure and puzzle based structure) and Indiana Jones' Greatest Adventures which included the storylines from all three of the original films.

Following this, the games branched off into original storylines with Indiana Jones in the Lost Kingdom, Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis, Indiana Jones and the Infernal Machine, Indiana Jones and the Emperor's Tomb and Indiana Jones and the Staff of Kings. Emperor's Tomb sets up Jones's companion Wu Han and the search for Nurhaci's ashes seen at the beginning of Temple of Doom. The first two games were developed by Hal Barwood and starred Doug Lee as the voice of Indiana Jones; Emperor's Tomb had David Esch fill the role and Staff of Kings starred John Armstrong.

Indiana Jones and the Infernal Machine was the first Indy-based game presented in three dimensions, as opposed to 8-bit graphics and side-scrolling games before.

There is also a small game from Lucas Arts Indiana Jones and His Desktop Adventures. A video game was made for young Indy called Young Indiana Jones and the Instruments of Chaos, as well as a video game version of The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles.

Two Lego Indiana Jones games have also been released. was released in 2008 and follows the plots of the first three films. It was followed by in late 2009. The sequel includes an abbreviated reprise of the first three films, but focuses on the plot of Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull.

Indiana Jones has also made cameo appearances as an unlockable character in the games and .

Social gaming company Zynga introduced Indiana Jones to their "Adventure World" game in late 2011. 

===Theme parks===

Action on the set of Indiana Jones Epic Stunt Spectacular at Disney's Hollywood Studios, Orlando, Florida.
Indiana Jones is featured at several Walt Disney theme park attractions. The Indiana Jones Adventure attractions at Disneyland and Tokyo DisneySea ("Temple of the Forbidden Eye" and "Temple of the Crystal Skull," respectively) place Indy at the forefront of two similar archaeological discoveries. These two temples each contain a wrathful deity who threatens the guests who ride through in World War II troop transports. The attractions, some of the most expensive of their kind at the time, opened in 1995 and 2001, respectively, with sole design credit attributed to Walt Disney Imagineering. Disney did not originally license Harrison Ford's likeness for the American version; nonetheless, a differentiated Indiana Jones audio-animatronic character appears at three points in both attractions. However, the Indiana Jones featured in the DisneySea version does use Harrison Ford's likeness but uses Japanese audio for all of his speaking parts. In 2010, some of the Indy audio-animatronics at the Disneyland version were replaced with ones resembling Ford. Disneyland Resort: Whats Worth Seeing in 2010? | The DIS Unplugged Disney Blog. Disunplugged.com. (2010-02-08). Retrieved on 2012-01-14. 

Disneyland Paris also features an Indiana Jones-titled ride where people speed off through ancient ruins in a runaway mine wagon similar to that found in Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom. Indiana Jones and the Temple of Peril is a looping roller coaster engineered by Intamin, designed by Walt Disney Imagineering, and opened in 1993.

The Indiana Jones Epic Stunt Spectacular! is a live show that has been presented in the Disney's Hollywood Studios theme park of the Walt Disney World Resort with few changes since the park's 1989 opening, as Disney-MGM Studios. The 25-minute show presents various stunts framed in the context of a feature film production, and recruits members of the audience to participate in the show. Stunt artists in the show re-create and ultimately reveal some of the secrets of the stunts of the Raiders of the Lost Ark films, including the well-known "running-from-the-boulder" scene. Stunt performer Anislav Varbanov was fatally injured in August 2009, while rehearsing the popular show. Also at Disney's Hollywood Studios, an audio-animatronic Indiana Jones appears in another attraction; during the The Great Movie Ride's Raiders of the Lost Ark segment. 

==Character description and formation==
Harrison Ford as the mature Jones in Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull (2008)
In his role as a college professor of archaeology, Henry Jones Jr. is scholarly and learned in a tweed suit, lecturing on ancient civilizations. In Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull, it is revealed that Jones is influenced by the Marxist Archaeologist, Vere Gordon Childe, whose qualified acceptance of cultural diffusionism theory he propounds. Ironically, though Childe loathes fieldwork, Indy goes on to say, "If you want to be a good archaeologist, you gotta get out of the library." This is in tongue-in-cheek contrast to the previous film's comment, "Seventy percent of all archaeology is done in the library."

However, at the opportunity to recover important artifacts, Dr. Jones transforms into "Indiana," a "non-superhero superhero" image he has concocted for himself. Producer Frank Marshall said, "Indy a fallible character. He makes mistakes and gets hurt. That's the other thing people like: He's a real character, not a character with superpowers." Spielberg said there "was the willingness to allow our leading man to get hurt and to express his pain and to get his mad out and to take pratfalls and sometimes be the butt of his own jokes. I mean, Indiana Jones is not a perfect hero, and his imperfections, I think, make the audience feel that, with a little more exercise and a little more courage, they could be just like him." According to Spielberg biographer Douglas Brode, Indiana created his heroic figure so as to escape the dullness of teaching at a school. Both of Indiana's personas reject one another in philosophy, creating a duality. Harrison Ford said the fun of playing the character was because Indiana is both a romantic and a cynic, while scholars have analyzed Indiana as having traits of a lone wolf; a man on a quest; a noble treasure hunter; a hardboiled detective; a human superhero; and an American patriot. 

Like many characters in his films, Jones has some autobiographical elements of Spielberg. Indiana lacks a proper father figure because of his strained relationship with his father, Henry Senior. His own contained anger is misdirected towards Professor Abner Ravenwood, his mentor at the University of Chicago, leading to a strained relationship with Marion Ravenwood. The teenage Indiana bases his own look on a figure from the prologue of Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade, after being given his hat. Marcus Brody acts as Indiana's positive role model at the college. Indiana's own insecurities are made worse by the absence of his mother. In Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom, he becomes the father figure to Willie Scott and Short Round, to survive; he is rescued from Kali's evil by Short Round's dedication. Indiana also saves many enslaved children. 

Because of Indiana's strained relationship with his father, who was absent much of Indiana's youth searching for the Holy Grail, the character does not pursue the more spiritual aspects of the cultures he studies. Indiana uses his knowledge of Shiva to defeat Mola Ram. In Raiders, however, he is wise enough to close his eyes in the presence of God in the Ark of the Covenant. By contrast, his rival Rene Belloq is killed for having the audacity to try to communicate directly with God. 

In the prologue of Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade, Jones is seen as a teenager, establishing his look when given a hat. Indiana's intentions are revealed as prosocial, as he believes artifacts "belong in a museum." In the film's climax, Indiana undergoes "literal" tests of faith to retrieve the Grail and save his father's life. He also remembers Jesus as a historical figure  a humble carpenter  rather than an exalted figure when he recognizes the simple nature and tarnished appearance of the real Grail amongst a large assortment of much more ornately decorated ones. Henry Senior rescues his son from falling to his death when reaching for the fallen Grail, telling him to "let it go," overcoming his mercenary nature. The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles explains how Indiana becomes solitary and less idealistic following his service in World War I. In Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull, Jones is older and wiser, whereas his sidekicks Mutt and Mac are youthfully arrogant and greedy, respectively. 

==Origins and inspirations==
Charlton Heston in Secret of the Incas
Indiana Jones is modeled after the strong-jawed heroes of the matine serials and pulp magazines that George Lucas and Steven Spielberg enjoyed in their childhoods (such as the Republic Pictures serials, and the Doc Savage series). Sir H. Rider Haggard's safari guide/big game hunter Allan Quatermain of King Solomon's Mines, who dates back to 1885, is a notable template for Jones. "Based on a 1885 novel by Henry Rider Haggard, exploits of Allan Quartermain have long served as a template for the Indiana Jones character. King Solomon's Mines (1950), Quartermain finds himself unwillingly thrust into a worldwide search for the legendary mines of King Solomon. The look and feel of Indiana and his past adventures are quite apparent. Both Quartermain and Jones are confronted by angry villagers and a myriad of dangerous booby traps. Look to King Solomon's Mines for a good idea on the feel and tone Lucas and Spielberg are after with their latest Indiana Jones outing". Superheroflix.com. Retrieved on 2012-01-14. The two friends first discussed the project in Hawaii around the time of the release of the first Wars Episode IV: A New Hope|Star Wars] film. Spielberg told Lucas how he wanted his next project to be something fun, like a James Bond film (this would later be referenced when they cast Sean Connery as Henry Jones, Sr.). According to sources, Lucas responded to the effect that he had something "even better," or that he'd "got that beat." 

One of the possible bases for Indiana Jones are Professor Challenger, created by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle in 1912 for his novel, The Lost World. Challenger was based on Doyle's physiology professor, Sir William Rutherford, an adventuring academic, albeit a zoologist/anthropologist. 

The character was originally named Indiana Smith, after an Alaskan Malamute Lucas owned in the 1970s (Indiana); the name was perhaps in a nod to the 1966 Western film Nevada Smith. Spielberg disliked the name Smith, and Lucas casually suggested Jones as an alternative. 

Lucas has said on various occasions that Sean Connery's portrayal of British secret agent James Bond was one of the primary inspirations for Jones, a reason Connery was chosen for the role of Indiana's father in Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade. Bond Inspiration For Indiana Jones. Starpulse.com (2006-08-28). Retrieved on 2012-01-14. Given that both Spielberg and Ford were Eagle and Life Scouts, respectively, in their youth, gave them the inspiration to portray Indiana Jones as a Life Scout at age 13 in The Last Crusade, mirroring Ford's Scouting past. HARRISON FORD BIOGRAPHY - The Biography Channel.co.uk 

Costume designer Deborah Nadoolman Landis noted that the inspiration for the series as well as Indiana Jones' outfit was Charlton Heston's Harry Steele in Secret of the Incas (1954) and called Raiders of the Lost Ark "almost a shot for shot" remake of the Heston film, citing that Indiana Jones was "a kinder, gentler Harry Steele": "We did watch this film together as a crew several times, and I always thought it strange that the filmmakers did not credit it later as the inspiration for the series." 

===Historical models===
Many people are said to be the real-life inspiration of the Indiana Jones characteralthough none of the following have been confirmed as inspirations by Lucas or Spielberg. There are some suggestions, listed here in alphabetical order by last name:
* Beloit College professor and paleontologist Roy Chapman Andrews. , pp. 9798, "Andrews is allegedly the real person that the movie character of Indiana Jones was patterned after... crack shot, fighter of Mongolian brigands, the man who created the metaphor of 'Outer Mongolia' as denoting any exceedingly remote place." 
* Italian archaeologist and circus strongman Giovanni Battista Belzoni (17781823). 
* Yale University professor, historian, and explorer Hiram Bingham III, who rediscovered and excavated the lost city of Machu Picchu, and chronicled his find in the bestselling book The Lost City of the Incas in 1948. 
* University of Chicago archaeologist Robert Braidwood. 
* University of Chicago archaeologist James Henry Breasted. "Some sources say that Breasted was the inspiration for Indiana Jones; others say it was Robert Braidwood." 
* Frederick Russell Burnham, the celebrated American scout and British Army spy who heavily influenced Sir Haggard's fictional Allan Quatermain character and also became the inspiration for the Boy Scouts. 
* British archaeologist Percy Fawcett, who spent much of his life exploring the jungles of northern Brazil, and who was last seen in 1925 returning to the Amazon Basin to look for the Lost City Of Z. A fictionalized version of Fawcett appears to Jones in the book Indiana Jones And The Seven Veils. 
* American archaeologist Walter Fairservis. 
* Harvard University paleontologist Farish Jenkins. 
* British archaeologist and soldier T. E. Lawrence. 
* Northwestern University anthropologist, professor and adventurer William Montgomery McGovern. 
* British adventurer Frederick Albert Mitchell-Hedges. 
* German archaeologist Otto Rahn. 
* Harvard University archaeologist and art historian Langdon Warner. 

==Costume==
Upon requests by Spielberg and Lucas, the costume designer gave the character a distinctive silhouette through the styling of the hat; after examining many hats, the designers chose a tall-crowned, wide-brimmed fedora. As a documentary of Raiders pointed out, the hat served a practical purpose. Following the lead of the old "B"-movies that inspired the Indiana Jones series, the fedora hid the actor's face sufficiently to allow doubles to perform the more dangerous stunts seamlessly. Examples in Raiders include the wider-angle shot of Indy and Marion crashing a statue through a wall, and Indy sliding under a fast-moving vehicle from front to back. Thus it was necessary for the hat to stay in place much of the time.

The hat became so iconic that the filmmakers could only come up with very good reasons or jokes to remove it. If it ever fell off during a take, filming would have to stop to put it back on. In jest, Ford put a stapler against his head to stop his hat from falling off when a documentary crew visited during shooting of Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade. This created the urban legend that Ford stapled the hat to his head. Although other hats were also used throughout the films, the general style and profile remained the same. Elements of the outfit include:
* The fedora was supplied by Herbert Johnson Hatters in England for the first three films. It was referred to as "The Australian Model" by costume designer Deborah Landis and was fitted with a Petersham bow. The fedora for Crystal Skull was made by Steve Delk and Marc Kitter of the Adventurebilt Hat Company of Columbus, Mississippi. 
* The leather jacket, a hybrid of the "Type 440" and the A-2 jacket, was made by Leather Concessionaires (now known as Wested Leather Co.) for Raiders of the Lost Ark and Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade. For Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom, jackets were made in-house at Bermans & Nathans in London based on a stunt jacket they provided for Raiders of the Lost Ark. Tony Nowak made the jacket for Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull.
* The Indiana Jones shirt is based on a typical safari-style shirt. Its distinctive feature is two vertical strips running from the shoulders to the bottom of the shirt tails and continued over both breast pockets. A common debate regards the original shirt color. Surviving samples of the original shirts seem to be darker in reality than they appear on screen. Most fans look for an off-white "stone" color for their replicas. The original shirts, however, may have been more of a "tan" or "natural" color. The shirt varied little from film to film, the only notable difference being the darker buttons in Temple of Doom and Last Crusade. Originally designed by Andreas Dometakis for the films, this shirt was once one of the hardest pieces of gear to find.
* The pants worn by Indiana Jones in all three films were based on original World War II Army and Army Air Corps officer trousers. Although not original Pinks they are based on the same basic design and do carry a slight pinkish hue. The pants made for Raiders are said to be more of a greyish-brown where the pants made for Temple of Doom and Last Crusade were supposedly a purer reddish-brown. The pants were made of a khaki wool-twill, pleated with seven belt loops, two scalloped button flap rear pockets, a button fly and a four-inch military style hem. They were all most likely subcontracted by the costume department and made by famed London based cinema costumers, Angels and Bermans, to be tailored perfectly for Harrison Ford for the production.
* The bag was a modified Mark VII British gas mask bag, usually worn under the jacket with the exception of Crystal Skull where the bag was worn over the jacket.
* The whip was a 8 to bullwhip crafted by David Morgan for the first three films. The whips for Crystal Skull were crafted by a variety of people, including Terry Jacka, Joe Strain and Morgan (different lengths and styles were likely used in specific stunts).
* The pistol was usually a World War I-era revolver, including the Webley Government (Last Crusade and Crystal Skull), or a .45 ACP Smith & Wesson Hand Ejector 2nd model revolver (Raiders). He has also used an M1917 revolver (Temple of Doom), a Nagant M1895 (Young Indiana Jones), and a 9 mm Browning Hi-Power (Raiders). The weapon is carried in a military pattern flap holster.
* The shoes were made by Alden. A stock style (model 405) that had been a favorite of Ford's before the films, they are still sold today (though in a redder (brick) shade of brown than seen in the films) and are popularly known as "Indy Boots." 

The fedora and leather jacket from Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade are on display at the Smithsonian Institution's American History Museum in Washington, D.C. The collection of props and clothing from the films has become a thriving hobby for some aficionados of the franchise. Jones' whip was the third most popular film weapon, as shown by a 2008 poll held by 20th Century Fox, which surveyed approximately two thousand film fans. 

==Casting==
Originally, Spielberg suggested Harrison Ford; Lucas resisted the idea, since he had already cast the actor in American Graffiti, Star Wars and Wars Episode V: The Empire Strikes Back|The Empire Strikes Back], and did not want Ford to become known as his "Bobby De Niro" (in reference to the fact that fellow director Martin Scorsese regularly casts Robert De Niro in his films). During an intensive casting process, Lucas and Spielberg auditioned many actors, and finally cast actor Tom Selleck as Indiana Jones. Shortly afterward pre-production began in earnest on Raiders of the Lost Ark. However, CBS refused to release Selleck from his contractual commitment to Magnum, P.I. (which was gradually gaining momentum in the ratings), forcing him to turn down the role. One of CBS's concerns was that shooting for Magnum P.I. conflicted with shooting for Raiders, both of which were to begin about the same time. However, Selleck was to say later in an interview that shooting for Magnum P.I. was delayed and did not actually begin until shooting for Raiders had concluded.

After Spielberg suggested Ford again, Lucas gave in, and Ford was cast in the role less than three weeks before filming began. 

==Influence==
Though some archaeologists criticize Indy's methods as befitting a "looter" rather more than a careful worker of precious sites, many have adopted the popular figure as something of a standard-bearer for their profession. The industry magazine Archaeology, believing that Jones, as one editor said, was "a horrible archaeologist but a great diplomat for archaeology," named eight past and current archaeologists who they felt "embodied spirit" as recipients of the "Indy Spirit Awards" in 2008. That same year Ford himself was elected to the Board of Directors of the Archaeological Institute of America. Commenting that "understanding the past can only help us in dealing with the present and the future," Ford was praised by the association's president for his character's "significant role in stimulating the public's interest in archaeological exploration." 

While himself a homage to various prior adventurers, aspects of Indiana Jones also directly influenced some subsequent characterizations:
* Lara Croft, the female archaeologist of the Tomb Raider series, was originally designed as a man, but was changed to a woman, partly because the developers felt that the original design was too similar to Indiana Jones. Paramount Pictures, which distributed the Indiana Jones film series, would later make two films based on the Tomb Raider games.
* Prince of Persia producer Ben Mattes explained that their "inspiration was anything Harrison Ford has ever done: Indiana Jones, Han Solo." As quoted in Gary Steinman, "Prince of Persia: Anatomy of a Prince," PlayStation: The Official Magazine 13 (December 2008): 50. 
* The video game series Uncharted is also very heavily influenced and inspired by Indiana Jones. The protagonist, Nathan Drake, also shares many similarities with Jones himself, both visually and personality-wise. The design team felt the sources shared themes of mystery and "what-if scenarios" that romanticized adventure and aimed to include those in Uncharted. 
* The protagonists of Spelunky and La-Mulana are also daring, whip-wielding, fedora-wearing adventurers.

==References==

==External links==

*IndianaJones.com  the official Indiana Jones site
*
*The Indiana Jones Wiki  A wiki devoted to Indiana Jones



