[[London]]

London is the capital city of England and the United Kingdom. It is the most populous region, urban zone and metropolitan area in the United Kingdom. Standing on the River Thames, London has been a major settlement for two millennia, its history going back to its founding by the Romans, who named it Londinium. London's ancient core, the City of London, largely retains its 1.12 sqmi mediaeval boundaries and in 2011 had a resident population of 7,375, making it the smallest city in England. Since at least the 19th century, the term London has also referred to the metropolis developed around this core. The bulk of this conurbation forms the London region and the Greater London administrative area, See also: Independent city#National capitals. governed by the Mayor of London and the London Assembly. 

London is a leading global city, with strengths in the arts, commerce, education, entertainment, fashion, finance, healthcare, media, professional services, research and development, tourism and transport all contributing to its prominence. It is one of the world's leading financial centres and has the fifth-or sixth-largest metropolitan area GDP in the world depending on measurement. Rankings of cities by metropolitan area GDP can vary as a result of differences in the definition of the boundaries and population sizes of the areas compared, exchange rate fluctuations and the method used to calculate output. London and Paris are of broadly similar size in terms of total economic output which can result in third party sources varying as to which is defined as having the fifth- and sixth-largest city GDP in the world. A report by the McKinsey Global Institute published in 2012 estimated that London had a city GDP of US$751.8 billion in 2010, compared to US$764.2 billion for Paris, making them respectively the sixth- and fifth-largest in the world. A report by PricewaterhouseCoopers published in November 2009 estimated that London had a city GDP measured in purchasing power parity of US$565 billion in 2008, compared to US$564 billion for Paris, making them respectively the fifth- and sixth-largest in the world. The McKinsey Global Institute study used a metropolitan area with a population of 14.9 million for London compared to 11.8 million for Paris, whilst the PricewaterhouseCoopers study used a metropolitan area with a population of 8.59 million for London compared to 9.92 million for Paris. London is a world cultural capital. It is the world's most-visited city as measured by international arrivals and has the world's largest city airport system measured by passenger traffic. London's 43 universities form the largest concentration of higher education in Europe. In 2012, London became the first city to host the modern Summer Olympic Games three times. 

London has a diverse range of peoples and cultures, and more than 300 languages are spoken within its boundaries. London had an official population of 8,308,369 in 2012, making it the most populous municipality in the European Union, and accounting for 12.5% of the UK population. The Greater London Urban Area is the second-largest in the EU with a population of 9,787,426 according to the 2011 census. The London metropolitan area is the largest in the EU with a total population of 13,614,409, while the Greater London Authority puts the population of London metropolitan region at 21 million. The London Plan - Introduction - Positioning London. Greater London Authority. Retrieved 12 July 2013. 
London had the largest population of any city in the world from around 1831 to 1925. 

London contains four World Heritage Sites: the Tower of London; Kew Gardens; the site comprising the Palace of Westminster, Westminster Abbey, and St Margaret's Church; and the historic settlement of Greenwich (in which the Royal Observatory, Greenwich marks the Prime Meridian, 0 longitude, and GMT). Other famous landmarks include Buckingham Palace, the London Eye, Piccadilly Circus, St Paul's Cathedral, Tower Bridge, Trafalgar Square, and The Shard. London is home to numerous museums, galleries, libraries, sporting events and other cultural institutions, including the British Museum, National Gallery, Tate Modern, British Library and 40 West End theatres. The London Underground is the oldest underground railway network in the world. 

== History ==

=== Toponymy ===

The name London may derive from the River Thames
The etymology of London is uncertain. It is an ancient name, found in sources from the 2nd century. It is recorded c. 121 as Londinium, which points to Romano-British origin. The earliest attempted explanation, now disregarded, is attributed to Geoffrey of Monmouth in Historia Regum Britanniae. This had it that the name originated from a supposed King Lud, who had allegedly taken over the city and named it Kaerlud. 

From 1898, it was commonly accepted that the name was of Celtic origin and meant place belonging to a man called *Londinos; this explanation has since been rejected. Richard Coates put forward an explanation in 1998 that it is derived from the pre-Celtic Old European *(p)lowonida, meaning 'river too wide to ford', and suggested that this was a name given to the part of the River Thames which flows through London; from this, the settlement gained the Celtic form of its name, *Lowonidonjon; this requires quite a serious amendment however. The ultimate difficulty lies in reconciling the Latin form Londinium with the modern Welsh Llundain, which should demand a form *(h)lndinion (as opposed to *londnion), from earlier *loundiniom. The possibility cannot be ruled out that the Welsh name was borrowed back in from English at a later date, and thus cannot be used as a basis from which to reconstruct the original name.

Until 1889, the name "London" officially only applied to the City of London but since then it has also referred to the County of London and now Greater London. 

=== Prehistory and antiquity ===

Two recent discoveries indicate probable very early settlements near the Thames in the London area. In 1999, the remains of a Bronze Age bridge were found on the foreshore north of Vauxhall Bridge. This bridge either crossed the Thames, or went to a (lost) island in the river. Dendrology dated the timbers to 1500BC. In 2010 the foundations of a large timber structure, dated to 4500BC, were found on the Thames foreshore, south of Vauxhall Bridge. The function of the mesolithic structure is not known. Both structures are on South Bank, at a natural crossing point where the River Effra flows into the River Thames. 

In 1300, the City was still confined within the Roman walls.
Although there is evidence of scattered Brythonic settlements in the area, the first major settlement was founded by the Romans in 43 AD. This lasted for just seventeen years and around 61, the Iceni tribe led by Queen Boudica stormed it, burning it to the ground. The next, heavily planned, incarnation of Londinium prospered and superseded Colchester as the capital of the Roman province of Britannia in 100. At its height during the 2nd century, Roman London had a population of around 60,000.

=== Anglo-Saxon London ===
The Lancastrian siege of London in 1471 is attacked by a Yorkist sally.
With the collapse of Roman rule in the early 5th century, London ceased to be a capital and the walled city of Londinium was effectively abandoned, although Roman civilisation hung on in the St Martin-in-the-Fields area until around 450. From around 500, an Anglo-Saxon settlement known as Lundenwic developed in the same area, slightly to the west of the old Roman city. By about 680, it had revived sufficiently to become a major port, although there is little evidence of large-scale production of goods. From the 820s the town declined because of repeated Viking attacks, and the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle recorded that it was "refounded" by Alfred the Great in 886. Archaeological research shows that this involved abandonment of Lundenwic and a revival of life and trade within the old Roman walls. London then grew slowly until about 950, after which activity increased dramatically. 

By the 11th century, London was beyond all comparison the largest town in England. Westminster Abbey, rebuilt in the Romanesque style by King Edward the Confessor, was one of the grandest churches in Europe. Winchester had previously been the capital of Anglo-Saxon England, but from this time on, London became the main forum for foreign traders and the base for defence in time of war. In the view of Frank Stenton: "It had the resources, and it was rapidly developing the dignity and the political self-consciousness appropriate to a national capital." 

=== Middle Ages ===
Westminster Abbey, as seen in this painting (Canaletto, 1749), is a World Heritage Site and one of London's oldest and most important buildings
Following his victory in the Battle of Hastings, William, Duke of Normandy, was crowned King of England in the newly finished Westminster Abbey on Christmas Day 1066. William constructed the Tower of London, the first of the many Norman castles in England to be rebuilt in stone, in the southeastern corner of the city, to intimidate the native inhabitants. In 1097, William II began the building of Westminster Hall, close by the abbey of the same name. The hall became the basis of a new Palace of Westminster. 

During the 12th century, the institutions of central government, which had hitherto accompanied the royal English court as it moved around the country, grew in size and sophistication and became increasingly fixed in one place. In most cases this was Westminster, although the royal treasury, having been moved from Winchester, came to rest in the Tower. While the City of Westminster developed into a true capital in governmental terms, its distinct neighbour, the City of London, remained England's largest city and principal commercial centre, and it flourished under its own unique administration, the Corporation of London. In 1100, its population was around 18,000; by 1300 it had grown to nearly 100,000. 

Disaster struck during the Black Death in the mid-14th century, when London lost nearly a third of its population. London was the focus of the Peasants' Revolt in 1381. 

=== Early modern ===
The Great Fire of London destroyed many parts of the city in 1666.
London in 1806
During the Tudor period the Reformation produced a gradual shift to Protestantism, with much of London passing from church to private ownership. Pevsner, Nikolaus. London I: The Cities of London and Westminster rev. edition, 1962. Introduction p. 48. The traffic in woollen cloths shipped undyed and undressed from London to the nearby shores of the Low Countries where it was considered indispensable. J. G. Pounds (1976). "An Historical Geography of Europe 450 B.C.-A.D. 1330, Part 1330". p. 430. CUP Archive, But the tentacles of English maritime enterprise hardly extended beyond the seas of north-west Europe. The commercial route to Italy and the Mediterranean Sea normally lay through Antwerp and over the Alps; any ships passing through the Strait of Gibraltar to or from England were likely to be Italian or Ragusan. Upon the re-opening of the Netherlands to English shipping in January 1565 there at once ensued a strong outburst of commercial activity. Ramsay, George Daniel (1986). The Queen's Merchants and the Revolt of the Netherlands: The End of the Antwerp Mart. Volume 2, pp. 1 and 62-63. Manchester University Press. ISBN 978-0-7190-1849-7 The Royal Exchange was founded. The life and times of Sir Thomas Gresham, founder of the Royal Exchange: including notices of many of his contemporaries. With illustrations, Volume 2, pages 8081, John William Burgon, E. Wilson, 1839. Mercantilism grew and monopoly trading companies such as the East India Company were established, with trade expanding to the New World. London became the principal North Sea port, with migrants arriving from England and abroad. The population rose from an estimated 50,000 in 1530 to about 225,000 in 1605. 

In the 16th century William Shakespeare and his contemporaries lived in London at a time of hostility to the development of the theatre. By the end of the Tudor period in 1603, London was still very compact. There was an assassination attempt on James I in Westminster, through the Gunpowder Plot on 5 November 1605. London was plagued by disease in the early 17th century, culminating in the Great Plague of 16651666, which killed up to 100,000 people, or a fifth of the population. 

The Great Fire of London broke out in 1666 in Pudding Lane in the city and quickly swept through the wooden buildings. Rebuilding took over ten years and was supervised by Robert Hooke as Surveyor of London. The curious life of Robert Hooke, the man who measured London by Lisa Jardine In 1708 Christopher Wren's masterpiece, St Paul's Cathedral was completed. During the Georgian era new districts such as Mayfair were formed in the west; and new bridges over the Thames encouraged development in South London. In the east, the Port of London expanded downstream.

In 1762, George III acquired Buckingham House and it was enlarged over the next 75 years. During the 18th century, London was dogged by crime and the Bow Street Runners were established in 1750 as a professional police force. "Thief Taker, Constable, Police". Public Broadcasting Service (PBS). In total, more than 200 offences were punishable by death, including petty theft. Most children born in the city died before reaching their third birthday. The coffeehouse became a popular place to debate ideas, with growing literacy and the development of the printing press making news widely available; and Fleet Street became the centre of the British press.

According to Samuel Johnson:

=== Late modern and contemporary ===
British volunteer recruits in London, August 1914
A bombed-out London street during the Blitz of the Second World War
London was the world's largest city from about 1831 to 1925. London's overcrowded conditions led to cholera epidemics, claiming 14,000 lives in 1848, and 6,000 in 1866. Rising traffic congestion led to the creation of the world's first local urban rail network. The Metropolitan Board of Works oversaw infrastructure expansion in the capital and some of the surrounding counties; it was abolished in 1889 when the London County Council was created out of those areas of the counties surrounding the capital. London was bombed by the Germans during the First World War while during the Second World War the Blitz and other bombing by the German Luftwaffe killed over 30,000 Londoners and destroyed large tracts of housing and other buildings across the city. Immediately after the war, the 1948 Summer Olympics were held at the original Wembley Stadium, at a time when London had barely recovered from the war.

In 1951, the Festival of Britain was held on the South Bank. The Great Smog of 1952 led to the Clean Air Act 1956, which ended the "pea soup fogs" for which London had been notorious. From the 1940s onwards, London became home to a large number of immigrants, largely from Commonwealth countries such as Jamaica, India, Bangladesh and Pakistan, making London one of the most diverse cities in Europe.

Primarily starting in the mid-1960s, London became a centre for the worldwide youth culture, exemplified by the Swinging London subculture associated with the King's Road, Chelsea and Carnaby Street. The role of trendsetter was revived during the punk era. In 1965 London's political boundaries were expanded to take into account the growth of the urban area and a new Greater London Council was created. During The Troubles in Northern Ireland, London was subjected to bombing attacks by the Provisional IRA. Racial inequality was highlighted by the 1981 Brixton riot. Greater London's population declined steadily in the decades after the Second World War, from an estimated peak of 8.6 million in 1939 to around 6.8 million in the 1980s. The principal ports for London moved downstream to Felixstowe and Tilbury, with the London Docklands area becoming a focus for regeneration as the Canary Wharf development. This was borne out of London's ever-increasing role as a major international financial centre during the 1980s.

The Thames Barrier was completed in the 1980s to protect London against tidal surges from the North Sea. The Greater London Council was abolished in 1986, which left London as the only large metropolis in the world without a central administration. In 2000, London-wide government was restored, with the creation of the Greater London Authority. To celebrate the start of the 21st century, the Millennium Dome, London Eye and Millennium Bridge were constructed. On 6 July 2005 London was awarded the 2012 Summer Olympics, making London the first city to stage the Olympic Games three times. 

== Government ==

=== Local government ===

The administration of London is formed of two tiersa city-wide, strategic tier and a local tier. City-wide administration is coordinated by the Greater London Authority (GLA), while local administration is carried out by 33 smaller authorities. The GLA consists of two elected components; the Mayor of London, who has executive powers, and the London Assembly, who scrutinise the mayor's decisions and can accept or reject his budget proposals each year.
The headquarters of the GLA is City Hall, Southwark; the mayor is Boris Johnson. The mayor's statutory planning strategy is published as the London Plan, which was most recently revised in 2011. The local authorities are the councils of the 32 London boroughs and the City of London Corporation. They are responsible for most local services, such as local planning, schools, social services, local roads and refuse collection. Certain functions, such as waste management, are provided through joint arrangements. In 20092010 the combined revenue expenditure by London councils and the GLA amounted to just over 22 billion (14.7 billion for the boroughs and 7.4 billion for the GLA). http://www.communities.gov.uk/documents/statistics/pdf/1911067.pdf 

Policing in Greater London, with the exception of the City of London, is provided by the Metropolitan Police Force, overseen by the Mayor through the Mayor's Office for Policing and Crime (MOPAC). The City of London has its own police force  the City of London Police. The British Transport Police are responsible for police services on National Rail and London Underground services. 

The London Fire Brigade is the statutory fire and rescue service for Greater London. It is run by the London Fire and Emergency Planning Authority and is the third largest fire service in the world. National Health Service ambulance services are provided by the London Ambulance Service (LAS) NHS Trust, the largest free-at-the-point-of-use emergency ambulance service in the world. The London Air Ambulance charity operates in conjunction with the LAS where required. Her Majesty's Coastguard and the Royal National Lifeboat Institution operate on the River Thames, which is under the jurisdiction of the Port of London Authority from Teddington Lock to the sea. 

=== National government ===
London is the seat of the Government of the United Kingdom. Many government departments are based close to the Palace of Westminster, particularly along Whitehall, including the Prime Minister's residence at 10 Downing Street. The British Parliament is often referred to as the "Mother of Parliaments" (although this sobriquet was first applied to England itself by John Bright) because it has been the model for most other parliamentary systems, and its Acts have created many other parliaments. There are 73 Members of Parliament (MPs) from London, who correspond to local parliamentary constituencies in the national Parliament. Of these, 38 are from the Labour Party, 28 are Conservatives, and 7 are Liberal Democrats.

== Geography ==

=== Scope ===
Satellite view of inner London
Greater city of London and the south of England lit up at night and seen from the air
Greater London is the top-level administrative subdivision covering London. The small, ancient City of London at its core once contained the whole settlement, but as the urban area grew the City Corporation resisted attempts to amalgamate it with its suburbs, causing "London" to be defined in a number ways for different purposes; and the situation was once open to legal debate. Forty per cent of Greater London is covered by the London post town, within which 'LONDON' forms part of postal addresses. 

The London telephone area code (020) covers a larger area, similar in size to Greater London, although some outer districts are omitted and some places just outside are included. The area within the orbital M25 motorway is normally what is referred to as 'London'. and the Greater London boundary has been aligned to it in places. 

Outward urban expansion is now prevented by the Metropolitan Green Belt, although the built-up area extends beyond the boundary in places, resulting in a separately defined Greater London Urban Area. Beyond this is the vast London commuter belt. Greater London is split for some purposes into Inner London and Outer London. The city is split by the River Thames into North and South, with an informal central London area in its interior. The coordinates of the nominal centre of London, traditionally considered to be the original Eleanor Cross at Charing Cross near the junction of Trafalgar Square and Whitehall, are approximately . 

=== Status ===
Within London, both the City of London and the City of Westminster have city status and both the City of London and the remainder of Greater London are the ceremonial counties. The area of Greater London has incorporated areas that were once part of the historic counties of Middlesex, Kent, Surrey, Essex and Hertfordshire. London's status as the capital of England, and later the United Kingdom, has never been granted or confirmed officiallyby statute or in written form.

Its position was formed through constitutional convention, making its status as de facto capital a part of the UK's unwritten constitution. The capital of England was moved to London from Winchester as the Palace of Westminster developed in the 12th and 13th centuries to become the permanent location of the royal court, and thus the political capital of the nation. More recently, Greater London has been defined as a region of England and in this context is known as London. 

=== Topography ===
Parliament Hill
Greater London encompasses a total area of 1583 km2, an area which had a population of 7,172,036 in 2001 and a population density of 4542 PD/km2. The extended area known as the London Metropolitan Region or the London Metropolitan Agglomeration, comprises a total area of 8382 km2 has a population of 13,709,000 and a population density of 1510 PD/km2. Modern London stands on the Thames, its primary geographical feature, a navigable river which crosses the city from the south-west to the east. The Thames Valley is a floodplain surrounded by gently rolling hills including Parliament Hill, Addington Hills, and Primrose Hill. The Thames was once a much broader, shallower river with extensive marshlands; at high tide, its shores reached five times their present width. 

Since the Victorian era the Thames has been extensively embanked, and many of its London tributaries now flow underground. The Thames is a tidal river, and London is vulnerable to flooding. The threat has increased over time because of a slow but continuous rise in high water level by the slow 'tilting' of Britain (up in the north and down in the south) caused by post-glacial rebound. 

In 1974, a decade of work began on the construction of the Thames Barrier across the Thames at Woolwich to deal with this threat. While the barrier is expected to function as designed until roughly 2070, concepts for its future enlargement or redesign are already being discussed. 

=== Climate ===
Regent Street in the snow
London has a temperate oceanic climate (Kppen: Cfb&#x202f;), similar to much of southern Britain. Despite its reputation as being a rainy city, London receives less precipitation (with 601 mm in a year), than Rome (at 834 mm), Bordeaux (at 923 mm), Toulouse (at 668 mm), and Naples (at 1006 mm per year). tabella CLINO della stazione / CLINO Averages Listed for the station Napoli Capodichino The Weather Network 18 November 2011 Prvisions mto de Mto-France  Climat en France 18 November 2011 World Weather Information Service  Toulouse 18 November 2011 Temperature extremes for all sites in the London area range from 38.1 C at Kew during August 2003, (which has been proposed to be the UK's highest 'accurate' temperature) down to -16.1 C at Northolt during January 1962. Temperatures of below -20 C have been noted prior to the 20th century, but the accuracy cannot be validated.

Summers are generally warm and sometimes hot, the heat being boosted by the urban heat island effect making the centre of London at times 5 C-change warmer than the suburbs and outskirts. London's average July high is 24 C. During the 2003 European heat wave there were 14 consecutive days above 30 C and 2 consecutive days where temperatures reached 38 C, leading to hundreds of heat related deaths. Rain generally occurs on around 2 out of 10 summer days. Spring and Autumn are mixed seasons and can be pleasant. On 1 October 2011, the air temperature attained 30 C and in April 2011 it reached 28 C. However in recent years both of these months have also had snowfall. Temperature extremes range from -10 C to 37.9 C.

=== Districts ===

 The City of London and the 32 London boroughs City of London City of Westminster Kensington and Chelsea Hammersmith and Fulham Wandsworth Lambeth Southwark Tower Hamlets Hackney Islington Camden Brent Ealing Hounslow Richmond Kingston Merton Sutton Croydon Bromley Lewisham Greenwich Bexley Havering Barking and Dagenham Redbridge Newham Waltham Forest Haringey Enfield Barnet Harrow Hillingdon 

London's vast urban area is often described using a set of district names, such as Bloomsbury, Mayfair, Wembley and Whitechapel. These are either informal designations, reflect the names of villages that have been absorbed by sprawl, or are superseded administrative units such as parishes or former boroughs.

Such names have remained in use through tradition, each referring to a local area with its own distinctive character, but without official boundaries. Since 1965 Greater London has been divided into 32 London boroughs in addition to the ancient City of London. The City of London is the main financial district, and Canary Wharf has recently developed into a new financial and commercial hub in the Docklands to the east.

The West End is London's main entertainment and shopping district, attracting tourists. West London includes expensive residential areas where properties can sell for tens of millions of pounds. The average price for properties in Kensington and Chelsea is 894,000 with similar average outlay in most of central London. 

The East End is the area closest to the original Port of London, known for its high immigrant population, as well as for being one of the poorest areas in London. The surrounding East London area saw much of London's early industrial development; now, brownfield sites throughout the area are being redeveloped as part of the Thames Gateway including the London Riverside and Lower Lea Valley, which was developed into the Olympic Park for the 2012 Olympics and Paralympics. 

=== Architecture ===

The Tower, with Tower Bridge built 800 years later on the River Thames
30 St Mary Axe, also known as "the Gherkin", towers over St Andrew Undershaft
London's buildings are too diverse to be characterised by any particular architectural style, partly because of their varying ages. Many grand houses and public buildings, such as the National Gallery, are constructed from Portland stone. Some areas of the city, particularly those just west of the centre, are characterised by white stucco or whitewashed buildings. Few structures in central London pre-date the Great Fire of 1666, these being a few trace Roman remains, the Tower of London and a few scattered Tudor survivors in the City. Further out is, for example, the Tudor period Hampton Court Palace, England's oldest surviving Tudor palace, built by Cardinal Thomas Wolsey c. 1515. 
Wren's late 17th-century churches and the financial institutions of the 18th and 19th centuries such as the Royal Exchange and the Bank of England, to the early 20th century Old Bailey and the 1960s Barbican Estate form part of the varied architectural heritage.
Three icons: Big Ben clock tower with a red telephone box and London double-decker bus in front
The disused, but soon to be rejuvenated, 1939 Battersea Power Station by the river in the south-west is a local landmark, while some railway termini are excellent examples of Victorian architecture, most notably St. Pancras and Paddington. The density of London varies, with high employment density in the central area, high residential densities in inner London and lower densities in Outer London.

The Monument in the City of London provides views of the surrounding area while commemorating the Great Fire of London, which originated nearby. Marble Arch and Wellington Arch, at the north and south ends of Park Lane respectively, have royal connections, as do the Albert Memorial and Royal Albert Hall in Kensington. Nelson's Column is a nationally recognised monument in Trafalgar Square, one of the focal points of the city centre. Older buildings are mainly brick built, most commonly the yellow London stock brick or a warm orange-red variety, often decorated with carvings and white plaster mouldings. 

Buckingham Palace is the official residence of the British monarch
In the dense areas, most of the concentration is via medium- and high-rise buildings. London's skyscrapers such as 30 St Mary Axe, Tower 42, the Broadgate Tower and One Canada Square are mostly in the two financial districts, the City of London and Canary Wharf. High-rise development is restricted at certain sites if it would obstruct protected views of St Paul's Cathedral and other historic buildings. Nevertheless there are a number of very tall skyscrapers in central London (see Tall buildings in London), including the 72-storey Shard London Bridge, the tallest building in the European Union.

Other notable modern buildings include City Hall in Southwark with its distinctive oval shape, and the British Library in Somers Town/Kings Cross. What was formerly the Millennium Dome, by the Thames to the east of Canary Wharf, is now an entertainment venue called The O2 Arena.

=== Parks and gardens ===

Aerial view of Hyde Park
The largest parks in the central area of London are three of the Royal Parks, namely Hyde Park and its neighbour Kensington Gardens at the western edge of central London, and Regent's Park on the northern edge. Regent's Park contains London Zoo, the world's oldest scientific zoo, and is near the tourist attraction of Madame Tussauds Wax Museum. 

Closer to central London are the smaller Royal Parks of Green Park and St. James's Park. Hyde Park in particular is popular for sports and sometimes hosts open-air concerts. A number of large parks lie outside the city centre, including the remaining Royal Parks of Greenwich Park to the south-east and Bushy Park and Richmond Park (the largest) to the south-west, as well as Victoria Park, London to the east. Primrose Hill to the north of Regent's Park is a popular spot to view the city skyline.

Some more informal, semi-natural open spaces also exist, including the 320 ha Hampstead Heath of North London. This incorporates Kenwood House, the former stately home and a popular location in the summer months where classical musical concerts are held by the lake, attracting thousands of people every weekend to enjoy the music, scenery and fireworks. 

== Demography ==

With increasing industrialisation, London's population grew rapidly throughout the 19th and early 20th centuries, and it was for some time in the late 19th and early 20th centuries the most populous city in the world until overtaken by New York City in 1925. Its population peaked at 8,615,245 in 1939 immediately before the outbreak of the Second World War, but had declined to 7,192,091 at the 2001 Census. However, the population then grew by just over a million between the 2001 and 2011 Censuses, to reach 8,173,941 in the latter enumeration.

However, London's continuous urban area extends beyond the borders of Greater London and was home to 9,787,426 people in 2011, while its wider metropolitan area has a population of between 12 and 14 million depending on the definition used. According to Eurostat, London is the most populous city and metropolitan area of the European Union and the second most populous in Europe (or third if Istanbul is included). During the period 19912001 a net 726,000 immigrants arrived in London. 

The region covers an area of 1579 km2. The population density is 5177 PD/km2, more than ten times that of any other British region. In terms of population, London is the 19th largest city and the 18th largest metropolitan region in the world. As of 2014, London has the largest number of billionaires (British Pound Sterling) in the world, with 72 residing in the city. London ranks as one of the most expensive cities in the world, alongside Tokyo and Moscow. 

=== Ethnic groups ===

According to the Office for National Statistics, based on the 2011 Census estimates, 59.8 per cent of the 8,173,941 inhabitants of London were White, with 44.9 per cent White British, 2.2 per cent White Irish, 0.1 per cent gypsy/Irish traveller and 12.1 per cent classified as Other White.

20.9 per cent of Londoners are of Asian and mixed-Asian descent. 19.7 per cent are of full Asian descent, with those of mixed-Asian heritage comprising 1.2 of the population. Indians account for 6.6 per cent of the population, followed by Pakistanis and Bangladeshis at 2.7 per cent each. Chinese peoples account for 1.5 per cent of the population, with Arabs comprising 1.3 per cent. A further 4.9 per cent are classified as "Other Asian".

15.6 per cent of London's population are of Black and mixed-Black descent. 13.3 per cent are of full Black descent, with those of mixed-Black heritage comprising 2.3 per cent. Black Africans account for 7.0 per cent of London's population, with 4.2 per cent as Black Caribbean and 2.1 per cent as "Other Black". 5.0 per cent are of mixed race.

Across London, Black and Asian children outnumber White British children by about six to four in state schools. However, White children represented 62 per cent of London's 1,498,700 population aged 0 to 15, according to estimates from the Office for National Statistics from 2009, with 55.7 per cent of the population aged 0 to 15 being White British, 0.7 per cent White Irish and 5.6 per cent from other EU White backgrounds. In January 2005, a survey of London's ethnic and religious diversity claimed that there were more than 300 languages spoken in London and more than 50 non-indigenous communities with a population of more than 10,000. Figures from the Office for National Statistics show that, , London's foreign-born population was 2,650,000 (33 per cent), up from 1,630,000 in 1997.

The 2011 census showed that 36.7 per cent of Greater London's population were born outside the UK. The table to the right shows the 20 most common foreign countries of birth of London residents in 2011, the date of the last published UK Census. A portion of the German-born population are likely to be British nationals born to parents serving in the British Armed Forces in Germany. Estimates produced by the Office for National Statistics indicate that the five largest foreign-born groups living in London in the period July 2009 to June 2010 were those born in India, Poland, the Republic of Ireland, Bangladesh and Nigeria. Figure given is the central estimate. See the source for 95 per cent confidence intervals. 

=== Religion ===

According to the 2011 Census, the largest religious groupings are Christians (48.4 per cent), followed by those of no religion (20.7 per cent), Muslims (12.4 per cent), no response (8.5 per cent), Hindus (5.0 per cent), Jews (1.8 per cent), Sikhs (1.5 per cent), Buddhists (1.0 per cent) and other (0.6 per cent).

London has traditionally been Christian, and has a large number of churches, particularly in the City of London. The well-known St Paul's Cathedral in the City and Southwark Cathedral south of the river are Anglican administrative centres, while the Archbishop of Canterbury, principal bishop of the Church of England and worldwide Anglican Communion, has his main residence at Lambeth Palace in the London Borough of Lambeth. 

Important national and royal ceremonies are shared between St Paul's and Westminster Abbey. The Abbey is not to be confused with nearby Westminster Cathedral, which is the largest Roman Catholic cathedral in England and Wales. Despite the prevalence of Anglican churches, observance is very low within the Anglican denomination. Church attendance continues on a long, slow, steady decline, according to Church of England statistics. 
St Paul's Cathedral

London is also home to sizeable Muslim, Hindu, Sikh, and Jewish communities. Many Muslims live in Tower Hamlets and Newham; the most important Muslim edifice is London Central Mosque on the edge of Regent's Park. Following the oil boom, increasing numbers of wealthy Middle-Eastern Muslims have based themselves around Mayfair and Knightsbridge in west London. London is home to the largest mosque in western Europe, the Baitul Futuh Mosque, of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community. Since the spiritual head of the Community, Mirza Masroor Ahmad resides in London, the city acts as the international headquarters of the Community. 
London's large Hindu community is in the north-western boroughs of Harrow and Brent, the latter of which is home to Europe's largest Hindu temple, Neasden Temple. London is also home to 42 Hindu temples. There are Sikh communities in East and West London, particularly in Southall, home to one of the largest Sikh populations and the largest Sikh temple outside India. 

The majority of British Jews live in London, with significant Jewish communities in Stamford Hill, Stanmore, Golders Green, Finchley, Hampstead, Hendon and Edgware in North London. Bevis Marks Synagogue in the City of London is affiliated to London's historic Sephardic Jewish community. It is the only synagogue in Europe which has held regular services continuously for over 300 years. Stanmore and Canons Park Synagogue has the largest membership of any single Orthodox synagogue in the whole of Europe, overtaking Ilford synagogue (also in London) in 1998. The community set up the London Jewish Forum in 2006 in response to the growing significance of devolved London Government. 

== Economy ==

The City of London is one of the largest financial centres in the world 

London generates approximately 20 per cent of the UK's GDP (or $446 billion in 2005); while the economy of the London metropolitan areathe largest in Europegenerates approximately 30 per cent of the UK's GDP (or an estimated $669 billion in 2005). London is one of the pre-eminent financial centres of the world and vies with New York City as the most important location for international finance. 

London's largest industry is finance, and its financial exports make it a large contributor to the UK's balance of payments. Around 325,000 people were employed in financial services in London until mid-2007. London has over 480 overseas banks, more than any other city in the world. Over 85% (3.2 million) of the employed population of greater London works in the services industries. Because of its prominent global role, London's economy has been affected by the Late-2000s financial crisis. The City of London estimates that 70,000 jobs in finance will be cut within a year. The City of London is home to the Bank of England, London Stock Exchange, and Lloyd's of London insurance market.

Over half of the UK's top 100 listed companies (the FTSE 100) and over 100 of Europe's 500 largest companies have their headquarters in central London. Over 70 per cent of the FTSE 100 are within London's metropolitan area, and 75 per cent of Fortune 500 companies have offices in London. Canary Wharf is a major business and financial centre and is home to some of the UK's tallest buildings

Along with professional services, media companies are concentrated in London and the media distribution industry is London's second most competitive sector. The BBC is a significant employer, while other broadcasters also have headquarters around the City. Many national newspapers are edited in London. London is a major retail centre and in 2010 had the highest non-food retail sales of any city in the world, with a total spend of around 64.2 billion. The Port of London is the second-largest in the United Kingdom, handling 45 million tonnes of cargo each year. 

London has five major business districts: the City, Westminster, Canary Wharf, Camden & Islington and Lambeth & Southwark. One way to get an idea of their relative importance is to look at relative amounts of office space: Greater London had 27 million m2 of office space in 2001, and the City contains the most space, with 8 million m2 of office space. London has some of the highest real estate prices in the world. 

A growing number of technology companies are based in London notably in East London Tech City, also known as Silicon Roundabout. The city will be among the first to receive a geoTLD, in spring or summer 2014. Domain availability - Dot London 

In February 2014 London was ranked as the European City of the Future in the 2014/15 list by FDi Magazine. 

London has the highest property prices of any European city according to the Office of National Statistics and the European Office of Statistics. http://www.citymayors.com/statistics/uk-european-cities.html On average the price per square metre in central London is 24,252 (April 2014). This is higher than the property prices in other G8 European capital cities; Berlin 3,306, Rome 6,188 and Paris 11,229. http://www.globalpropertyguide.com/Europe/United-Kingdom/square-meter-prices 

=== Tourism ===

The Natural History Museum 
London is a popular centre for tourism, one of its prime industries, employing the equivalent of 350,000 full-time workers in 2003, while annual expenditure by tourists is around 15 billion. "", Visit London. Retrieved 3 June 2006. London attracts over 14 million international visitors per year, making it Europe's most visited city. London attracts 27 million overnight-stay visitors every year. " In 2010 the ten most-visited attractions in London were: 
# British Museum
# Tate Modern
# National Gallery
# Natural History Museum
# London Eye
# Science Museum
# Victoria and Albert Museum
# Madame Tussauds
# National Maritime Museum
# Tower of London

== Transport ==

A black London taxi, also known as a hackney carriage.
Transport is one of the four main areas of policy administered by the Mayor of London, however the mayor's financial control does not extend to the longer distance rail network that enters London. In 2007 he assumed responsibility for some local lines, which now form the London Overground network, adding to the existing responsibility for the London Underground, trams and buses. The public transport network is administered by Transport for London (TfL) and is one of the most extensive in the world. Cycling is an increasingly popular way to get around London. The London Cycling Campaign lobbies for better provision. 

The lines that formed the London Underground, as well as trams and buses, became part of an integrated transport system in 1933 when the London Passenger Transport Board (LPTB) or London Transport was created. Transport for London (TfL), is now the statutory corporation responsible for most aspects of the transport system in Greater London, and is run by a board and a commissioner appointed by the Mayor of London. 

=== Air ===
Heathrow (Terminal 5 pictured) is the busiest airport in the world for international traffic. London is a major international air transport hub with the largest city airspace in the world. Eight airports use the word London in their name, but most traffic passes through six of these. London Heathrow Airport, in Hillingdon, West London, is the busiest airport in the world for international traffic, and is the major hub of the nation's flag carrier, British Airways. In March 2008 its fifth terminal was opened. There were plans for a third runway and a sixth terminal however these were cancelled by the Coalition Government on 12 May 2010. In September 2011 a personal rapid transit system was opened at Heathrow to connect to a nearby car park. 

Similar traffic, with some cheap short-haul flights, is also handled at Gatwick Airport, south of London in West Sussex. 

Stansted Airport, north east of London in Essex, is a local UK hub and Luton Airport to the north of London in Bedfordshire, caters mostly for cheap short-haul flights. London City Airport, the smallest and most central airport, in Newham, East London, is focused on business travellers, with a mixture of full service short-haul scheduled flights and considerable business jet traffic. 

London Southend Airport, east of London in Essex, is a smaller, regional airport that mainly caters for cheap short-haul flights. It recently went through a large redevelopment project including a brand new terminal, extended runway and a new railway station offering fast links into the capital.

=== Buses and trams ===
The red double-decker bus is an iconic symbol of London
London's bus network is one of the largest in the world, running 24 hours a day, with approximately 8,500 buses, more than 700 bus routes and around 19,500 bus stops. In 2013, the network had more than 2 billion commuter trips per annum, more than the Underground. Around 850 million is taken in revenue each year. London has the largest wheelchair accessible network in the world and, from the 3rd quarter of 2007, became more accessible to hearing and visually impaired passengers as audio-visual announcements were introduced. The distinctive red double-decker buses are an internationally recognised trademark of London transport along with black cabs and the Tube. 

London has a modern tram network, known as Tramlink, based in Croydon in South London. The network has 39 stops and four routes, and carried 28 million people in 2013. Since June 2008 Transport for London has completely owned Tramlink, and it plans to spend 54m by 2015 on maintenance, renewals, upgrades and capacity enhancements. Since April 2009 all trams have been refurbished. 

=== Cable car ===

London's first and only cable car, known as the Emirate Air Line or Thames cable car opened in June 2012. Crossing the River Thames, linking Greenwich Peninsula and the Royal Docks in the east of the city, the cable car is integrated with London's Oyster Card ticketing system.

=== Cycling ===

Barclays Cycle Hire docking station in Southwark Street
Cycling in London has enjoyed a renaissance since the turn of the Millennium. Cyclists enjoy a cheaper, and often quicker, way around town than those using public transport or cars, and the launch of the Barclays Cycle Hire scheme in July 2010 has been successful and generally well received.

=== Port and river boats ===
From being the largest port in the world, the Port of London is now only the second-largest in the United Kingdom, handling 45 million tonnes of cargo each year. Most of this actually passes through the Port of Tilbury, outside the boundary of Greater London.

London also has frequent river boat services on the Thames known as Thames Clippers. These run up to every 20 minutes between Embankment Pier and North Greenwich Pier. The Woolwich Ferry, with 2.5 million passengers every year, Transport for London: Woolwich Ferry, 50 years on Retrieved 8 September 2013 is a frequent service linking the North and South Circular Roads. Other operators also run both commuter and tourist boat services in London.

=== Rail ===

====Underground and DLR====
The London Underground is the world's oldest and second-longest rapid transit system
The London Underground  all of which is now commonly referred to as the Tube, though originally this designation referred only to the deep-level lines, as distinct from the sub-surface lines  is the oldest, and second longest metro system in the world, dating from 1863. The system serves 270 stations and was formed from several private companies, including the world's first underground electric line, the City and South London Railway. 

Over three million journeys are made every day on the Underground network, over 1 billion each year. An investment programme is attempting to reduce congestion and improve reliability, including 6.5 billion (7.7 billion) spent before the 2012 Summer Olympics. London has been commended as the city with the best public transport. The Docklands Light Railway, which opened in 1987, is a second, more local metro system using smaller and lighter tram-type vehicles which serve Docklands and Greenwich.

====Suburban====
There are 366 railway stations in the London Travelcard Zones on an extensive above-ground suburban railway network. South London, particularly has a high concentration of railways as it fewer Underground lines. London houses Britain's busiest station  Waterloo, with over 184 million people using the interchange station complex (which includes Waterloo East station) each year. While is the busiest station in Europe by the number of trains passing. Most rail lines terminate around the centre of London, running into eighteen terminal stations with the exception of the Thameslink trains connecting Bedford in the north and Brighton in the south via Luton and Gatwick airports. 

With the need for more rail capacity in London, Crossrail is due to open in 2018. It will be a new railway line running east to west through London and into the Home Counties with a branch to Heathrow Airport. It is Europe's biggest construction project, with a 15 billion projected cost. 

====InterCity and International====
St Pancras railway station is the main terminal for high speed Eurostar and HS1 services, as well as suburban Thameslink and East Midlands Trains services.

London is the centre of the National Rail network, with 70% of rail journeys starting or ending in London. Like suburban rail services, Regional and InterCity trains depart from several termini around the City Centre, linking London with the rest of Britain including: Cambridge, Bristol, Cardiff, Birmingham, Sheffield, Leeds, Manchester, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, Edinburgh and Glasgow.

Since 2007 high-speed Eurostar trains link St. Pancras International with Lille, Paris, and Brussels. Journey times to Paris and Brussels of two-and-a-quarter hours and one hour 50 minutes respectively make London closer to continental Europe than the rest of Britain by virtue of the High Speed 1 rail link to the Channel Tunnel while the first high-speed domestic trains started in June 2009 linking Kent to London. There are plans for a second high speed line between London and the West Midlands.

=== Roads ===
The A102, near Greenwich. This was one of the few routes proposed in the Ringways Plan within Inner London to be built.
Although the majority of journeys involving central London are made by public transport, car travel is common in the suburbs. The inner ring road (around the city centre), the North and South Circular roads (in the suburbs), and the outer orbital motorway (the M25, outside the built-up area) encircle the city and are intersected by a number of busy radial routesbut very few motorways penetrate into inner London. The M25 is the longest ring-road motorway in the world at 121.5 mi long. Campbell, Ken (2000). "Guinness World Records 2001". p. 150. The A1 and M1 connect London to Leeds, and Newcastle and Edinburgh.

A plan for a comprehensive network of motorways throughout the city (the Ringways Plan) was prepared in the 1960s but was mostly cancelled in the early 1970s. In 2003, a congestion charge was introduced to reduce traffic volumes in the city centre. With a few exceptions, motorists are required to pay 10 per day to drive within a defined zone encompassing much of central London. Motorists who are residents of the defined zone can buy a greatly reduced season pass which is renewed monthly and is cheaper than a corresponding bus fare. London is notorious for its traffic congestion, with the M25 motorway the busiest stretch in the country. The average speed of a car in the rush hour is 10.6 mi/h. London government initially expected the Congestion Charge Zone to increase daily peak period Underground and bus users by 20,000 people, reduce road traffic by 10 to 15 per cent, increase traffic speeds by 10 to 15 per cent, and reduce queues by 20 to 30 per cent. Santos, Georgina; Button, Kenneth; Noll, Roger G. "London Congestion Charging/Comments." Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs. 15287084 (2008): 177,177234. Over the course of several years, the average number of cars entering the centre of London on a weekday was reduced from 195,000 to 125,000 cars  a 35-per-cent reduction of vehicles driven per day. Table 3 in Santos, Georgina; Button, Kenneth; Noll, Roger G. "London Congestion Charging/Comments." Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs.15287084 (2008): 177,177234. 

== Education ==

=== Tertiary education ===
The Wilkins Building at University College London
London is a major centre of higher education teaching and research and its 43 universities form the largest concentration of higher education in Europe. In 2008/09 it had a higher education student population of around 412,000 (approximately 17 per cent of the UK total), of whom around 287,000 were registered for undergraduate degrees and 118,000 were studying at postgraduate level. In 2008/09 there were around 97,150 international students in London, approximately 25 per cent of all international students in the UK. 

A number of world-leading education institutions are based in London. In the 2013 QS World University Rankings, University College London (UCL) is ranked 4th in the world, Imperial College London 5th, and King's College London 19th. The London School of Economics has been described as the world's leading social science institution for both teaching and research. The London Business School is considered one of the world's leading business schools and in 2010 its MBA programme was ranked best in the world by the Financial Times. 

With 125,000 students, the federal University of London is the largest contact teaching university in Europe. It includes four large multi-faculty universities  King's College London, Queen Mary, Royal Holloway and UCL  and a number of smaller and more specialised institutions including Birkbeck, the Courtauld Institute of Art, Goldsmiths, Guildhall School of Music and Drama, the Institute of Education, the London Business School, the London School of Economics, the London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, the Royal Academy of Music, the Central School of Speech and Drama, the Royal Veterinary College and the School of Oriental and African Studies. Members of the University of London have their own admissions procedures, and some award their own degrees.

There are a number of universities in London which are outside of the University of London system, including Brunel University, City University London, Imperial College London, Kingston University, London Metropolitan University (with over 34,000 students, the largest unitary university in London), About London Met London Metropolitan University, August 2008 London South Bank University, Middlesex University, University of the Arts London (the largest university of art, design, fashion, communication and the performing arts in Europe), University of East London, the University of West London and the University of Westminster. In addition there are three international universities in London  Regent's College, Richmond University and Schiller International University.

The front faade of the Royal College of Music
London is home to five major medical schools  Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry (part of Queen Mary), King's College London School of Medicine (the largest medical school in Europe), Imperial College School of Medicine, UCL Medical School and St George's, University of London  and has a large number of affiliated teaching hospitals. It is also a major centre for biomedical research, and three of the UK's five academic health science centres are based in the city  Imperial College Healthcare, King's Health Partners and UCL Partners (the largest such centre in Europe). 

There are a number of business schools in London, including Cass Business School (part of City University London), Hult International Business School, ESCP Europe, European Business School London, Imperial College Business School and the London Business School. London is also home to many specialist arts education institutions, including the Academy of Live and Recorded Arts, the London Contemporary Dance School, RADA, the Royal College of Art, the Royal College of Music and Trinity Laban.

=== Primary and secondary education ===
The majority of primary and secondary schools in London are state schools and are controlled by the London boroughs, although there are also a number of private schools in London, including old and famous schools such as the City of London School, Harrow, St Paul's School, University College School, Highgate School and Westminster School.

== Culture ==

=== Accent ===
The London accent long ago acquired the Cockney label, which is heard both in London itself, and across the wider South East England region more generally. "Cracking Up!". p. 178. Lulu.com The accent of a 21st-century 'Londoner' varies widely; what is becoming more and more common amongst the under-30s however is some fusion of Cockney with a whole array of 'ethnic' accents, in particular Caribbean, which form an accent labelled Multicultural London English (MLE). 

=== Leisure and entertainment ===

Piccadilly Circus
Within the City of Westminster, the entertainment district of the West End has its focus around Leicester Square, where London and world film premieres are held, and Piccadilly Circus, with its giant electronic advertisements. London's theatre district is here, as are many cinemas, bars, clubs and restaurants, including the city's Chinatown district (in Soho), and just to the east is Covent Garden, an area housing speciality shops. The city is the home of Andrew Lloyd Webber, whose musicals have dominated the West End theatre since the late 20th century. Sondheim and Lloyd-Webber: the new musical The New York Times.. referred to Andrew Lloyd Webber as "the most commercially successful composer in history" The United Kingdom's Royal Ballet, English National Ballet, Royal Opera and English National Opera are based in London and perform at the Royal Opera House, the London Coliseum, Sadler's Wells Theatre and the Royal Albert Hall as well as touring the country. 

Harrods in Knightsbridge
Islington's 1 mi long Upper Street, extending northwards from Angel, has more bars and restaurants than any other street in the United Kingdom. Europe's busiest shopping area is Oxford Street, a shopping street nearly 1 mi long, making it the longest shopping street in the United Kingdom. Oxford Street is home to vast numbers of retailers and department stores, including the world-famous Selfridges flagship store. Knightsbridge, home to the equally renowned Harrods department store, lies to the south-west.

London is home to designers Vivienne Westwood, Galliano, Stella McCartney, Manolo Blahnik, and Jimmy Choo among others; its renowned art and fashion schools make it an international centre of fashion alongside Paris, Milan, and New York City. London offers a great variety of cuisine as a result of its ethnically diverse population. Gastronomic centres include the Bangladeshi restaurants of Brick Lane and the Chinese food restaurants of Chinatown. 

There is a variety of annual events, beginning with the relatively new New Year's Day Parade, fireworks display at the London Eye, the world's second largest street party, the Notting Hill Carnival is held during the late August Bank Holiday each year. Traditional parades include November's Lord Mayor's Show, a centuries-old event celebrating the annual appointment of a new Lord Mayor of the City of London with a procession along the streets of the City, and June's Trooping the Colour, a formal military pageant performed by regiments of the Commonwealth and British armies to celebrate the Queen's Official Birthday. 

=== Literature, film and television ===

Keats House, where Keats wrote his Ode to a Nightingale. The village of Hampstead has historically been a literary centre in London.
London has been the setting for many works of literature. The literary centres of London have traditionally been hilly Hampstead and (since the early 20th century) Bloomsbury. Writers closely associated with the city are the diarist Samuel Pepys, noted for his eyewitness account of the Great Fire, Charles Dickens, whose representation of a foggy, snowy, grimy London of street sweepers and pickpockets has been a major influence on people's vision of early Victorian London, and Virginia Woolf, regarded as one of the foremost modernist literary figures of the 20th century. 
Sherlock Holmes Museum, Baker Street, London, bearing the number 221B
The pilgrims in Geoffrey Chaucer's late 14th-century Canterbury Tales set out for Canterbury from London  specifically, from the Tabard inn, Southwark. William Shakespeare spent a large part of his life living and working in London; his contemporary Ben Jonson was also based there, and some of his workmost notably his play The Alchemistwas set in the city. A Journal of the Plague Year (1722) by Daniel Defoe is a fictionalisation of the events of the 1665 Great Plague. Later important depictions of London from the 19th and early 20th centuries are Dickens' novels, and Arthur Conan Doyle's Sherlock Holmes stories. Modern writers pervasively influenced by the city include Peter Ackroyd, author of a "biography" of London, and Iain Sinclair, who writes in the genre of psychogeography.

London has played a significant role in the film industry, and has major studios at Ealing and a special effects and post-production community centred in Soho. Working Title Films has its headquarters in London. London has been the setting for films including Oliver Twist (1948), Peter Pan (1953), The Ladykillers (1955), The 101 Dalmatians (1961), Mary Poppins (1964), Blowup (1966), The Long Good Friday (1980), Secrets & Lies (1996), Notting Hill (1999), Match Point (2005), V For Vendetta (2005) and (2008). Notable actors and filmmakers from London include; Charlie Chaplin, Alfred Hitchcock, Michael Caine, Helen Mirren, Gary Oldman, Christopher Nolan, Jude Law, Tom Hardy, Keira Knightley and Daniel Day-Lewis. As of 2008, the British Academy Film Awards have taken place at the Royal Opera House. London is a major centre for television production, with studios including BBC Television Centre, The Fountain Studios and The London Studios. Many television programmes have been set in London, including the popular television soap opera EastEnders, broadcast by the BBC since 1985.

=== Museums and art galleries ===
The British Museum
London is home to many museums, galleries, and other institutions, many of which are free of admission charges and are major tourist attractions as well as playing a research role. The first of these to be established was the British Museum in Bloomsbury, in 1753. Originally containing antiquities, natural history specimens and the national library, the museum now has 7 million artefacts from around the globe. In 1824 the National Gallery was founded to house the British national collection of Western paintings; this now occupies a prominent position in Trafalgar Square. In the latter half of the 19th century the locale of South Kensington was developed as "Albertopolis", a cultural and scientific quarter. Three major national museums are there: the Victoria and Albert Museum (for the applied arts), the Natural History Museum and the Science Museum. The National Portrait Gallery was founded in 1856 to house depictions of figures from British history; its holdings now comprise the world's most extensive collection of portraits. The national gallery of British art is at Tate Britain, originally established as an annexe of the National Gallery in 1897. The Tate Gallery, as it was formerly known, also became a major centre for modern art; in 2000 this collection moved to Tate Modern, a new gallery housed in the former Bankside Power Station.

=== Music ===
The Royal Albert Hall hosts concerts and musical events
London is one of the major classical and popular music capitals of the world and is home to major music corporations, such as EMI and Warner Music Group as well as countless bands, musicians and industry professionals. The city is also home to many orchestras and concert halls, such as the Barbican Arts Centre (principal base of the London Symphony Orchestra and the London Symphony Chorus), Cadogan Hall (Royal Philharmonic Orchestra) and the Royal Albert Hall (The Proms). London's two main opera houses are the Royal Opera House and the Coliseum Theatre. The UK's largest pipe organ is at the Royal Albert Hall. Other significant instruments are at the cathedrals and major churches. Several conservatoires are within the city: Royal Academy of Music, Royal College of Music, Guildhall School of Music and Drama and Trinity College of Music.
Abbey Road Studios, 3 Abbey Road, St John's Wood, City of Westminster, London
London has numerous venues for rock and pop concerts, including large arenas such as Earls Court, Wembley Arena and the O2 Arena, as well as many mid-sized venues, such as Brixton Academy, the Hammersmith Apollo and the Shepherd's Bush Empire. Several music festivals, including the Wireless Festival, are held in London. The city is home to the first and original Hard Rock Cafe and the Abbey Road Studios where The Beatles recorded many of their hits. In the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s, musicians and groups like Elton John, Pink Floyd, David Bowie, Queen, Elvis Costello, Cat Stevens, Ian Dury and the Blockheads, The Kinks, The Rolling Stones, The Who, Electric Light Orchestra, Madness, The Jam, The Small Faces, Led Zeppelin, Iron Maiden, Fleetwood Mac, The Police, The Cure, Cream, Dusty Springfield, Phil Collins and Sade, took the world by storm, deriving their sound from the streets and rhythms vibrating through London. 

London was instrumental in the development of punk music, with figures such as the Sex Pistols, The Clash, and Vivienne Westwood all based in the city. More recent artists to emerge from the London music scene include George Michael, Bananarama, Bush, Seal, Siouxsie and the Banshees, the Spice Girls, Jamiroquai, Blur, The Prodigy, Gorillaz, Mumford & Sons, Coldplay, Amy Winehouse and Adele. Walker, Tim (28 July 2008). "Mumford & Sons, The Luminaire, London". The Independent (London). Retrieved 13 October 2012. London is also a centre for urban music. In particular the genres UK garage, drum and bass, dubstep and grime evolved in the city from the foreign genres of hip hop and reggae, alongside local drum and bass. Black music station BBC Radio 1Xtra was set up to support the rise of home-grown urban music both in London and in the rest of the UK.

== Sports ==

Wembley Stadium, home of the England football team, has a 90,000 capacity. It is the biggest stadium in the UK

London has hosted the Summer Olympics three times: in 1908, 1948, and 2012. London was chosen in July 2005 to host the 2012 Olympics and Paralympics, making it the first city to host the modern Games three times. London was also the host of the British Empire Games in 1934. London will host the 2017 World Championships in Athletics. 

London's most popular sport is football and it has fourteen League football clubs, including six in the Premier League: Arsenal, Chelsea, Fulham, Crystal Palace, Tottenham Hotspur, and West Ham United. In May 2012, Chelsea became the first London club to win the UEFA Champions League.

From 1924, the original Wembley Stadium was the home of the English national football team, and served as the venue for the FA Cup final as well as rugby league's Challenge Cup final. The new Wembley Stadium serves exactly the same purposes and has a capacity of 90,000. 
Twickenham Stadium, home of the England national rugby union team, has an 82,000 capacity, the largest stadium in the world devoted solely to rugby union

London has five rugby union teams in the Aviva Premiership (London Irish, Saracens, Wasps, London Welsh and Harlequins), although only Harlequins and Saracens play in London. London Scottish play in the RFU Championship club and other rugby union clubs in the city include Richmond F.C., Rosslyn Park F.C., Westcombe Park R.F.C. and Blackheath F.C.. Twickenham Stadium in south-west London is the national rugby union stadium, and has a capacity of 82,000 now that the new south stand has been completed. 

There are two professional rugby league clubs in London the Super League side London Broncos who play at The Hive in Edgware and the Championship One side London Skolars in Wood Green, Haringey; in addition, Hemel Stags from Hemel Hempstead north of London and Oxford Rugby League from Oxford also play in the Championship One.
1.jpg|thumb|right|Centre Court at Wimbledon. First played in 1877, the Wimbledon Championships is the oldest tennis tournament in the world. [http://edition.cnn.com/2011/SPORT/tennis/06/14/tennis.wimbledon.125th.anniversary.museum/index.html 125 years of Wimbledon: From birth of lawn tennis to modern marvels CNN. Retrieved 28 September 2011 ]]

Cricket in London is served by two Test cricket grounds Lord's (home of Middlesex C.C.C.) in St John's Wood and the Oval (home of Surrey C.C.C.) in Kennington. Lord's has hosted four finals of the Cricket World Cup. One of London's best-known annual sports competitions is the Wimbledon Tennis Championships, held at the All England Club in the south-western suburb of Wimbledon. Played in late June to early July, it is the oldest tennis tournament in the world, and widely considered the most prestigious. Other key events are the annual mass-participation London Marathon, in which some 35,000 runners attempt a 26.2 mi course around the city, and the Oxford and Cambridge Boat Race on the River Thames between Putney and Mortlake. 

== See also ==

* List of companies based in London
* List of twin towns in the United Kingdom#London
* Outline of England
*Walking in London
*Water supply and sanitation in London

== Notes ==

== References ==

=== Bibliography ===
*
*

== External links ==

* British Path Digitalised archive containing hundreds of films of 20th century London
* London in British History Online, with links to numerous authoritative online sources
* VisitLondon.com  Official London Tourism site
* Museum of London Group Portal  Home
* Transport for London (TfL)  city transport authority
* Map of Early Modern London Historical Map & Encyclopaedia of Shakespeare's London. Scholarly
* London.gov.uk  Official site for the government of London by the Greater London Authority covering the Office of Mayor of London and the London Assembly
*

 



[[Lagri Hasan elebi]]

Lagri Hasan elebi was a legendary Ottoman aviator who, according to a sole account written by traveller Evliya elebi, made a successful manned rocket flight.

==Account==
Evliya elebi purported that in 1633, Lagari Hasan elebi launched in a 7-winged rocket using 50 okka (140 lbs) of gunpowder from Sarayburnu, the point below Topkap Palace in Istanbul. The flight was said to be undertaken at the time of the birth of sultan Murad IV's daughter. As Evliya Celebi wrote, Lagari proclaimed before launch "O my sultan! Be blessed, I am going to talk to Jesus!"; after ascending in the rocket, he landed in the sea, swimming ashore and reporting "O my sultan! Jesus sends his regards to you!"; he was rewarded by the Sultan with silver and the rank of sipahi in the Ottoman army. Winter, Frank H. (1992). "Who First Flew in a Rocket?", Journal of the British Interplanetary Society 45 (July 1992), p. 275-80 

Evliya elebi also wrote of Lagari's brother, Hezrfen Ahmed elebi, making a flight by glider a year earlier.

==Popular culture==
Istanbul Beneath My Wings is a 1996 film about the lives of Lagari Hasan elebi, his brother and fellow aviator Hezrfen Ahmed elebi, and Ottoman society in the early 17th century as witnessed and narrated by Evliya elebi.

The legend was addressed in an experiment by the television show MythBusters, on November 11, 2009, in the episode "Crash and Burn"; however, the rocket constructed for the TV show did not adhere closely to Evliya elebi's descriptions and the final design did not attempt to utilize materials of the period; the team noted that Evliya elebi had not sufficiently specified the alleged design used by Lagri Hasan and said that it would have been "extremely difficult" for a 17th-century figure, unequipped with modern steel alloys and welding, to land safely or even achieve thrust at all. Although the re-imagined rocket rose, it exploded midflight. 

==See also==
* Evliya elebi
* Hezrfen Ahmed elebi

==References==



[[Letterboxing (filming)]]

A 2.35:1 widescreen image letterboxed in a 1.33:1 screen

Letterboxing is the practice of transferring film shot in a widescreen aspect ratio to standard-width video formats while preserving the film's original aspect ratio. The resulting videographic image has mattes (black bars) above and below it; these mattes are part of the image (i.e., of each frame of the video signal). LTBX is the identifying abbreviation for films and images so formatted. The term refers to the shape of a letter box, a slot in a wall or door through which mail is delivered, being rectangular and wider than it is high.

==Description==
Letterboxing is used as an alternative to a full-screen, pan-and-scan transfer of a widescreen film image to videotape or videodisc. In pan-and-scan transfers, the original image is cropped to the narrower aspect ratio of the destination format, usually the 1.33:1 (4:3) ratio of the standard television screen, whereas letterboxing preserves the film's original image composition as seen in the cinema. Letterboxing was developed for use in 4:3 television displays before widescreen television screens were available, but it is also necessary to represent on a 16:9 widescreen display the unaltered original composition of a film with a wider aspect ratio, such as Panavision's 2.35:1 ratio.

Letterbox mattes are usually symmetrical (both the top and bottom mattes are roughly similar in size), but in some instances the picture can be elevated so the bottom matte is much larger, usually for the purpose of placing "hard" subtitles within the matte to avoid overlapping of the image. This was often done for letterbox widescreen anime on VHS, though the practice of "hiding" subtitles within the lower matte also is done with symmetrical mattes, albeit with less space available. The placing of "soft" subtitles within the picture or matte varies according to the DVD player being used, Subtitles in Letterbox though it appears to be dependent on the movie for Blu-ray disc. Cih subtitle master thread 

==Early use of the letterbox format==
The first use of letterbox appeared with the RCA videodisc (CED) format. Initially, letterboxing was limited to several key sequences of a film (e.g., opening and closing credits), but later it was used for the entire film. The first full letterboxed CED release was Amarcord in 1984, and several others followed. Each disc contained a label noting the use of "RCA's innovative wide-screen mastering technique." Amarcord CED Web Page 

==In the cinema and home video==
In some countries such as North America, almost all VHS titles were only released in pan-and-scan versions. However, most later Laserdiscs (from 1987 on) and some VHS releases were released in their original widescreen versions. A good amount of North American NSTC DVD releases, mainly early DVDs, family films, and more popular titles, tend to offer both "Widescreen" and "Fullscreen" versions on the same disc or on a "flipper" format DVD, while most are available in separate versions. Some DVD releases of films are in full screen only, due to whatever existing master is available or basing on what format demographics prefer to see on a certain title (examples being family films such as Matilda and The Thief and the Cobbler). In other territories, such as Europe and Asia, widescreen versions of films on VHS and Laserdisc were much more common in those territories, and is almost ubiquitous on region 2 DVDs.

Movies such as The Graduate and Woodstock that made use of the full width of the movie screen often have the sides cut off and look completely different in non-letterboxed copies from the original theatrical release. This is more apparent in pan-and-scanned movies that remain entirely on the center area of the film image.

The term "SmileBox" is a registered trademark used to describe a type of letterboxing for Cinerama films, such as on the Blu-ray release of How the West Was Won. The image is produced with 3D mapping technology to approximate a curved screen.

Currently, with the advent of widescreen HDTV units in almost every household, very few films are being offered in 4:3 and pan-and-scan releases today, except for older material shot in 4:3 only such as TV shows, made for TV productions, and pre-1953 films. Some titles that were previously released in full screen only on VHS and DVD are now being issued in their original widescreen ratio on recent DVDs and Blu-rays.

==On television==
Digital broadcasting allows 1.78:1 (16:9) widescreen format transmissions without losing resolution, and thus widescreen is becoming the television norm. Most television programming in the United States, Britain and France is in standard-definition 16:9 and is transmitted in anamorphic format on digital platforms. When using a 4:3 television, it is possible to display such programming in either a letterbox format or in a 4:3 centre-cut format (where the edges of the picture are lost).

A letterboxed compromise ratio was often broadcast in analogue transmissions in European countries making the transition from 4:3 to 16:9. In addition, recent years have seen an increase of "fake" letterbox mattes on television to give the impression of a cinema film, often seen in adverts, trailers or television programmes such as Top Gear. "Televisual letterboxes", Image Dissectors.com, URL accessed October 4, 2009 

Current high-definition television (HDTV) systems use video displays with a wider aspect ratio than older television sets, making it easier to accurately display widescreen films. In addition to films produced for the cinema, some television programming is produced in high definition and therefore widescreen.

On a widescreen television set, a 1.78:1 image fills the screen, however, 2.39:1 aspect ratio films are letterboxed with narrow mattes. Because the 1.85:1 aspect ratio does not match the 1.78:1 (16:9) aspect ratio of widescreen DVDs and high-definition video, slight letterboxing occurs. Usually, such matting of 1.85:1 film is eliminated to match the 1.78:1 aspect ratio in the DVD and HD image transference.

Letterbox mattes are not necessarily black. IBM has used blue mattes for many of their TV ads, yellow mattes in their "I am Superman" Lotus ads, and green mattes in ads about efficiency & environmental sustainability. Others uses of colored mattes appear in ads from Allstate, Aleve, and Kodak among others, and in music videos such as Zebrahead's Playmate of the Year. In other instances mattes are animated, such as in the music video for Never Gonna Stop (The Red Red Kroovy), and even parodied such as the final scene of the Crazy Frog Axel F music video in which Crazy Frog peeks over the matte on the lower edge of the screen with part of his hands overlapping the matte. Similar to breaking the border of a comic's panel, it is a form of breaking the fourth wall.

The table below shows which TV lines will contain picture information when letterbox pictures are displayed on either 4:3 or 16:9 screens.

 Aspect Ratio on 4:3 screen 525 Line System 625 Line System Aspect Ratio on 16:9 screen 525 Line System 625 Line System 1080 HD Line System 
 Full Screen (1.33:1) 21-263 284-525 23-310 336-623 - - - - - - - 
 14:9 (1.56:1) 40-245 302-508 44-289 357-602 - - - - - - - 
 16:9 (1.78:1) 52-232 315-495 59-282 372-587 Full Screen (1.78:1) 21-263 284-525 23-310 336-623 21-560 584-1123 
 1.85:1 56-229 320-491 64-270 376-582 1.85:1 26-257 289-520 29-304 342-617 31-549 594-1112 
 2.35:1 73-209 336-472 85-248 398-561 2.35:1 50-231 313-495 58-275 371-588 86-494 649-1057 

==Pillarboxing and windowboxing==

A windowboxed image

Pillarboxing (reversed letterboxing) is the display of an image within a wider image frame by adding lateral mattes (vertical bars at the sides); for example, a 1.33:1 image has lateral mattes when displayed on a 16:9 aspect ratio television screen.

An alternative to pillarboxing is "tilt-and-scan" (reversed pan and scan), horizontally matting the original 1.33:1 television images to the 1.78:1 aspect ratio, which at any given moment crops part of the top and/or bottom of the frame, hence the need for the "tilt" component. A tilt is a camera move in which the camera tilts up or down.

Windowboxing occurs when an image appears centered in a television screen, with blank space on all four sides of the image, A visual reference to common Pixel Aspect formats Home Theater: Audio & Video Glossary - ACME HOW TO.com such as when a widescreen image that has been previously letterboxed to fit 1.33:1 is then pillarboxed to fit 16:9. It is also called "matchbox", "gutterbox", and "postage stamp" display. This occurs on the DVD editions of the Star Trek films on a 4:3 television when the included widescreen documentaries show footage from the original television series. It is also seen in , which displays widescreen pillarboxing with 1.85:1 scenes in a 2.40:1 frame that is subsequently letterboxed. It is common to see windowboxed commercials on HD television networks, because many commercials are shot in 16:9 but distributed to networks in SD, letterboxed to fit 1.33:1.

Many 1980s 8-bit home computers feature gutterboxing display mode, because the TV screens normally used as monitors at that time tended to distort the image near the border of the screen, to such an extent that text displayed in that area became illegible. Moreover, due to the overscanned nature of television video, the precise edges of the visible area of the screen varied from television set to television set, so characters near the expected border of the active screen area might be behind the bezel or off the edge of the screen. The Commodore 64, VIC-20, and Commodore 128 (in 40-column mode) featured coloured gutterboxing of the main text window, while the Atari 8-bit family featured a blue text window with a black border. The original IBM PC CGA display adapter was the same, and the monochrome MDA, the predecessor of the CGA, as well as the later EGA and VGA, also featured gutterboxing; this is also called underscanned video. The Fisher-Price PXL-2000 camcorder of the late 1980s recorded a windowboxed image to compensate partially for low resolution.

Occasionally, an image is deliberately windowboxed for stylistic effect; for example, the documentary-style sequence of the film Rent suggest an older-format camera representing the 4:3 aspect ratio, and the opening sequence of the Oliver Stone film JFK features pillar boxing to represent the 1960s era 4:3 television footage. The film Sneakers uses a windowboxing effect in a scene for dramatic effect.

==See also==
*Active Format Description
*List of film formats
*Motion picture terminology

==References==

==External links==
*The Widescreen and Letterbox Advocacy Page



[[Lincoln]]

Lincoln commonly refers to:
* Abraham Lincoln, 16th President of the United States
* Lincoln (surname)
* Lincoln, England, United Kingdom, county town of Lincolnshire
* Lincoln, Nebraska, United States, the state's capital
* Lincoln Motor Company

Lincoln may also refer to:

== Educational institutions ==
* The Academy at Lincoln, a middle school in Greensboro, North Carolina
* Lincoln Academy, a high school in Newcastle, Maine
* Lincoln College (disambiguation)
* Lincoln Elementary School (disambiguation)
* Lincoln High School (disambiguation)
* Lincoln School (disambiguation)
* Lincoln University (disambiguation)
* Old Lincoln High School (Tallahassee, Florida)
* University of Lincoln, a university in Lincoln, United Kingdom

== Media ==
* Lincoln (novel), a 1984 novel by Gore Vidal
* Lincoln (album), a 1988 album by They Might Be Giants
* Lincoln (band), an American nerd pop band of the late 1990s
* Lincoln Records, a United States record label in the 1920s
* Lincoln (variety show), a Japanese variety show
* Lincoln (1988 film), a telefilm starring Sam Waterston
* Lincoln (1992 film), a telefilm by Peter W. Kunhardt
* Lincoln (2012 film), a film by Steven Spielberg
* Carl Sandburg's Lincoln, a miniseries starring Hal Holbrook

== Places ==
=== Argentina ===
* Lincoln, Buenos Aires Province, Argentina
* Lincoln Partido, Buenos Aires Province, Argentina

=== Australia ===
* Port Lincoln, South Australia

=== Canada ===
* Lincoln, New Brunswick, Canada
* Lincoln, Ontario, Canada
* Lincoln (electoral district), a former federal electoral district in Ontario, Canada

=== French Polynesia ===
* Motu One (Marquesas Islands) or Lincoln, French Polynesia

=== New Zealand ===
* Lincoln, New Zealand

=== United Kingdom ===
* Lincoln, England, the City of Lincoln, Lincolnshire
* Lincoln Green, England
* Lincoln (UK Parliament constituency)
* County of Lincoln, archaic name for county of Lincolnshire, England

=== United States ===
* Lincoln, Alabama
* Lincoln, Arkansas
* Lincoln, California, in Placer County
* Lincoln, Madera County, California
* Lincoln, Delaware
* Lincoln, Illinois
* Lincoln, Indiana
* Lincoln, Iowa
* Lincoln, Kansas
* Lincoln Parish, Louisiana
* Lincoln, Maine
* Lincoln Plantation, Maine
* Lincoln, Massachusetts
* Lincoln, Michigan
* Lincoln, Missouri
* Lincoln, Montana
* Lincoln, Nebraska
* Lincoln, New Hampshire
* Lincoln, New Mexico
* Lincoln, New York
* Lincoln, North Dakota
* Lincoln, Pennsylvania
* Lincoln, Rhode Island
* Lincoln, Texas
* Lincoln, Vermont
* Lincoln, Virginia
* Lincoln, Washington
*Lincoln, West Virginia
* Lincoln, Adams County, Wisconsin, a town
* Lincoln, Bayfield County, Wisconsin, a town
* Lincoln, Buffalo County, Wisconsin, a town
* Lincoln, Burnett County, Wisconsin, a town
* Lincoln, Eau Claire County, Wisconsin, a town
* Lincoln, Forest County, Wisconsin, a town
* Lincoln, Kewaunee County, Wisconsin, a town
** Lincoln (community), Wisconsin, an unincorporated community in the Kewaunee County town
* Lincoln, Monroe County, Wisconsin, a town
* Lincoln, Polk County, Wisconsin, a town
* Lincoln, Trempealeau County, Wisconsin, a town
* Lincoln, Vilas County, Wisconsin, a town
* Lincoln, Wood County, Wisconsin, a town
* Clinton, California or Lincoln
* Lincoln, Utah, a ghost town in Utah

====Proposed states====
* Lincoln (proposed Northwestern state)
* Lincoln (proposed Southern state)

===Fictional places===
* Lincoln Island, a fictional island in Jules Verne's The Mysterious Island

== Transport ==
* Lincoln tunnel
* Lincoln Highway, the first road across America
* Lincoln Highway (Australia), in southern Australia
* HMS Lincoln, several Royal Navy warships
* Avro Lincoln, an RAF bomber that first flew in 1943
* Lincoln Motor Car Works, a company that produced cars sold exclusively by mail order by the Sears Roebuck Company from 1908 until 1912
* Lincoln Motor Company, a company founded in 1917 to build aero engines and now a luxury car brand of Ford Motor Company
* USS Lincoln, two actual US Navy vessels and several other fictitious vessels have been named USS Lincoln.

=== Rail stations ===
* Lincoln Central railway station, Lincoln, England
* Lincoln St. Marks railway station, Lincoln, England
* Lincoln, Illinois (Amtrak station)
* Lincoln, Nebraska (Amtrak station)
* Lincoln (MBTA station), Lincoln, Massachusetts
* Lincoln (RTD), a transit station in Lone Tree, Colorado

== Other uses ==
* Lincoln (footballer), Brazilian football player
* Lincoln (sheep)
* Lincoln (grape), another name for the Catawba grape
* Lincoln biscuit
* Lincoln cent, U.S. coinage
* Lincoln City F.C., an English football club
* Lincoln green, a dyed woollen cloth
* Lincoln International, an investment banking firm
* Lincoln Logs
* Lincoln Memorial
* Lincoln National Corporation, an insurance and asset management company
* LincolnLee Legion temperance organization
* Lincoln Snacks Company
* Lincoln Temple United Church of Christ, historic church located in Washington, D.C.

== See also ==
* Lincoln City (disambiguation)
* Lincoln County (disambiguation)
* Lincoln Township (disambiguation)
* Lincoln Village (disambiguation)
* Camp Lincoln (disambiguation)
* Lincoln Center (disambiguation)
* Lincoln Institute (disambiguation)
* Lincoln Heights (disambiguation)
* Lincoln Park (disambiguation)
* Lincoln Square (disambiguation)
* Mount Lincoln (disambiguation)



[[Ligament]]

In anatomy, a ligament is the fibrous tissue that connects bones to other bones and is also known as articular ligament, articular larua, fibrous ligament, or true ligament.

Ligament can also refer to:
* Peritoneal ligament: a fold of peritoneum or other membranes.
* Fetal remnant ligament: the remnants of a fetal tubular structure.
* Periodontal ligament: a group of fibers that attach the cementum of teeth to the surrounding alveolar bone.

The study of ligaments is known as desmology (from Greek , desmos, "bond"; and , -logia).

Ligaments are similar to tendons and fasciae as they are all made of connective tissue. The differences in them are in the connections that they make; ligaments connect one bone to another bone, tendons connect muscle to bone and fasciae connect muscles to other muscles. 
These are all found in the skeletal system of the human body.
Ligaments cannot usually be regenerated naturally, however there are periodontal ligament stem cells located near the periodontal ligament which are involved in the adult regeneration of periodontal ligament.

==Articular ligaments ==
"Ligament" most commonly refers to a band of tough, fibrous dense regular connective tissue bundles, made of attenuated collagenous fibers; with said bundles protected by dense irregular connective tissue sheaths. Ligaments connect bones to other bones to form a joint. They do not connect muscles to bones; that is the job of tendons. Some ligaments limit the mobility of articulations, or prevent certain movements altogether.

Capsular ligaments are part of the articular capsule that surrounds synovial joints. They act as mechanical reinforcements. Extra-capsular ligaments join together in harmony with the other ligaments and provide joint stability. Intra-capsular ligaments, which are much less common, also provide stability but permit a far larger range of motion. Cruciate ligaments occur in pairs of three.

Ligaments are viscoelastic. They gradually shrink when under tension, and return to their original shape when the tension is removed. However, they cannot retain their original shape when compressed past a certain point or for a prolonged period of time. This is one reason why dislocated joints must be set as quickly as possible: if the ligaments lengthen too much, then the joint will be weakened, becoming prone to future dislocations. Athletes, gymnasts, dancers, and martial artists perform stretching exercises to lengthen their ligaments, making their joints more supple.

The term hypermobility refers to people with more-elastic ligaments, allowing their joints to stretch and contort further; this is sometimes still called double-jointedness. 

The consequence of a broken ligament can be instability of the joint. Not all broken ligaments need surgery, but, if surgery is needed to stabilise the joint, the broken ligament can be repaired. Scar tissue may prevent this. If it is not possible to fix the broken ligament, other procedures such as the Brunelli procedure can correct the instability. Instability of a joint can over time lead to wear of the cartilage and eventually to osteoarthritis.

== Artificial Ligaments ==
One of the most often torn ligaments in the body is the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL). The ACL is one of the ligaments crucial to knee stability and is therefore necessary for human mobility. Because of its importance in mobility, it is necessary for the ACL to be repaired promptly with good quality substitutes. This re-constructive surgery has been performed countless times, now new techniques are being used. One of these techniques is the replacement of the ligament with an artificial material. An artificial ligament is a reinforcing material that is used to replace a torn ligament, such as the ACL. Artificial ligaments are a synthetic material composed of a polymer, such as polyacrylonitrile fiber, polypropylene, PET (polyethylene terephthalate), or more commonly used today, polyNaSS poly(sodium styrene sulfonate). Lessim, Soucounda, et al. "PolyNaSS bioactivation of LARS artificial ligament promotes human ligament fibroblast colonisation in vitro." Bio-Medical Materials& Engineering 23, no. 4 (June 2013): 289-297. Academic Search Complete, EBSCOhost (accessed April 17, 2014). Scientists at the Ligament Augmentation & Reconstruction System (LARS) in France have come up with a workable solution to artificial ligaments.

The ACL reconstructive surgery uses a technique called grafting to attach the polymer to the bone. By grafting a bioactive polymer polyNaSS on a polyethylene terephalate device, commonly used in ACL reconstruction, it optimizes the adhesion and distribution of human fibroblasts. In other words the strength and organization of the fibers is increased and the production of fibroblast collagen is increased when the ligament has been bio-integrated with polyNaSS. This new technique is being used on animals and in in-vitro studies today but, the first official medical surgery has yet to occur. 

The difficulty behind artificial ligaments is making the polymers biocompatible. Designing the polymers properties to be able to withstand all the different types of fatigue is an obstacle that researchers are facing. Hukins, D. W., Leahy, J. C., & Mathias, K. J. Biomaterials: defining the mechanical properties of natural tissues and selection of replacement materials, 629-636. Retrieved December 22, 1998, from http://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlepdf/1999/JM/A807411I The polyethylene (PET) and poly (sodium styrene sulfonate) polymers are categorized as Viscoelastic, meaning after the material experiences large amounts of stress it will retain its original properties. Another large issue with biocompatibility and artificial ligaments, is creating a polymer that is non-reactive with inside bodily fluids. 

Creating a polymer and coating it with specific substances can make the polymer biocompatible, as well as speed the recovery process. Bio glass 58s, hyaluronic acid, and cationized gelatin are a few coatings that aid the reconstructive process. Acta Biomaterialia (2012), 8, (11), 4007-4019. Publisher: (Elsevier Ltd., ) CODEN:ABCICB ISSN:1742-7061. Bio glass for example is used for strengthening the connection between the polymer and the bone. Applied Surface Science (2011), 257, (22), 9371-9376. Publisher: (Elsevier B.V., ) CODEN:ASUSEE ISSN:0169-4332. 

=== Examples ===

;Head and neck
* Cricothyroid ligament
* Periodontal ligament
* Suspensory ligament of the lens

;Thorax
* Suspensory ligament of the breast

;Pelvis
* Anterior sacroiliac ligament
* Posterior sacroiliac ligament
* Sacrotuberous ligament
* Sacrospinous ligament
* Inferior pubic ligament
* Superior pubic ligament
* Suspensory ligament of the penis

;Wrist
* Palmar radiocarpal ligament
* Dorsal radiocarpal ligament
* Ulnar collateral ligament
* Radial collateral ligament

;Knee
* Anterior cruciate ligament 
* Lateral collateral ligament 
* Posterior cruciate ligament 
* Medial collateral ligament 
* Cranial cruciate ligament - quadruped equivalent of anterior cruciate ligament
* Caudal cruciate ligament - quadruped equivalent of posterior cruciate ligament 
* Patellar ligament

==Peritoneal ligaments==
Certain folds of peritoneum are referred to as ligaments. Examples include:
* The hepatoduodenal ligament, that surrounds the hepatic portal vein and other vessels as they travel from the duodenum to the liver.
* The broad ligament of the uterus, also a fold of peritoneum.

==Fetal remnant ligaments==
Certain tubular structures from the fetal period are referred to as ligaments after they close up and turn into cord-like structures:

 Fetal Adult 
 ductus arteriosus ligamentum arteriosum 
 extra-hepatic portion of the fetal left umbilical vein ligamentum teres hepatis (the \"round ligament of the liver\"). 
 intra-hepatic portion of the fetal left umbilical vein (the ductus venosus) ligamentum venosum 
 distal portions of the fetal left and right umbilical arteries medial umbilical ligaments 

== See also ==
* Brostrm procedure

==References==

 

 

[[Loch Ness Monster]]

The Loch Ness Monster is a cryptid, a creature whose existence has been suggested but has not been discovered or documented by the scientific community. It is reputedly a large unknown animal that inhabits Loch Ness in the Scottish Highlands. It is similar to other supposed lake monsters in Scotland and elsewhere, though its description varies from one account to the next. Popular interest and belief in the animal's existence has varied since it was first brought to the world's attention in 1933. Evidence of its existence is anecdotal, with minimal and much-disputed photographic material and sonar readings.

The most common speculation among believers is that the creature represents a line of long-surviving plesiosaurs. The scientific community regards the Loch Ness Monster as a modern-day myth, and explains sightings as including misidentifications of more mundane objects, outright hoaxes, and wishful thinking. Robert Todd Carroll, The Skeptic's Dictionary: A Collection of Strange Beliefs, Amusing Deceptions, and Dangerous Delusions pages 200201 (John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2003). ISBN 0-471-27242-6 Despite this, it remains one of the most famous examples of cryptozoology. The legendary monster has been affectionately referred to by the nickname Nessie () Campbell, Elizabeth Montgomery & David Solomon, The Search for Morag (Tom Stacey 1972) ISBN 0-85468-093-4, page 28 gives an-t-Seileag, an-Niseag, a-Mhorag for the monsters of Lochs Shiel, Ness and Morag, adding that they are feminine diminutives since the 1940s. 

==Origins==
Loch Ness
The term "monster" was reportedly applied for the first time to the creature on 2 May 1933 by Alex Campbell, the water bailiff for Loch Ness and a part-time journalist, in a report in The Inverness Courier. The Sun 27 November 1975: I'm the man who first coined the word "monster" for the creature. R. Binns The Loch Ness Mystery Solved pp 1112 Inverness Courier 2 May 1933 "Loch Ness has for generations been credited with being the home of a fearsome-looking monster" On 4 August 1933, the Courier published as a full news item the assertion of a London man, George Spicer, that a few weeks earlier while motoring around the Loch, he and his wife had seen "the nearest approach to a dragon or pre-historic animal that I have ever seen in my life", trundling across the road toward the Loch carrying "an animal" in its mouth. Other letters began appearing in the Courier, often anonymously, with claims of land or water sightings, either on the writer's part or on the parts of family, acquaintances or stories they remembered being told. R. Binns The Loch Ness Mystery Solved pp 1927 These stories soon reached the national (and later the international) press, which described a "monster fish", "sea serpent", or "dragon", Daily Mirror, 11 August 1933 "Loch Ness, which is becoming famous as the supposed abode of a dragon..." eventually settling on "Loch Ness Monster". The Oxford English Dictionary gives 9 June 1933 as the first usage of the exact phrase Loch Ness monster On 6 December 1933 the first purported photograph of the monster, taken by Hugh Gray, was published in the Daily Express, R. P. Mackal (1983) "The Monsters of Loch Ness" p.94 and shortly after the creature received official notice when the Secretary of State for Scotland ordered the police to prevent any attacks on it. Daily Mirror 8 December 1933 "The Monster of Loch Ness  Official! Orders That Nobody is to Attack it" ... A Huge Eel?" In 1934, interest was further sparked by what is known as The Surgeon's Photograph. In the same year R. T. Gould published a book, the first of many that describe the author's personal investigation and collected record of additional reports pre-dating 1933. Other authors have claimed that sightings of the monster go as far back as the 6th century (see below).

==History==

===Saint Columba (6th century)===
The earliest report of a monster associated with the vicinity of Loch Ness appears in the Life of St. Columba by Adomnn, written in the 7th century. J. A Carruth Loch Ness and its Monster, (1950) Abbey Press, Fort Augustus, cited by Tim Dinsdale (1961) Loch Ness Monster ppp 3335 According to Adomnn, writing about a century after the events he described, the Irish monk Saint Columba was staying in the land of the Picts with his companions when he came across the locals burying a man by the River Ness. They explained that the man had been swimming the river when he was attacked by a "water beast" that had mauled him and dragged him under. They tried to rescue him in a boat, but were able only to drag up his corpse. Hearing this, Columba stunned the Picts by sending his follower Luigne moccu Min to swim across the river. The beast came after him, but Columba made the sign of the Cross and commanded: "Go no further. Do not touch the man. Go back at once." Adomnn, p. 176 (II:27). The beast immediately halted as if it had been "pulled back with ropes" and fled in terror, and both Columba's men and the pagan Picts praised God for the miracle. 

The oldest manuscript relating to this story was put online in 2012. Believers in the Loch Ness Monster often point to this story, which takes place on the River Ness rather than the loch itself, as evidence for the creature's existence as early as the 6th century. Adomnn p. 330. However, sceptics question the narrative's reliability, noting that water-beast stories were extremely common in medieval saints' Lives; as such, Adomnn's tale is likely to be a recycling of a common motif attached to a local landmark. R. Binns The Loch Ness Mystery Solved, pp. 5257 According to the sceptics, Adomnn's story may be independent of the modern Loch Ness Monster legend entirely, only becoming attached to it in retrospect by believers seeking to bolster their claims. In an article for Cryptozoology, A. C. Thomas notes that even if there were some truth to the story, it could be explained rationally as an encounter with a walrus or similar creature that had swum up the river. R. Binns acknowledges that this account is the most serious of various alleged early sightings of the monster, but argues that all other claims of monster sightings prior to 1933 are highly dubious and do not prove that there was a tradition of the monster before this date. 

===Spicers (1933)===
Modern interest in the monster was sparked by a sighting on 22 July 1933, when George Spicer and his wife saw 'a most extraordinary form of animal' cross the road in front of their car. They described the creature as having a large body (about 1.2 m high and 7.6 m long), and long, narrow neck, slightly thicker than an elephant's trunk and as long as the 10 - width of the road; the neck had undulations in it. They saw no limbs, possibly because of a dip in the road obscuring the animal's lower portion. T. Dinsdale (1961) Loch Ness Monster page 42. It lurched across the road towards the loch 20 yd away, leaving only a trail of broken undergrowth in its wake. 

In August 1933 a motorcyclist named Arthur Grant claimed to have nearly hit the creature while approaching Abriachan on the north-eastern shore, at about 1 a.m. on a moonlit night. Grant claimed that he saw a small head attached to a long neck, and that the creature saw him and crossed the road back into the loch. A veterinary student, he described it as a hybrid between a seal and a plesiosaur. Grant said he dismounted and followed it to the loch, but only saw ripples. Tim Dinsdale Loch Ness Monster pp 445 Some believe this story was intended as a humorous explanation of a motorcycle accident. "He had apparently fallen off his motor bike and told his mother that the damage to the bike was caused by the monster making him crash! Will all authors please stop treating this sighting as if it were genuine." 

Sightings of the monster increased following the building of a road along the loch in early 1933, bringing both workmen and tourists to the formerly isolated area. R. Mackal (1976) "The Monsters of Loch Ness" page 85. Sporadic land sightings continued until 1963, when film of the creature was shot in the loch from a distance of 4 kilometres. Because of the distance at which it was shot, it has been described as poor quality. 

===Chief Constable William Fraser (1938)===
In 1938, Inverness-shire Chief Constable William Fraser wrote a letter stating that it was beyond doubt the monster existed. His letter expressed concern regarding a hunting party that had arrived armed with a specially-made harpoon gun and were determined to catch the monster "dead or alive". He believed his power to protect the monster from the hunters was "very doubtful". The letter was released by the National Archives of Scotland on 27 April 2010. 

===C. B. Farrel (1943)===
In May 1943, C. B. Farrel of the Royal Observer Corps was supposedly distracted from his duties by a Nessie sighting. He claimed to have been about 230 m away from a large-eyed, 'finned' creature, which had a 6 to long body, and a neck that protruded about 1.2 - out of the water. 

===Sonar contact (1954)===
In December 1954 a strange sonar contact was made by the fishing boat Rival III. The vessel's crew observed sonar readings of a large object keeping pace with the boat at a depth of 146 m. It was detected travelling for 800 m in this manner, before contact was lost, but then found again later. Many sonar attempts had been made previously, but most were either inconclusive or negative.

==Photographs and films==

===Hugh Gray's Photograph (1933)===
On 12 November 1933, Hugh Gray was walking along the loch after church when he spotted a substantial commotion in the water. A large creature rose up from the lake. Gray took several pictures of it, but only one of them showed up after they were developed. This image appeared to show a creature with a long tail and thick body at the surface of the loch. The image is blurred suggesting the animal was splashing. Four stumpy-looking objects on the bottom of the creature's body might possibly be a pair of appendages, such as flippers. Mackal, Roy P. (1976). The Monsters of Loch Ness Although critics have claimed that the photograph is of a dog swimming towards the camera (possibly carrying a stick), researcher Roland Watson rejects this interpretation and suggests there is an eel-like head on the right side of the image. 

This picture is the first known image allegedly taken of the Loch Ness Monster.

==="Surgeon's Photograph" (1934)===
Surgeon's Photograph
The "Surgeon's Photograph" purported to be the first photo of a "head and neck". R. P. Mackal (1976) The Monsters of Loch Ness page 208 Dr. Wilson claimed he was looking at the loch when he saw the monster, so grabbed his camera and snapped five photos. After the film was developed, only two exposures were clear. The first photo (the more publicised one) shows what was claimed to be a small head and back. The second one, a blurry image, attracted little publicity because it was difficult to interpret what was depicted. The image was revealed as a fake in The Sunday Telegraph dated 7 December 1975. Book review of Nessie  The Surgeon's Photograph  Exposed Douglas Chapman. Supposedly taken by Robert Kenneth Wilson, a London gynaecologist, it was published in the Daily Mail on 21 April 1934. Daily Mail 21 April 1934 Wilson's refusal to have his name associated with the photograph led to it being called "Surgeon's Photograph". The strangely small ripples on the photo fit the size and circular pattern of small ripples as opposed to large waves when photographed up close. Analysis of the original uncropped image fostered further doubt. In 1993, the makers of Discovery Communications's documentary Loch Ness Discovered analysed the uncropped image and found a white object was visible in every version of the photo, implying it was on the negative. It was believed to be the cause of the ripples, as if the object was being towed, though it could not be ruled out as a blemish in the negative. Additionally, one analysis of the full photograph revealed the object was quite small, only about 60 to long. However, analyses of the size of the photograph have been inconsistent.

In 1979 it was claimed to be a picture of an elephant (see below). Other sceptics in the 1980s argued the photo was that of an otter or a diving bird, but after Christian Spurling's confession most agree it was what Spurling claimed  a toy submarine with a sculpted head attached. Details of how the photo was accomplished were published in the 1999 book, Nessie  the Surgeon's Photograph Exposed, that contains a facsimile of the 1975 article in The Sunday Telegraph. David S. Martin & Alastair Boyd (1999) Nessie  the Surgeon's Photograph Exposed (East Barnet: Martin and Boyd). ISBN 0-9535708-0-0 Essentially, it was a toy submarine bought from F.W. Woolworths with a head and neck made of plastic wood, built by Christian Spurling, the son-in-law of Marmaduke Wetherell, a big game hunter who had been publicly ridiculed in the Daily Mail, the newspaper that employed him. Spurling claimed that to get revenge, Marmaduke Wetherell committed the hoax, with the help of Chris Spurling (a sculpture specialist), his son Ian Marmaduke, who bought the material for the fake, and Maurice Chambers (an insurance agent), who asked surgeon Robert Kenneth Wilson to offer the pictures to the Daily Mail. The hoax story is disputed by Henry Bauer, who claims this debunking is evidence of bias, and asks why the perpetrators did not reveal their plot earlier to embarrass the newspaper. H. H. Bauer (2001) Fatal Attractions: The Troubles with Science ISBN 1-931044-28-7 

Tim Dinsdale also disputes the claim of this photograph as a hoax in his book Loch Ness Monster. He claims that he studied the photograph so often and from many different angles that he was able to discern objects that prove the photograph is not a hoax. He states "upon really close examination, there are certain rather obscure features in the picture which have a profound significance." Two of the obscure features are: a solid object breaking the surface to the right of the neck, and to the left and behind the neck there is another mark of some sort, Dinsdale states. After making this claim Dinsdale discusses that these objects are too hard to identify, but that just proves that they could be part of the monster. According to Dinsdale either the objects are part of a very subtle fake or genuinely part of the monster. Another object that he points out to prove the photograph is not a fake is the vague smaller ripples that are behind the neck, which seem to have been caused after the neck broke the surface. Dinsdale emphatically states that this is a part of the animal that is underwater behind the neck.

Alastair Boyd, one of the researchers who uncovered the hoax, argues that the Loch Ness Monster is real, and that although the famous photo was hoaxed, that does not mean that all the photos, eyewitness reports, and footage of the monster were as well. He asserts that he too had a sighting and also argues that the hoaxed photo is not a good reason to dismiss eyewitness reports and other evidence. 

===Taylor film (1938)===
In 1938, G. E. Taylor, a South African tourist, filmed something in the loch for three minutes on 16 mm colour film, which was in the possession of Maurice Burton. Burton refused to show the film to Loch Ness investigators (such as Peter Costello or the Loch Ness Investigation Bureau). A single frame was published in his book The Elusive Monster; before he retired. Roy P. Mackal, a biologist and cryptozoologist, declared the frame was "positive evidence". Janet and Colin Bord, 'Alien Animals' (Granada 1986) p18 Later, it was shown also to the National Institute of Oceanography, now known as the National Oceanography Centre, Southampton.

===Dinsdale film (1960)===
In 1960, aeronautical engineer Tim Dinsdale filmed a hump crossing the water leaving a powerful wake. Dinsdale allegedly spotted the animal on his last day hunting for it, and described the object as reddish with a blotch on its side. When he mounted his camera the object started to move and said that he shot 40 feet of film. JARIC declared that the object was "probably animate". Others were sceptical, saying that the "hump" cannot be ruled out as being a boat, and claimed that when the contrast is increased a man can be seen in a boat. 

In 1993 Discovery Communications made a documentary called Loch Ness Discovered that featured a digital enhancement of the Dinsdale film. A computer expert who enhanced the film noticed a shadow in the negative that was not very obvious in the positive. By enhancing and overlaying frames, he found what appeared to be the rear body of a creature underwater. He commented that "Before I saw the film, I thought the Loch Ness Monster was a load of rubbish. Having done the enhancement, I'm not so sure". Some have countered this finding by saying that the angle of the film from the horizontal along with sun's angle on that day made shadows underwater unlikely. Others pointed out that the darker water is undisturbed water that was only coincidentally shaped like a body. The same source also says that there might be a smaller object (hump or head) in front of the hump causing this. 

===Holmes video (2007)===
On 26 May 2007, Gordon Holmes, a 55-year-old lab technician, captured video of what he said was "this jet black thing, about 14 m long, moving fairly fast in the water." Adrian Shine, a marine biologist at the Loch Ness 2000 centre in Drumnadrochit, described the footage as among "the best footage has ever seen." BBC Scotland broadcast the video on 29 May 2007. STV News' North Tonight aired the footage on 28 May 2007 and interviewed Holmes. In this feature, Adrian Shine of the Loch Ness Centre was also interviewed and suggested that the footage showed an otter, seal or water bird. 

Holmes's credibility has been doubted by an article on the Cryptomundo website, which states that he has a history of reporting sightings of cryptozoological creatures, and sells a self-published book and DVD claiming evidence for fairies. His video also has no other objects for size comparison. The MonsterQuest team investigated this video as well in their TV episode "Death of Loch Ness", where they examine evidence that Nessie has died, as well as other photos. In this documentary, Holmes asserts he spotted two creatures. A CNN news report showed the footage and an interview with Gordon Holmes.

Joe Nickell has suggested that this footage shows a beaver or an otter, swimming in the loch. 

===Sonar image (2011)===
On 24 August 2011, Marcus Atkinson, a local Loch Ness boat skipper, photographed a sonar image of a long 1.5 m wide unidentified object which was apparently following his boat for two minutes at a depth of 23 m. Atkinson ruled out the possibility of any small fish or seal being what he believed to be the Loch Ness Monster. In April 2012, a scientist from the National Oceanography Centre said that this image is a bloom of algae and zooplankton. However, Roland Watson, a cryptozoologist and Loch Ness Monster researcher, has criticised this analysis, stating that the object in the image is very unlikely to be a bloom of algae and zooplankton, since algae needs sunlight to grow, and the waters of Loch Ness are very dark, and nearly devoid of sunlight, 23 m down.
 

===George Edwards' photograph (2011)===
On 3 August 2012, skipper George Edwards published a photograph he claims to be "The most convincing Nessie photograph ever", which he claimed to have taken on 2 November 2011. Edwards' photograph consists in a hump out of the water which, according to him, remained so for five to ten minutes. The Daily Mail reports that Edward had the photograph independently verified by specialists such as a Loch Ness Monster sighting devotee and a group of US military monster experts. Edwards spends 60 hours per week on the loch aboard his boat, Nessie Hunter IV, in which he takes tourists for a ride on the lake, and claims to have searched for the Loch Ness monster for 26 years. Said Edwards, "In my opinion, it probably looks kind of like a manatee, but not a mammal. When people see three humps, they're probably just seeing three separate monsters." McLaughlin, Erin, "Scottish Sailor Claims To Have Best Picture Yet Of Loch Ness Monster", ABC News/Yahoo! News, 16 August 2012 

However, other researchers of the Loch Ness phenomena have questioned the authenticity of the photograph. A subsequent investigation by Loch Ness researcher, Steve Feltham, suggests that the object in the water is in fact a fibreglass hump used previously in a National Geographic documentary which Edwards had participated in. Researcher Dick Raynor has also questioned Edward's claims about finding a deeper bottom to Loch Ness, which he refers to as "Edwards Deep". He also found inconsistencies between Edwards' claims of the location and conditions of the photograph and the actual location and weather conditions of that day. Additionally, Raynor also stated that Edwards had previously told him he had faked a photograph in 1986, which he had promoted as genuine in the National Geographic documentary. 

===David Elder's video (2013)===
On 27 August 2013, tourist David Elder presented a five-minute video of a "mysterious wave" in the loch. He believed that the wave was being produced by a 4.5 m "solid black object" just under the surface of the water. Elder, aged 50, of East Kilbride, South Lanarkshire, was taking a picture of a swan at the pierhead of Fort Augustus, at the south-west end of the loch, when he captured the movement. He added that "The water was very still at the time and there were no ripples coming off the wave and no other activity on the water." Sceptics suggested that the wave may have been the result of a gust of wind. 
===Apple Maps photograph (2014)===
On 19 April 2014 it was reported that Apple Maps was showing what appeared to be the monster close to the surface of the loch. It was spotted by Andrew Dixon who was browsing a map of his home town at the time and took a moment to take a look at the loch. Possible explanations for the image are that it could be the wake of a boat, a seal causing ripples or a floating log.

==Searches for the monster==

===Sir Edward Mountain Expedition (1934)===
Having read the book by Gould, Edward Mountain decided to finance a proper watch. Twenty men with binoculars and cameras positioned themselves around the Loch from 9 am to 6 pm, for five weeks starting 13 July 1934. They took 21 photographs, though none was considered conclusive. Captain James Fraser was employed as a supervisor, and remained by the Loch afterwards, taking cine film (which is now lost) on 15 September 1934. R. Binns (1983) The Loch Ness Mystery Solved ISBN 0-7291-0139-8, pages 3639 When viewed by zoologists and professors of natural history it was concluded that it showed a seal, possibly a grey seal. The Times 5 October 1934, page 12 Loch Ness "Monster" Film 

===Loch Ness Phenomena Investigation Bureau (19621972)===
The Loch Ness Phenomena Investigation Bureau (LNPIB) was a UK-based society formed in 1962 by Norman Collins, R. S. R. Fitter, David James, MP, Peter Scott and Constance Whyte Henry H. Bauer, The Enigma of Loch Ness: Making Sense of a Mystery, page 163 (University of Illinois Press, 1986). ISBN 0-252-01284-4 "to study Loch Ness to identify the creature known as the Loch Ness Monster or determine the causes of reports of it." Rick Emmer, Loch Ness Monster: Fact or Fiction?, page 35 (Infobase Publishing, 2010). ISBN 978-0-7910-9779-3 It later shortened the name to Loch Ness Investigation Bureau (LNIB). It closed in 1972. The society had an annual subscription charge, which covered administration. Its main activity was for groups of self-funded volunteers to watch the loch from various vantage points, equipped with cine cameras with telescopic lenses. From 1965 to 1972 it had a caravan camp and main watching platform at Achnahannet, and sent observers to other locations up and down the loch. Tim Dinsdale (1973) The Story of the Loch Ness Monster Target Books ISBN 0-426-11340-3 According to the 1969 Annual Report of the Bureau, it had 1,030 members, of whom 588 were from the UK.

===LNPIB sonar study (19671968)===
Professor D. Gordon Tucker, chairman of the Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering at the University of Birmingham, England, volunteered his services as a sonar developer and expert at Loch Ness in 1968. The gesture was part of a larger effort helmed by the LNPIB from 1967 to 1968 and involved collaboration between volunteers and professionals in various fields. Tucker had chosen Loch Ness as the test site for a prototype sonar transducer with a maximum range of 800 m. The device was fixed underwater at Temple Pier in Urquhart Bay and directed towards the opposite shore, effectively drawing an acoustic 'net' across the width of Ness through which no moving object could pass undetected. During the two-week trial in August, multiple animate targets 6 m in length were identified ascending from and diving to the loch bottom. Analysis of diving profiles ruled out air-breathers because the targets never surfaced or moved shallower than midwater.

===Andrew Carroll's sonar study (1969)===

In 1969 Andrew Carroll, field researcher for the New York Aquarium in New York City, proposed a mobile sonar scan operation at Loch Ness. The project was funded by the Griffis foundation (named for Nixon Griffis, then a director of the aquarium). This was the tail-end (and most successful portion) of the LNPIB's 1969 effort involving submersibles with biopsy harpoons. The trawling scan, in Carroll's research launch Rangitea, took place in October. One sweep of the loch made contact with a strong, animate echo for nearly three minutes just north of Foyers. The identity of the contact remains a mystery. Later analysis determined that the intensity of the returning echo was twice as great as that expected from a 3 m pilot whale. On returning to the University of Chicago, biologist Roy Mackal and colleagues subjected the sonar data to greater scrutiny and confirmed dimensions of 6 m.

===Submersible investigations===

Earlier submersible work had yielded dismal results. Under the sponsorship of World Book Encyclopedia, pilot Dan Taylor deployed the Viperfish at Loch Ness on 1 June 1969. His dives were plagued by technical problems and produced no new data. The Deep Star III built by General Dynamics and an unnamed two-man submersible built by Westinghouse were scheduled to sail but never did. It was only when the Pisces arrived at Ness that the LNPIB obtained new data. Owned by Vickers, Ltd., the submersible had been rented out to produce The Private Life of Sherlock Holmes, a film featuring a dummy Loch Ness Monster. When the dummy monster broke loose from the Pisces during filming and sank to the bottom of the loch, Vickers executives capitalised on the loss and 'monster fever' by allowing the sub to do a bit of exploring. During one of these excursions, the Pisces picked up a large moving object on sonar 60 m ahead and 15 m above the bottom of the loch. Slowly the pilot closed to half that distance but the echo moved rapidly out of sonar range and disappeared.

==="Big Expedition" of 1970===

During the so-called "Big Expedition" of 1970, Roy Mackal, a biologist who taught for 20 years at the University of Chicago, devised a system of hydrophones (underwater microphones) and deployed them at intervals throughout the loch. In early August a hydrophone assembly was lowered into Urquhart Bay and anchored in 210 m of water. Two hydrophones were secured at depths of 300 and 180 m. After two nights of recording, the tape (sealed inside a 44 gallon drum along with the system's other sensitive components) was retrieved and played before an excited LNPIB. "Bird-like chirps" had been recorded, and the intensity of the chirps on the deep hydrophone suggested they had been produced at greater depth. In October "knocks" and "clicks" were recorded by another hydrophone in Urquhart Bay, indicative of echolocation. These sounds were followed by a "turbulent swishing" suggestive of the tail locomotion of a large aquatic animal. The knocks, clicks and resultant swishing were believed were the sounds of an animal echo-locating prey before moving in for the kill. The noises stopped whenever craft passed along the surface of the loch near the hydrophone, and resumed once the craft reached a safe distance. In previous experiments, it was observed that call intensities were greatest at depths less than 30 m. Members of the LNPIB decided to attempt communication with the animals producing the calls by playing back previously recorded calls into the water and listening via hydrophone for results, which varied greatly. At times the calling patterns or intensities changed, but sometimes there was no change at all. Mackal noted that there was no similarity between the recordings and the hundreds of known sounds produced by aquatic animals.

===Robert Rines's studies (1972, 1975, 2001 and 2008)===
In the early 1970s, a group of people led by Robert H. Rines obtained some underwater photographs. Two were rather vague images, perhaps of a rhomboid flipper (though others have dismissed the image as air bubbles or a fish fin). The alleged flipper was photographed in different positions, indicating movement. http://web.archive.org/web/20110829140111/http://scienceblogs.com/tetrapodzoology/Nessie_Rines%20flipper.gif On the basis of these photographs, British naturalist Peter Scott announced in 1975 that the scientific name of the monster would henceforth be Nessiteras rhombopteryx (Greek for "The Ness monster with diamond-shaped fin"). Scott intended that this would enable Nessie to be added to a British register of officially protected wildlife. Scottish politician Nicholas Fairbairn pointed out that the name was an anagram for "Monster hoax by Sir Peter S". Dinsdale, T. "Loch Ness Monster" (Routledge and Kegan paul 1976), p.171. Dinsdale, in the same paragraph, also says that Robert Rines, co-author of the Nature article, "soon came up with the antidote  'Yes, both pix are monsters  R.'" "London, 18 December (Reuters)  A Scottish member of Parliament has discovered an anagram for Nessiteras rhombopteryx...
Nicholas Fairbairn, the MP, announced the anagram in a letter to The Times: 'Monster hoax by Sir Peter S.'
("Loch Ness Monster Shown a Hoax by Another Name." New York Times 19 December 1975. p. 78.) 

The underwater photos were reportedly obtained by painstakingly examining the loch depths with sonar for unusual underwater activity. Rines knew the water was murky and filled with floating wood and peat, so he took precautions to avoid it. A submersible camera with an affixed, high-powered flood light was deployed to record images below the surface. If he detected anything on the sonar, he would turn the lights on and take some pictures. Several of the photographs, despite their obviously murky quality, did indeed seem to show an animal resembling a plesiosaur in various positions and lightings. One photograph appeared to show the head, neck and upper torso of a plesiosaur-like animal. After two distinct sonar contacts were made, the strobe light camera photographed two large lumps in the water, suggesting there to be two large animals living in the loch. Another photo seemed to depict a horned "gargoyle head", consistent to that of several sightings of the monster. http://www.cryptomundo.com/wp-content/uploads/rines1975a.jpg Sceptics point out that several years later, a log was filmed underwater which bore a striking resemblance to the gargoyle head.

A few close-ups of what might be the creature's diamond-shaped fin were taken, with the "fin" in different positions, as though the creature was moving, but after some time it came to be known that the "flipper photograph" was highly enhanced and retouched compared with the original image. The Museum of Hoaxes shows the original unenhanced photo. Team member Charles Wyckoff claimed that someone retouched the photo to superimpose the flipper, and that the original enhancement showed a much smaller flipper. No one is sure how the original came to be altered. Loch Ness Monster: Search for the Truth, 2001 

On 8 August 1972, Rines' Raytheon DE-725C sonar unit, operating at a frequency of 200 kHz and anchored at a depth of 11 m, identified a moving target (or targets) estimated by echo strength to be 6 to in length. Specialists from Raytheon, Simrad (now Kongsberg Maritime), and Hydroacoustics, Inc.; Marty Klein of MIT and Klein Associates (a producer of side scan sonar); and Dr. Ira Dyer of MIT's Department of Ocean Engineering were all on hand to examine the data. Further, P. Skitzki of Raytheon suggested that the data showed a protuberance, 3 m in length, projecting from one of the echoes. Mackal proposed that the shape was a "highly flexible laterally flattened tail" or the misinterpreted return from two animals swimming together. Roy Mackal (1976) The Monsters of Loch Ness page 307, see also appendix E 

In 2001, the Robert Rines' Academy of Applied Science videoed a powerful V-shaped wake traversing the still water on a calm day. The AAS also videotaped an object on the floor of the loch resembling a carcass, found marine clam-shells and a fungus-like organism not normally found in fresh water lochs, which they suggest gives some connection to the sea and a possible entry for Nessie. Dr. Robert H. Rines. Loch Ness Findings. Academy of Applied Science. 

In 2008, Rines theorised that the monster may have become extinct, citing the lack of significant sonar readings and a decline in eyewitness accounts. Rines undertook one last expedition to look for remains of the monster, using sonar and underwater camera in an attempt to find a carcass. Rines believed that the animals may have failed to adapt to temperature changes as a result of global warming. 

===Operation Deepscan (1987)===
In 1987, Operation Deepscan took place. Twenty-four boats equipped with echosounder equipment were deployed across the whole width of the loch and they simultaneously sent out acoustic waves. BBC News reported that the scientists had made sonar contact with a large unidentified object of unusual size and strength. The researchers decided to return to the same spot and re-scan the area. After analysing the echosounder images, it seemed to point to debris at the bottom of the loch, although three of the pictures were of moving debris. Shine speculates that they could be seals that got into the loch, since they would be of about the same magnitude as the objects detected. 

Darrell Lowrance, sonar expert and founder of Lowrance Electronics, donated a number of echosounder units used during Operation Deepscan. After examining the echogram data, specifically a sonar return revealing a large moving object near Urquhart Bay at a depth of 180 m, Lowrance said: "There's something here that we don't understand, and there's something here that's larger than a fish, maybe some species that hasn't been detected before. I don't know." Mysterious Creatures (1988) By the Editors of Time-Life Books, page 90 

===Discovery Loch Ness (1993)===

In 1993 Discovery Communications began to research the ecology of the loch. The study did not focus entirely on the monster, but on the loch's nematodes (of which a new species was discovered) and fish. Expecting to find a small fish population, the researchers caught twenty fish in one catch, increasing previous estimates of the loch's fish population about ninefold.

Using sonar, the team encountered a kind of underwater disturbance (called a seiche) due to stored energy (such as from a wind) causing an imbalance between the loch's warmer and colder layers (known as the thermocline). While reviewing printouts of the event the next day, they found what appeared to be three sonar contacts, each followed by a powerful wake. These events were later shown on a program called Loch Ness Discovered, in conjunction with analyses and enhancements of the 1960 Dinsdale Film, the Surgeon's Photo, and the Rines Flipper Photo.

===Searching for the Loch Ness Monster BBC (2003)===
In 2003, the BBC sponsored a full search of the Loch using 600 separate sonar beams and satellite tracking. The search had enough resolution to pick up a small buoy. No animal of any substantial size was found whatsoever and despite high hopes, the scientists involved in the expedition admitted that this essentially proved the Loch Ness monster was only a myth. 

==Explanations==
A variety of explanations have been postulated over the years to account for sightings of the Loch Ness Monster. These may be categorised as: misidentifications of common animals; misidentifications of inanimate objects or effects; reinterpretations of traditional Scottish folklore; hoaxes; and exotic species of large animals.

===Misidentification of common animals===

====Bird wakes====
There are wake sightings that occur when the loch is dead calm with no boat nearby. A bartender named David Munro claims to have witnessed a wake he believed was a creature zigzagging, diving, and reappearing. (There were 26 other witnesses from a nearby car park.) Some sightings describe the onset of a V-shaped wake, as if there were something underwater. Moreover, many wake sightings describe something not conforming to the shape of a boat. Discovery Communications, Loch Ness Discovered, 1993 Under dead calm conditions, a creature too small to be visible to the naked eye can leave a clear v-shaped wake. In particular, a group of swimming birds can give a wake and the appearance of an object. A group of birds can leave the water and then land again, giving a sequence of wakes like an object breaking the surface, which Dick Raynor says is a possible explanation for his film. 

====Eels====
A giant eel was one of the first suggestions made. Eels are found in Loch Ness, and an unusually large eel would fit many sightings. This has been described as a conservative explanation. R. P. Mackal (1976) The Monsters of Loch Ness page 216, see also chapter 9 and appendix G Eels are not known to protrude swanlike from the water and thus would not account for the head and neck sightings. Dinsdale dismissed the proposal because eels move in a side-to-side undulation. Tim Dinsdale (1961) Loch Ness Monster page 229 

Sightings, in 1856, of a 'sea-serpent' or Kelpie in a freshwater lake near Leurbost in the Outer Hebrides were also explained as being of an oversized eel, which were also believed to be common in 'Highland lakes': "All, however, agree, in describing its form as that of an eel; and we have heard one, whose evidence we can rely upon, state that in length he supposed it to be about forty feet. It is probable that it is no more than a conger eel after all, animals of this description having been caught in the Highland lakes which have attained a huge size." 

On 2 May 2001, two conger eels were found on the shore of the loch; as conger eels are saltwater animals and Loch Ness is freshwater, it is believed that they were put there to be seen as "Mini-Nessies". 

====Elephant====
In a 1979 article, California biologist Dennis Power and geographer Donald Johnson claimed that the Surgeon's Photograph was in fact the top of the head, extended trunk and flared nostrils of a swimming elephant, probably photographed elsewhere and claimed to be from Loch Ness. A Fresh Look at Nessie, New Scientist, v. 83, pp. 358359 In 2006, palaeontologist and artist Neil Clark similarly suggested that travelling circuses might have allowed elephants to refresh themselves in the loch and that the trunk could therefore be the head and neck, with the elephant's head and back providing the humps. In support of this he provided a painting. 

====Resident animals====
When viewed through a telescope or binoculars with no outside reference, it is difficult to judge the size of an object in the water. Loch Ness has resident otters and pictures of them are given by Binns, R. Binns (1983) The Loch Ness Mystery Solved plates 15(a)-(f) which could be misinterpreted. Likewise he gives pictures of deer swimming in Loch Ness, and birds that could be taken as a "head and neck" sighting. R. Binns (1983) The Loch Ness Mystery Solved plates 1618 

====Seals====
A number of photographs and a video have confirmed the presence of seals in the loch, for up to months at a time. In 1934 the Sir Edward Mountain expedition analysed film taken the same year and concluded that the monster was a species of seal, which was reported in a national newspaper as "Loch Ness Riddle Solved  Official". Daily Mirror 5 October 1934 A long-necked seal was advocated by Peter Costello for Nessie and for other reputed lake-monsters. R.T. Gould wrote "A grey seal has a long and surprisingly extensible neck; it swims with a paddling action; its colour fits the bill; and there is nothing surprising in its being seen on the shore of the loch, or crossing a road." This explanation would cover sightings of lake-monsters on land, during which the creature supposedly waddled into the loch upon being startled, in the manner of seals. Seals could also account for sonar traces that act as animate objects. Against this, it has been argued that all known species of pinnipeds are usually visible on land during daylight hours to sunbathe, something that Nessie is not known to do. However seals have been observed and photographed in Loch Ness and the sightings are sufficiently infrequent to allow for occasional visiting animals rather than a permanent colony.

===Misidentifications of inanimate objects or effects===

====Trees====
In 1933 the Daily Mirror showed a picture with the following caption 'This queerly-shaped tree-trunk, washed ashore at Foyers may, it is thought, be responsible for the reported appearance of a "Monster"'. Daily Mirror 17 August 1933 page 12 (Foyers is on Loch Ness.)

In a 1982 series of articles for New Scientist, Dr Maurice Burton proposed that sightings of Nessie and similar creatures could actually be fermenting logs of Scots Pine rising to the surface of the loch's cold waters. Initially, a rotting log could not release gases caused by decay, because of high levels of resin sealing in the gas. Eventually, the gas pressure would rupture a resin seal at one end of the log, propelling it through the waterand sometimes to the surface. Burton claimed that the shape of tree logs with their attendant branch stumps closely resemble various descriptions of the monster. 

Four Scottish lochs are very deep, including Morar, Ness and Lomond. Only the lochs with pinewoods on their shores have monster legends; Loch Lomondwith no pinewoodsdoes not. Gaseous emissions and surfactants resulting from the decay of the logs can cause the foamy wake reported in some sightings. Indeed, beached pine logs showing evidence of deep-water fermentation have been found. On the other hand, there are believers who assert that some lakes do have reports of monsters, despite an absence of pinewoods; a notable example would be the Irish lough monsters. 

====Seiches and wakes====
Loch Ness, because of its long, straight shape, is subject to some unusual ripples affecting its surface. A seiche is a large, regular oscillation of a lake, caused by a water reverting to its natural level after being blown to one end of the lake. The impetus from this reversion continues to the lake's windward end and then reverts. In Loch Ness, the process occurs every 31.5 minutes. 

Boat wakes can also produce strange effects in the loch. As a wake spreads and divides from a boat passing the centre of the loch, it hits both sides almost simultaneously and deflects back to meet again in the middle. The movements interact to produce standing waves that are much larger than the original wake, and can have a humped appearance. By the time this occurs, the boat has passed and the unusual waves are all that can be seen. 

====Optical effects====
Wind conditions can give a slightly choppy and thus matte appearance to the water, with occasional calm patches appearing as dark ovals (reflecting the mountains) from the shore, which can appear as humps to visitors unfamiliar with the loch. In 1979, Lehn showed that atmospheric refraction could distort the shape and size of objects and animals, W. H. Lehn (1979) Science vol 205. No. 4402 pages 183185 "Atmospheric Refraction and Lake Monsters" and later showed a photograph of a rock mirage on Lake Winnipeg that looked like a head and neck. 

====Seismic gas====
The Italian geologist Luigi Piccardi has proposed geological explanations for some ancient legends and myths. He pointed out that in the earliest recorded sighting of a creature, the Life of St. Columba, the creature's emergence was accompanied "cum ingenti fremitu" (with very loud roaring). The Loch Ness is located along the Great Glen Fault, and this could be a description of an earthquake. Furthermore, in many sightings, the report consists of nothing more than a large disturbance on the surface of the water. This could be caused by a release of gas from through the fault, although it could easily be mistaken for a large animal swimming just below the surface. 

Binns concludes that it would be unwise to put forward a single explanation of the monster, and probably a wide range of natural phenomena have been mistaken for the monster at times: otters, swimming deer, unusual waves. However, he adds that this also touches on some issues of human psychology, and the ability of the eye to see what it wants to see. 

===Folklore===
According to the Swedish naturalist and author Bengt Sjgren (1980), present day beliefs in lake monsters such as the Loch Ness Monster are associated with the old legends of kelpies. He claims that the accounts of loch monsters have changed over the ages, originally describing creatures with a horse-like appearance; they claimed that the "kelpie" would come out of the lake and turn into a horse. When a tired traveller would get on the back of the kelpie, it would gallop into the loch and devour its prey. This myth successfully kept children away from the loch, as was its purpose. Sjgren concludes that the kelpie legends have developed into current descriptions of lake-monsters, reflecting modern awareness of plesiosaurs. In other words, the kelpie of folklore has been transformed into a more realistic and contemporary notion of the creature. Believers counter that long-dead witnesses could only compare the creature to that with which they were familiar, and they were not familiar with plesiosaurs. 

Specific mention of the kelpie as a water horse in Loch Ness was given in a Scottish newspaper in 1879, Aberdeen Weekly Journal, Wednesday, 11 June 1879 "This kelpie had been in the habit of appearing as a beautiful black horse No sooner had the weary unsuspecting victim seated himself in the saddle than away darted the horse with more than the speed of the hurricane and plunged into the deepest part of Loch Ness, and the rider was never seen again." and was commemorated in the title of a book Project Water Horse by Tim Dinsdale. Tim Dinsdale (1975) Project Water Horse. The true story of the monster quest at Loch Ness (Routledge & Kegan Paul) ISBN 0-7100-8030-1 

A study of the Highland folklore literature prior to 1933 with specific references to Kelpies, Water Horses and Water bulls suggested that Loch Ness was the most mentioned loch by a large margin. Watson, Roland,The Water Horses of Loch Ness (2011) ISBN 1-4611-7819-3 

===Hoaxes===
The Loch Ness monster phenomenon has seen several attempts to hoax the public, some of which were very successful. Other hoaxes were revealed rather quickly by the perpetrators or exposed after diligent research. A few examples are mentioned below.

In August 1933, Italian journalist Francesco Gasparini submitted what he claimed was the first news article on the Loch Ness monster. In 1959, he confessed to taking a sighting of a "strange fish" and expanding on it by fabricating eye witness accounts. "I had the inspiration to get hold of the item about the strange fish. The idea of the monster had never dawned on me, but then I noted that the strange fish would not yield a long article, and I decided to promote the imaginary being to the rank of monster without further ado." 

In the 1930s, a big-game hunter named Marmaduke Wetherell went to Loch Ness to look for the Loch Ness Monster. He claimed to have found footprints, but when casts of the footprints were sent to scientists for analysis, they turned out to be from a hippopotamus. A prankster had used a hippopotamus-foot umbrella stand to make the footprints. 

In 1972 a team of zoologists from Yorkshire's Flamingo Park Zoo had gone in search of the legendary monster and discovered a large body floating in the water. The corpse was 4.9 - long and weighed up to 1.5 tonnes, described by the Press Association as having "a bear's head and a brown scaly body with clawlike fins." The creature was put in a van to be taken away for testing, whereupon police chased them down and took the cadaver under an act of parliament that prohibits the removal of "unidentified creatures" from Loch Ness. But it was later revealed that Flamingo Park's education officer John Shields had shaved the whiskers and otherwise disfigured a bull elephant seal that had died the week before and dumped it in Loch Ness to dupe his colleagues. The Independent. Tales of Nessie. Some of the best April Fools' hoaxes. Retrieved 6 April 2011. 

On 2 July 2003, Gerald McSorely found a fossil supposedly belonging to Nessie when he tripped and fell into the loch. After examination, it became clear that the fossil was not from Loch Ness and had been planted there. 

Cryptoclidus model used in the Five TV programme "Loch Ness Monster: The Ultimate Experiment"

In 2004, a documentary team for television channel Five, using special effects experts from movies, tried to make people believe there was something in the loch. They constructed an animatronic model of a plesiosaur, and dubbed it "Lucy". Despite setbacks, such as Lucy falling to the bottom of the loch, about 600 sightings were reported in the places they conducted the hoaxes. 

In 2005, two students claimed to have found a huge tooth embedded in the body of a deer on the loch shore. They publicised the find widely, even setting up a website, but expert analysis soon revealed that the "tooth" was the antler of a muntjac. The Loch Ness tooth was a publicity stunt to promote a horror novel by Steve Alten titled The Loch. 

In 2007, a video purported to show Nessie jumping high into the air showed up on YouTube. This was revealed by the online amateur sceptic's community eSkeptic to be a viral ad promoting the then-upcoming Sony Pictures film Water Horse: Legend of the Deep|The Water Horse]. The release of the film confirmed the eSkeptic analysis: the viral video comprises footage from The Water Horse.

===Exotic species of large animals===

====Plesiosaur====
Reconstruction of Nessie as a plesiosaur outside Museum of Nessie
In 1933 the suggestion was made that the monster "bears a striking resemblance to the supposedly extinct plesiosaur", R. J. Binns (1983) The Loch Ness Mystery Solved, page 22 a long-necked aquatic reptile that went extinct during the CretaceousPaleogene extinction event. At the time this was a popular explanation. The following arguments have been put against it:
* Plesiosaurs were probably cold-blooded reptiles requiring warm tropical waters, while the average temperature of Loch Ness is only about 5.5 C. Rick Emmer, Loch Ness Monster: Fact or Fiction?, page 62 (Infobase Publishing, 2010). ISBN 978-0-7910-9779-3 Even if the plesiosaurs were warm-blooded, they would require a food supply beyond that of Loch Ness to maintain the level of activity necessary for warm-blooded animals. 
* In October 2006, the New Scientist headlined an article "Why the Loch Ness Monster is no plesiosaur" because Leslie No of the Sedgwick Museum in Cambridge reported, "The osteology of the neck makes it absolutely certain that the plesiosaur could not lift its head up swan-like out of the water". 
* The loch is only about 10,000 years old, dating to the end of the last ice age. Prior to that date, the loch was frozen solid for about 20,000 years. 
* If creatures similar to plesiosaurs lived in the waters of the Loch Ness, they would be seen very frequently as they would have to surface several times a day to breathe. 

In response to these criticisms, proponents such as Tim Dinsdale, Peter Scott and Roy Mackal postulate a trapped marine creature that evolved either from a plesiosaur or to the shape of a plesiosaur by convergent evolution. Roy P. Mackal (1976) The Monsters of Loch Ness, page 138 Robert Rines also explained that the "horns" described in some sightings may be breathing tubes or nostrils that allow the animal to breathe without breaking the surface.

====Amphibian====
R. T. Gould suggested something like a long-necked newt The Times 9 December 1933, page 14 and Roy Mackal discussed this possibility, giving it the highest score (88%) in his list of possible candidates. R. P. Mackal (1976) The Monsters of Loch Ness, pages 1389, 211213 

====Invertebrate====
In 1968 Frank Holiday proposed that Nessie and other lake-monsters such as Morag could be explained by a giant invertebrate such as a bristleworm, and cited the extinct Tullimonstrum as an example of the shape. Holiday, F.T. The Great Orm of Loch Ness (Faber and Faber 1968) He says this provides an explanation for land sightings and for the variable back shape, and relates it to the medieval description of dragons as "worms". Mackal considered this, but found it less convincing than eel, amphibian or plesiosaur types of animal. R. P. Mackal (1976) The Monsters of Loch Ness pages 141142, chapter XIV 

====Pinniped====
In the 1930s, the Dutch zoologist Antoon Cornelis Oudemans first proposed that the Loch Ness Monster could possibly be an unknown form of long-necked Pinniped (semi-aquatic mammals including seals). In 1892, Oudemans had come to the conclusion that several sightings of Sea serpents were probably huge, plesiosaur-like pinnipeds. He came up with a hypothetical new species of long-necked pinniped, to which he gave the scientific name of Megophias megophias. He theorised that the Loch Ness cryptid was simply a freshwater version of his own Megophias megophias. In 2003, cryptozoologists Loren Coleman and Patrick Huyghe discussed the pinniped hypothesis, and found it to be the most likely candidate for the Loch Ness Monster. Coleman, Loren & Huyghe, Patrick. (2003). The Field Guide To Lake Monsters, Sea Serpents, And Other Mystery Denizens of the Deep. Retrieved 16 May 2012. 

==Popular culture==

==See also==

* Bear Lake monster
* Bunyip
* Champ (cryptozoology)
* Chessie (sea monster)
* Gaasyendietha
* Jiaolong
* Lake monster
* Lake Tianchi Monster
* Lake Van Monster
* List of reported lake monsters
* List of topics characterized as pseudoscience
* Leviathan
* Manipogo
* Memphre
* Mokele-mbembe
* Morag
* Nahuel Huapi Lake Monster
* Ogopogo
* Sea monster
* Stronsay Beast
* Wani (dragon)
* Water Horse

==Footnotes==
;Notes

;References

==Bibliography==
* Bauer, Henry H. The Enigma of Loch Ness: Making Sense of a Mystery, Chicago, University of Illinois Press, 1986
* Binns, Ronald, The Loch Ness Mystery Solved, Great Britain, Open Books, 1983, ISBN 0-7291-0139-8 and Star Books, 1984, ISBN 0-352-31487-7
* Burton, Maurice, The Elusive Monster: An Analysis of the Evidence from Loch Ness, London, Rupert Hart-Davis, 1961
* Campbell, Steuart. The Loch Ness Monster  The Evidence, Buffalo, New York, Prometheus Books, 1985.
* Dinsdale, Tim, Loch Ness Monster, London, Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1961, SBN 7100 1279 9
* Harrison, Paul The encyclopaedia of the Loch Ness Monster, London, Robert Hale, 1999
* Gould, R. T., The Loch Ness Monster and Others, London, Geoffrey Bles, 1934 and paperback, Lyle Stuart, 1976, ISBN 0-8065-0555-9
* Holiday, F. W., The Great Orm of Loch Ness, London, Faber & Faber, 1968, SBN 571 08473 7
* Mackal, Roy P., The Monsters of Loch Ness, London, Futura, 1976, ISBN 0-86007-381-5
* Whyte, Constance, More Than a Legend: The Story of the Loch Ness Monster, London, Hamish Hamilton, 1957

==Documentary==
* Secrets of Loch Ness. Produced & Directed by Christopher Jeans (ITN/Channel 4/A&E Network, 1995).

==External links==

* Nova Documentary On Nessie
* Smithsonian Institution
* Skeptic's Dictionary: Loch Ness "monster"
* 
* Photos of Nessie and other cryptids

*



[[Laser science]]

Laser science or laser physics is a branch of optics that describes the theory and practice of lasers. 

Laser science is principally concerned with quantum electronics, laser construction, optical cavity design, the physics of producing a population inversion in laser media, and the temporal evolution of the light field in the laser. It is also concerned with the physics of laser beam propagation, particularly the physics of Gaussian beams, with laser applications, and with associated fields such as nonlinear optics and quantum optics.

==History==

Laser science predates the invention of the laser itself. Albert Einstein created the foundations for the laser and maser in 1917, via a paper in which he re-derived Max Plancks law of radiation using a formalism based on probability coefficients (Einstein coefficients) for the absorption, spontaneous emission, and stimulated emission of electromagnetic radiation. The existence of stimulated emission was confirmed in 1928 by Rudolf W. Ladenburg. Steen, W. M. "Laser Materials Processing", 2nd Ed. 1998. In 1939, Valentin A. Fabrikant predicted the use of stimulated emission to amplify "short" waves; In 1947, Willis E. Lamb and R. C. Retherford found apparent stimulated emission in hydrogen spectra and effected the first demonstration of stimulated emission; in 1950, Alfred Kastler (Nobel Prize for Physics 1966) proposed the method of optical pumping, experimentally confirmed, two years later, by Brossel, Kastler, and Winter. 

The theoretical principles describing the operation of a microwave laser (a maser) were first described by Nikolay Basov and Alexander Prokhorov at the All-Union Conference on Radio Spectroscopy in May 1952. The first maser was built by Charles H. Townes, James P. Gordon, and H. J. Zeiger in 1953. Townes, Basov and Prokhorov were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1964 for their research in the field of stimulated emission,.

The first working laser (a pulsed ruby laser) was demonstrated on May 16, 1960, by Theodore Maiman at the Hughes Research Laboratories. 

==See also==
*Laser acronyms
*List of laser types

==References==

==External links==
* A very detailed tutorial on lasers

 

[[Lincoln, England]]

Lincoln is a cathedral city and county town of Lincolnshire, England. The non-metropolitan district of Lincoln has a 2011 population of 119,541. Office for National Statistics : Census 2011 : cited in James Wilkinson : City of Lincoln Council Lincoln Drivers Report Autumn 2012 Retrieved 21 November 2012 The 2011 census gave the entire urban area of Lincoln (which includes North Hykeham and Waddington) a population of 130,200. KS01 Usual resident population: Census 2001, Key Statistics for urban areas 

Lincoln developed from the Roman town of Lindum Colonia, which developed from an Iron Age settlement. Lincoln's major landmarks are Lincoln Cathedral, a fine example of English Gothic architecture, and Lincoln Castle, an 11th-century Norman castle. The city is also home to the University of Lincoln and Bishop Grosseteste University. Lincoln is situated in a gap in the Lincoln Cliff 141 mi north of London, at an elevation of 20.4 m above sea level by the River Witham, stretching up to 72.8 m above sea level in the uphill area around the cathedral.

==History==

===Earliest history: Lincoln===
The Brayford Pool
The earliest origins of Lincoln can be traced to the remains of an Iron Age settlement of round wooden dwellings (which were discovered by archaeologists in 1972) that have been dated to the 1st century BC This settlement was built by a deep pool (the modern Brayford Pool) in the River Witham at the foot of a large hill (on which the Normans later built Lincoln Cathedral and Lincoln Castle).
View of the Lincoln Castle
The origins of the name Lincoln may come from this period, when the settlement is thought to have been named in the Brythonic language of Iron Age Britain's Celtic inhabitants as Lindon "The Pool", presumably referring to the Brayford Pool (compare the etymology of the name Dublin, from the Gaelic dubh linn "black pool"). It is not possible to know how big this original settlement was as its remains are now buried deep beneath the later Roman and medieval ruins, as well as the modern Lincoln.

===Roman history: Lindum Colonia===
Newport Arch, a 3rd-century Roman gate

The Romans conquered this part of Britain in AD 48 and shortly afterwards built a legionary fortress high on a hill overlooking the natural lake formed by the widening of the River Witham (the modern day Brayford Pool) and at the northern end of the Fosse Way Roman road (A46). The Celtic name Lindon was subsequently Latinised to Lindum and given the title Colonia when it was converted into a settlement for army veterans. 

The conversion to a colonia was made when the legion moved on to York (Eboracum) in AD 71. Lindum colonia or more fully, Colonia Domitiana Lindensium, after its founder Domitian, was established within the walls of the hilltop fortress with the addition of an extension of about equal area, down the hillside to the waterside below.

It became a major flourishing settlement, accessible from the sea both through the River Trent and through the River Witham, and was even the provincial capital of Flavia Caesariensis when the province of Britannia Inferior was subdivided in the early 4th century, but then it and its waterways fell into decline. By the close of the 5th century the city was largely deserted, although some occupation continued under a Praefectus Civitatis, for Saint Paulinus visited a man of this office in Lincoln in AD 629.

===AD 4101066===
Lincoln Castle east gate

During this period the Latin name Lindum Colonia was shortened in Old English to become 'Lincylene'. 

After the first destructive Viking raids, the city once again rose to some importance, with overseas trading connections. In Viking times Lincoln was a trading centre that issued coins from its own mint, by far the most important in Lincolnshire and by the end of the 10th century, comparable in output to the mint at York. Finds suggest a 100-to-1 preponderance over nominal mints Caistor, Horncastle and Louth; a hoard recovered at Corringham, near Gainsborough, is composed mainly of coins minted at Lincoln and York (David Michael Metcalf, An Atlas of Anglo-Saxon and Norman Coin Finds, c.973-1086, 1998:198-200). After the establishment of Dane Law in 886, Lincoln became one of The Five Boroughs in the East Midlands. Excavations at Flaxengate reveal that this area, deserted since Roman times, received new timber-framed buildings fronting a new street system, ca 900. Richard Hall, Viking Age Archaeology (series Shire Archaeology) 2010:23. Lincoln experienced an unprecedented explosion in its economy with the settlement of the Danes. Like York, the Upper City seems to have been given over to purely administrative functions up to 850 or so, while the Lower City, running down the hill towards the River Witham, may have been largely deserted. By 950, however, the banks of the Witham were newly developed with the Lower City being resettled and the suburb of Wigford quickly emerging as a major trading centre. In 1068, two years after the Norman conquest, William I ordered Lincoln Castle to be built on the site of the former Roman settlement, for the same strategic reasons and controlling the same road. 

===Cathedral===

The Norman West Front of Lincoln Cathedral

Construction of the first Lincoln Cathedral, within its close or walled precinct facing the castle, began when the see was removed from the quiet backwater of Dorchester-on-Thames, Oxfordshire and completed in 1092; it was rebuilt after a fire but was destroyed by an unusual earthquake in 1185. The rebuilt Lincoln Minster, enlarged to the east at each rebuilding, was on a magnificent scale, its crossing tower crowned by a spire reputed to have been 525 ft high, the highest in Europe. When completed the central of the three spires is widely accepted to have succeeded the Great Pyramids of Egypt as the tallest man-made structure in the world. Mary Jane Taber(1905), The cathedrals of England: an account of some of their distinguishing characteristics,p.100 

The bishops of Lincoln were among the magnates of medieval England: the diocese of Lincoln, the largest in England, had more monasteries than the rest of England put together, and the diocese was supported by large estates.

When Magna Carta was drawn up in 1215, one of the witnesses was Hugh of Wells, Bishop of Lincoln. One of only four surviving originals of the document is preserved in Lincoln Castle.

Iconic view of Lincoln Cathedral
Among the most famous bishops of Lincoln were Robert Bloet, the magnificent justiciar to Henry I; Hugh of Avalon, the cathedral builder canonised as St Hugh of Lincoln; Robert Grosseteste, the 13th-century intellectual; Henry Beaufort, a politician deeply involved in the Wars of the Roses; Philip Repyngdon, chaplain to Henry IV of England and defender of Wycliffe; Thomas Wolsey.

The administrative centre was the Bishop's Palace, the third element in the central complex. When it was built in the late 12th century, the Bishop's Palace was one of the most important buildings in England. Built by the canonised bishop Hugh of Lincoln, the palace's East Hall range over a vaulted under-croft is the earliest surviving example of a roofed domestic hall. The chapel range and entrance tower were built by Bishop William of Alnwick, who modernised the palace in the 1430s. Both Henry VIII and James I were guests of bishops here; the palace was sacked by royalist troops during the Civil War in 1648.

Following a recent break-in, some of the stained glass windows of the cathedral have had to be replaced.

===Medieval town===
Lincoln Guildhall coat of arms

During the Anarchy, in 1141 Lincoln was the site of a battle between King Stephen and the forces of Empress Matilda, led by her illegitimate halfbrother Robert, 1st Earl of Gloucester. After fierce fighting in the city's streets, Stephen's forces were defeated. Stephen himself was captured and taken to Bristol.

By 1150, Lincoln was among the wealthiest towns in England. The basis of the economy was cloth and wool, exported to Flanders; Lincoln weavers had set up a guild in 1130 to produce Lincoln Cloth, especially the fine dyed 'scarlet' and 'green', the reputation of which was later enhanced by Robin Hood wearing woollens of Lincoln green. In the Guildhall that surmounts the city gate called the Stonebow, the ancient Council Chamber contains Lincoln's civic insignia, probably the finest collection of civic regalia.

Outside the precincts of cathedral and castle, the old quarter clustered around the Bailgate, and down Steep Hill to the High Bridge, which bears half-timbered housing, with the upper storeys jutting out over the river. There are three ancient churches: St Mary le Wigford and St Peter at Gowts are both 11th century in origin and St Mary Magdalene, built in the late 13th century, is an unusual English dedication to the saint whose cult was coming greatly into vogue on the European continent at that time.

12th-century Jew's House
Lincoln was home to one of the five most important Jewish communities in England, well established before it was officially noted in 1154. In 1190, anti-semitic riots that started in King's Lynn, Norfolk, spread to Lincoln; the Jewish community took refuge with royal officials, but their habitations were plundered. The so-called 'House of Aaron' has a two-storey street frontage that is essentially 12th century and a nearby Jew's House likewise bears witness to the Jewish population. In 1255, the affair called 'The Libel of Lincoln' in which prominent Jews of Lincoln, accused of the ritual murder of a Christian boy ('Little Saint Hugh of Lincoln' in medieval folklore) were sent to the Tower of London and 18 were executed. The Jews were expelled en masse in 1290. 
Frontage of Jews' Court on Steep Hill.

During the 13th century, Lincoln was the third largest city in England and was a favourite of more than one king. During the First Barons' War, it became caught up in the strife between the king and the rebel barons, who had allied with the French. It was here and at Dover that the French and Rebel army was defeated. In the aftermath of the battle, the town was pillaged for having sided with Prince Louis. 

However, during the 14th century, the city's fortunes began to decline. The lower city was prone to flooding, becoming increasingly isolated, and plagues were common. In 1409, the city was made a county corporate.

===16th century===
16th-century High Bridge
The Dissolution of the Monasteries exacerbated Lincoln's problems, cutting off its main source of diocesan income and drying up the network of patronage controlled by the bishop, with no fewer than seven monasteries closed down within the city alone. A number of nearby abbeys were also closed, which led to a further diminution of the region's political power. When the cathedral's great spire rotted and collapsed in 1549 and was not replaced, it was a significant symbol of Lincoln's economic and political decline. However, the comparative poverty of post-medieval Lincoln preserved pre-medieval structures that would probably have been lost in a more prosperous scenario.

===Civil War===
The west front of Lincoln Cathedral viewed through the Exchequer Gate, one of a number of surviving gates in the Cathedral Close walls.Between 1642 and 1651, during the English Civil War, Lincoln was on the frontier between the Royalist and Parliamentary forces and changed hands several times. . Many buildings were badly damaged. Lincoln now had no major industry and no easy access to the sea and was poorly situated. Thus while the rest of the country was beginning to prosper at the beginning of the 18th century, Lincoln suffered immensely, travellers often commenting on the state of what had essentially become a 'one street' town. 

===Georgian Age===
By the Georgian era, Lincoln's fortunes began to pick up, thanks in part to the Agricultural Revolution. The re-opening of the Foss Dyke canal allowed coal and other raw materials vital to industry to be more easily brought into the city.

As well as the economic growth of Lincoln during this era, the city boundaries expanded to include the West Common. To this day, an annual Beat the Boundaries walk takes place along the perimeter of the common.

===Industrial Revolution===
Coupled with the arrival of the railway links, Lincoln boomed again during the Industrial Revolution, and several world-famous companies arose, such as Ruston's, Clayton's, Proctor's and William Foster's. Lincoln began to excel in heavy engineering, building locomotives, steam shovels and all manner of heavy machinery.

===20th century===
Lincoln was hit by a major typhoid epidemic between November 1904 and August 1905 caused by polluted drinking water from Hartsholme Lake and the River Witham. Over 1,000 people contracted the disease and fatalities totalled 131, 100-year-old promise kept following typhoid epidemic in Lincoln including the very man responsible for the city's water supply, Liam Kirk of Baker Crescent. Near the beginning of the epidemic, Dr. Alexander Cruickshank Houston installed a chlorine disinfection system just ahead of the poorly operating slow sand filter to kill the bacteria causing the epidemic. Reece, R.J. (1907). "Report on the Epidemic of Enteric Fever in the City of Lincoln, 190405." In Thirty-Fifth Annual Report of the Local Government Board, 190506: Supplement Containing the Report of the Medical Officer for 190506. London:Local Government Board, 116. Chlorination of the water supply continued until 1911 when a new water supply was implemented. Houston, Alexander C. (1921). "B. Welchii, Gastro-Enteritis and Water Supply." Engineering News-Record. 87:12, 484. The Lincoln chlorination episode was one of the first uses of the chemical to disinfect a water supply. Baker, Moses N. (1981). The Quest for Pure Water: the History of Water Purification from the Earliest Records to the Twentieth Century. 2nd Edition. Vol. 1. Denver: American Water Works Association, 336. Westgate Water Tower was constructed to provide new water supplies to the city.

The first tanks were built in Lincoln
In the world wars, Lincoln switched to war production. The first ever tanks were invented, designed and built in Lincoln by William Foster & Co. during the First World War and population growth provided more workers for even greater expansion. The tanks were tested on land now covered by Tritton Road (in the south-west suburbs of the city). During the Second World War, Lincoln produced a vast array of war goods, from tanks, aircraft, munitions and military vehicles.

Ruston & Hornsby produced diesel engines for ships and locomotives, then by teaming up with former colleagues of Frank Whittle and Power Jets Ltd, in the early 1950s, R & H (which became RGT) opened the first ever production line to build gas turbine engines for land-based and sea-based energy production. Hugely successful, it was the largest single employer in the city, providing over 5,000 jobs in its factory and research facilities, making it a rich takeover target for industrial conglomerates. It was taken over by English Electric in November 1966, who were then bought by GEC in 1968, with diesel engine production being transferred to the Ruston Diesels Division in Newton-le-Willows, Lancashire of GEC at the former Vulcan Foundry, which was eventually bought by the German MAN Diesel (now MAN Diesel & Turbo) in June 2000.

Siemens Pelham Works
It merged with Alstom of France in the late 1980s, then in 2003 was bought out by Siemens AG of Germany, now being called Siemens Industrial Turbomachinery. This also includes what is left of Napier Turbochargers. Plans were announced early in 2008 for the construction of a new plant just outside the city boundary at Teal Park, North Hykeham. Siemens Press Release 5 February 2008 Unfortunately Siemens made large scale redundancies and moved jobs to both Sweden and the Netherlands. The factory now employs 1300 people. R&H's former Beevor Foundry is now owned by Hoval Group who make industrial boilers (wood chip). The Aerospace Manufacturing Facility (AMF) at the Firth Road site was divested to ITP Engines UK, in January 2009 from Alstom Aerospace Ltd. AMF ITP ITP UK 

Lincoln's second largest private employer is James Dawson and Son, a belting and hose manufacturer founded in Lincoln in the late 19th century, which is located on the city's Tritton Road next to the University of Lincoln, it still operates using a coal-fired boiler. Dawson's became part of the Hull based Fenner group in the late 1970s.

In the post-war years after 1945, new suburbs were built, but heavy industry declined towards the end of the 20th century, mimicking the wider economic profile of the United Kingdom. More people are nevertheless still employed today in Lincoln building gas turbines than anything else.

==Economy==

Lincoln's economy is based mainly on public administration, commerce, arable farming and tourism, with industrial relics like Ruston (now Siemens) still in existence. However, many of Lincoln's industrial giants have long ceased production in the city, leaving large empty industrial warehouse-like buildings. More recently, these buildings have become multi-occupant units, with the likes of Lincs FM radio station (in the Titanic Works) and LA Fitness gym taking up space. The main employment sectors in Lincoln are; public administration, education and health, which accounts for 34% of the workforce. Distribution, restaurants and hotels account for 25% of the workforce. http://www.scribd.com/doc/157187867/Central-Lincolnshire-Local-Plan-Core-Strategy page 158 

Like many other cities in Britain, Lincoln has developed a growing IT economy, with many e-commerce mail order companies setting up in or around the city. A plethora of other, more conventional small industrial businesses are located in and around Lincoln. One of the reasons for building the University of Lincoln was to increase inward investment and act as a springboard for small companies. The University's presence has also drawn many more licensed premises to the town centre around the Brayford Pool. A new small business unit next door to a university accommodation building, the Think Tank, opened in June 2009. Think Tank 

214x214px
The Extra motorway services company is based on Castle Hill, with most new UK service areas being built by Swayfields who are the parent company. There are two main electronics companies in the town: Chelmsford-based e2V (formerly Associated Electrical Industries before 1961) is situated between Carholme Road (A57) and the Foss Dyke next-door to Carholme Golf Club; Carholme Golf Club and Dynex Semiconductor (formerly Marconi Electronic Devices) is on Doddington Road (B1190) near the A46 bypass just inside the borough boundary, and near North Hykeham. Bifrangi, an Italian company, makes crankshafts for off-road vehicles (tractors), using a screw press; it is based at the former Tower Works formerly owned by Smith-Clayton Forge.

Lincoln is also the functional hub of a wider area that encompasses several satellite settlements such as Welton, Saxilby, Skellingthorpe and Washingborough. These villages look to Lincoln for most of their service and employment needs, and effectively boost its population to around 165,000. http://www.scribd.com/doc/157187867/Central-Lincolnshire-Local-Plan-Core-Strategy Due to its size and central location, Lincoln is the main centre for jobs and facilities in Central Lincolnshire, and performs a wider regional role that extends to cover much of Lincolnshire and parts of Nottinghamshire. According to a document entitled "Central Lincolnshire Local Plan Core Strategy" Lincoln is within a "travel-to-work" area with a population of about 300,000. This "includes a large part of Lincolnshire and extends into Nottinghamshire." 

===Retail parks===
Around the Tritton Road (B1003) trading estate, many new businesses have begun trading from large units with car parking. Lincoln has a choice of five large national supermarkets. The St Mark's Square complex has Debenhams as its flagship store and has an accompanying trading estate with well-known chain stores such as BHS.

Another development, originally expected to be completed by 2015, is named Lindongate. It includes plans for a new department store, shops, hotel, flats and new transport facilities. The viability of proposed developments such as this was, however, called into question by the sudden economic downturn which started late in 2007. The scheme depends on a continuing demand for retail space, and a continuation of a strong housing market, but by mid-2008 both of these factors had become conspicuously absent. Outline planning permission was granted, however, by Lincoln City Council in 2012 and financing arrangements are being put into place to commence the project.

===Tourism===
A view up Steep Hill towards the historic quarter of Bailgate.
The city is a tourist centre and those who come do so to visit the numerous historic buildings including the cathedral, the castle, and the Medieval Bishop's Palace.
Waterside Empowerment 2002 sculpture 

The Collection, of which the Usher Gallery is now a part, is an important attraction. Housed partly in a recently opened, purpose-built venue, it currently contains over 2,000,000 objects, and was one of the four finalists for the 2006 Gulbenkian Prize. Any material from official archaeological excavations in Lincolnshire is eventually deposited at in The Collection so it is growing all the time.

Other attractions include the Museum of Lincolnshire Life and the Sir Joseph Banks Conservatory at the Lawn, adjacent to Lincoln Castle. Tranquil destinations close by include Whisby Nature Reserve and Hartsholme Country Park (including the Swanholme Lakes Local Nature Reserve), while noisier entertainment can be found at Waddington airfield, Scampton airfield (base of the RAF's Red Arrows jet aerobatic team), the County Showground or the Cadwell Park motor racing circuit near Louth.

Because of its climate, Lincoln attracts many of its tourists in summer, but also on the first Thursday of December until the following Sunday when the Bailgate area of the city holds its annual Christmas Market in and around the Castle grounds. The market is based upon the traditional German-style Christmas market as found in several German cities, including Lincoln's 'twin town' Neustadt an der Weinstrasse. In 2010, for the first time in the history of the Christmas Market, the event was cancelled due to 'atrocious conditions' of heavy snowfall across Lincolnshire and most of the United Kingdom. 
 

==Topography: 'uphill' and 'downhill'==

Lincoln is situated in a gap in the Lincoln Cliff (a major escarpment that runs north-south through Lindsey and Kesteven, in central Lincolnshire and rising to 200 ft in height). The River Witham flows through this gap. Lincoln is thus divided informally into two zones, known locally as 'uphill' and 'downhill', with uphill at 72.8 m above sea level in the area near Lincoln Cathedral, and downhill at a height of 20.4 m above sea level by the River Witham.

Uphill Lincoln
The uphill area comprises the northern part of the city, on top of the Lincoln Cliff (to the north of the gap). This area includes the historical quarter, including Lincoln Cathedral, Lincoln Castle and the Medieval Bishop's Palace, known locally as 'the Bail' (although described in tourist promotional literature as 'the Cathedral Quarter'). It also includes residential suburbs to the north and northeast. The downhill area comprises the city centre (located in the gap) and the suburbs to the south and south-west. The aptly named street 'Steep Hill' connects the two (although it is too steep for vehicular traffic, which must take a more roundabout route).
High Bridge 'Glory Hole'
This divide marks out Lincoln from other historic cities in England and elsewhere in Europe. Whereas in most such cities, the chief historical buildings (cathedrals and castles) tend to be centrally located and intermingled with the present-day city centre, in Lincoln they are separate.

The divide was also once an important class distinction, with 'uphill' more affluent and 'downhill' less so. This distinction dates from the time of the Norman conquest, when the religious and military elite occupied the hilltop. The construction and expansion of suburbs in both parts of the city since the mid-19th century has diluted this distinction, nevertheless 'uphill' residential property continues to fetch a premium, and is almost invariably referred to as such in literature emanating from local estate agents.

==Climate==

Like the rest of the British Isles, Lincoln has a maritime climate with cool summers and mild winters. The nearest Met Office weather station is at Waddington, about 4 mi to the south of the city centre. Temperature extremes since 1948 have ranged from as high as 34.8 C in August 1990, to as low as -15.6 C in February 1956. A now closed weather station still holds the record for the lowest daytime maximum temperature recorded in England in the month of December: -9.0 C on 17 December 1981. The coldest temperature reported in recent years was -10.4 C during December 2010, although another weather station, at Scampton, a similar distance north of the city centre, fell to -15.6 C, thus equalling Waddington's record low set in 1956. 

==Transport==
Lincoln Central

===Rail===

Lincoln Central railway station has five platforms and a steady flow of trains and passengers. Trains run to various destinations including Newark-on-Trent, Grimsby and Peterborough. In May 2010, East Coast began a new direct train service to London, calling at Newark, Peterborough and Stevenage. One service in each direction operates daily, but there is only a northbound journey on Sundays. TRAIN trips direct from Lincoln to London 

===Road===

The 19-million A46 bypass was opened in December 1985. The B1190 is an east-west road through Lincoln, starting from the Nottinghamshire-Lincolnshire boundary on the (Roman) Foss Dyke and A57 and finishing in the east at Thimbleby on the A158 near Horncastle. It originally terminated at the Canwick Road junction, then was extended to the west.

For many years the two main roads through Lincoln were the A46 and A15; there were no other main roads, and they both passed along the High Street. At the intersection of Guildhall Street and the High Street, these two roads met the A57, where it terminated. North of the city centre, the former route of the A15, Riseholme Road is the B1226, and that of the A46, Nettleham Road, is the B1182. The early northern inner ring-road, formed of Yarborough Road and Yarborough Crescent was originally the B1193, then an A road for many years, the A1102, from the mid-1930s and after the bypass was built, this distributor road became the B1273.

==Education==

===Higher education===
Lincoln has two higher education institutions, the older being Bishop Grosseteste University, which started life as a teacher training college linked to the Anglican Church in 1862. During the 1990s, the college branched out into new subject areas with a focus on the arts and drama. Bishop Grosseteste College, as it was, became a University College in 2006 when it was awarded taught degree powers, so that students graduate with degrees from BGUC and not the University of Leicester as previously. The college became a university in 2012. A graduation celebration takes place every year in Lincoln Cathedral. Bishop Grosseteste University has no links with the University of Lincoln.
The University of Lincoln seen from The Shed (pub) balcony

The larger University of Lincoln started life as the University of Lincolnshire and Humberside in 1996, when the University of Humberside opened a Lincoln campus next to Brayford Pool, attracting additional students to the city. Lincoln School of Art & Design (which was Lincolnshire's main outlet for higher education) and Riseholme Agricultural College, which had previously been part of De Montfort University in Leicester, were absorbed into the University of Lincoln in 2001, and subsequently the Lincoln campus took priority over the Hull campus. 

Most buildings were built after 2001. The University changed its name to the University of Lincoln in September 2002. In the 200506 academic year, 8,292 full-time undergraduates were studying at the university and by 201011, 11,900 students were registered as studying there. "Key facts about the University of Lincoln", Lincoln.ac.uk. Retrieved 16 November 2011 

===Further education===
Further education courses in Lincoln are provided by Lincoln College, which is the largest education institution in Lincolnshire, with 18,500 students, of whom 2,300 are full-time. "The College", Web.archive.org. Retrieved 16 November 2011 
There is also a specialist music college, Access To Music, currently with approximately 140 students, all full-time. http://www.accesstomusic.ac.uk 

===Schools===
Former Lincoln Christ's Hospital Girls' High School, is now occupied by Lincoln College

The school system in Lincoln is anomalous within Lincolnshire despite being part of the same local education authority (LEA), as most of Lincolnshire retained the grammar school system. Other areas near Lincoln, such as North Hykeham North Kesteven School, Branston and Cherry Willingham, also have comprehensive schools.

In 1952, William Farr School was founded in Welton, a nearby village. Lincoln itself had four single-sex grammar schools until September 1974.

The Priory Academy LSST converted to academy status in 2008 in turn establishing The Priory Federation of Academies. The Federation has three schools in Lincoln and one, The Priory Ruskin Academy, in Grantham. The Priory Witham Academy was formed when the federation absorbed Moorlands Infant School, Usher Junior School and Ancaster High School. The Priory City of Lincoln Academy was formed when the City of Lincoln Community College merged into the federation, with a new multimillion pound campus and access to federation funding and networks.

The Lincolnshire LEA was ranked 32nd in the country based on the percentage of pupils attaining at least 5 A*&ndash;C grades at GCSE including maths and English (62.2% compared with the national average of 58.2%). 

There are three Special Needs schools in Lincoln: Sincil Sports College (11y-16y), St Christopher's School (3y-16y) and St Francis Community Special School (2y-18y). All provide specialist care for children and youngsters in the locality.

==Media==
The local newspaper is the Lincolnshire Echo, which was founded in 1894. Local radio stations are BBC Lincolnshire on 94.9FM, its commercial rival Lincs FM on 102.2FM and Lincoln City Radio on 103.6FM a community radio station catering primarily for people aged over 50 years. The Lincolnite is the online and mobile publication covering the greater Lincoln area. The Lincolnite Local listeners can also tune into Siren FM, which broadcasts on 107.3FM from the University of Lincoln.

Student publication The Linc The Linc is available both online and in print and targets the University of Lincoln's growing student population.

BBC Look North have a bureau in Lincoln as an integral part of their coverage of Lincolnshire and East Yorkshire. There are three TV reporters based in Lincoln serving both BBC Look North and East Midlands Today. ITV News also hold a newsroom in Lincoln.

Other local media outlets include Bailgate Independent, Bailgate Independent and Lincolnista. Lincolnista 

Two popular culture websites are based from the city of Lincoln; Faux Magazine, an online arts & culture website & Shout4Music, an online music publication.

==Sport==
The Gold Victorian post box painted in recognition of Paralympian Sophie Wells who won the gold medal in the team Equestian event at the 2012 Paralympic Games in London
Lincoln has a professional football team, Lincoln City F.C., nicknamed 'The Imps', which plays at the Sincil Bank stadium on the southern edge of the city. The collapse of ITV Digital, which owed Lincoln City FC more than 100,000, in 2002 saw the team faced with bankruptcy but it was saved after a massive fund-raising venture by the fans that returned ownership of the club to them where it has remained since. The club was famously the first team to be relegated from the English Football League, when automatic relegation to the Football Conference was introduced from the 198687 season. Lincoln City regained its league place at the first attempt and has held onto it until the 201011 season when they were once again relegated to the Football Conference. Their most successful era was arguably in the early 1980s; they won promotion from the Fourth Division in 1981 and narrowly missed out on promotion to the Second Division in the two years that followed. 

Lincoln City were notably the first club managed by Graham Taylor, who managed the English national football team from 1990 to 1993. He was at Lincoln City from 1972 to 1977, during which time the club won promotion from the Fourth Division as champions in 1976  The club also won the Football League Division Three North title on three separate occasions, a joint record.

Lincoln Ladies F.C. ('The Lady Imps'), as members of the FA WSL, were one of the top eight women's football clubs in England until the franchise passed to Nottingham in 2013. Lincoln is also home to Lincoln United F.C, Lincoln Moorlands Railway F.C. and Lincoln Griffins Ladies F.C. Lincoln also hosts upcoming sports teams the Lincolnshire Bombers Roller Girls, the Imposters Rollergirls and hosts Lincoln Rowing centre located on the River Witham.

==Notable people==

* Kelly Adams &ndash; television and film actress, was born in Lincoln in 1979
* Nonso Anozie &ndash; actor was born in Lincoln in 1979
* Marlon Beresford &ndash; former Premiership footballer, a veteran of 20 years in the game was born in Lincoln in 1969 (a former pupil of Lincoln Christ's Hospital School).
* George Boole &ndash; mathematician and developer of Boolean logic, born in Lincoln in 1815 
* Frank Bramley &ndash; painter, member of the Royal Academy and the Newlyn School, born in Lincoln 1857
* Jim Broadbent &ndash; Oscar-winning actor
Swans on Boultham Drain at Tritton Road, Lincoln
* Mark Byford &ndash; BBC Deputy Director-General, went to Lincoln School
* William Byrd &ndash; A famous Renaissance composer and organist who resided near the Cathedral.
* George Francis Carline &ndash; oil and watercolour painter, born in Lincoln 1855
* Lee Chapman &ndash; former footballer who scored more than 200 first-team goals as a striker, was born in Lincoln
* Daniel Cox &ndash; British juniors tennis player was born in the city in 1990
* Peter Day &ndash; BBC broadcaster went to Lincoln School
* Jane Eaglen &ndash; opera singer was born in the city in 1962
* Frederick William Elwell &ndash; painter and member of the Royal Academy, born in Lincoln 1870
* James Fenton &ndash; poet, journalist and literary critic, born in the city in 1949
* Penelope Fitzgerald  novelist and biographer, born Penelope Mary Knox in the city in 1916. Jenny Turner: "In a Potato Patch". Review of Penelope Fitzgerald: A Life by Hermione Lee. London Review of Books 35/24, 19 December 2013. 
* Sheila Gish &ndash; RADA actress, including roles in Highlander
* Darrell Hair &ndash; former international cricket umpire who recently was stood down after a ball tampering dispute with the Pakistan cricket team. He lives just outside the city, in Nettleham
* Marion Rose Halpenny &ndash; equestrian writer and horsewoman known for her pioneering book British Racing and Racecourses, was born in Lincoln
* Alex Henshaw &ndash; Spitfire chief test pilot, went to Lincoln School
* John Hurt &ndash; actor, attended Lincoln School "The Guardian Interview: John Hurt; Guardian.co.uk, 27 April 2000. Retrieved 27 April 2012 
* Jonathan Kerrigan - television, film and stage actor, is from Lincoln
* John de Lacy 1192  22 July 1240, son of Roger, became Earl of Lincoln
* William Logsdail &ndash; impressionist painter, born in Lincoln, 1859
* Neil McCarthy (19321985) British actor, born in Lincoln.
* Mary Mackie, novelist and writer, born in Lincoln.
* Sir Neville Marriner - conductor who arranged and conducted the music for the film Amadeus, was born in Lincoln. He attended Lincoln School from 193542
* Paul Palmer &ndash; swimmer, born in Lincoln, who won the silver medal in the 400 metres freestyle at the 1996 Olympics in Atlanta, Georgia, USA (also a former pupil of Lincoln Christ's Hospital School)
* Allison Pearson &ndash; newspaper columnist, went to Lincoln Christ's Hospital School
* Steve Race &ndash; radio broadcaster and host of Radio 4 programme My Music from 196793, was born in Lincoln. He attended Lincoln School from 193239 "Obituaries: Steve Race", Telegraph.co.uk, 22 June 2009. Retrieved 27 April 2012 
* Chris Rankin is an actor from the Harry Potter series, he was a student of the University of Lincoln
*James Upton, recipient of the Victoria Cross
* James Ward Usher, jeweller and philanthropist. 

==International relations==

===Twin towns===
Lincoln is twinned with: 

 * Neustadt an der Weinstrae, Germany (since 1969) * Port Lincoln, Australia (since 1991) * Radomsko, Poland (since 2007) * Tangshan, Hebei, China (since 1988) 

==See also==

===Attractions===

* Empowerment
* Jew's House
* Jew's Court
* Lincoln Arboretum
* Lincoln Castle
* Lincoln Cathedral
* Lincoln City F.C.
* Lincoln Imp

* Museum of Lincolnshire Life
* Newport Arch
* Steep Hill
* The Collection (Lincolnshire)
* The Sir Joseph Banks Conservatory at The Lawn, Lincoln
* Usher Gallery
* Viking Way

===Places===

* Boultham, Lincoln
* Engine Shed
* Hartsholme Country Park
* High Street, Lincoln
* Theatre Royal, Lincoln
* Lincoln Drill Hall
* Lincoln Medieval Bishop's Palace

* Lincoln Performing Arts Centre
* Lincoln Racecourse
* St. Catherines, Lincoln
* Steep Hill
* University of Lincoln
* Bishop Grosseteste University

===People===

* Aaron of Lincoln
* Hugh of Lincoln

* Little Saint Hugh of Lincoln

===Societies and groups===
* The Lincoln Philosophy Caf
* Lincoln Record Society
* Lincoln Hockey Club
* Anglo-Saxon, Viking and Norman living history and re-enactment group
* Lincoln Uphill Gardeners' Society

==References==

===Bibliography===

*
* Francis Hill, 1948. Medieval Lincoln (Cambridge: University Press)
*

===Notes===

==External links==

* City of Lincoln Council
* University of Lincoln
* Bishop Grosseteste University
*

==Video links==
* Pathe Newsreel, 1950, Europes largest foundry opens in Lincoln
* Pathe newsreel, 1934, about Lincoln
* Pathe newsreel, 1933, Lincolnshire regiment parade
* Pathe newsreel, 1933, Lincoln Handicap, racing in Lincoln

 



[[Luftwaffe]]

The Luftwaffe was the aerial warfare branch of the German Wehrmacht during World War II. After the German Empire's World War I-era army air force, the Luftstreitkrfte, and the Kaiserliche Marine naval air units had been disbanded by May 1920 under the terms of the Treaty of Versailles, the Luftwaffe was reformed on 26 February 1935 and grew to become one of the strongest, most doctrinally advanced, and most battle-experienced air forces in the world when World War II started in Europe in September 1939. Killen 2003, p. 93. After the defeat of the Third Reich, the Luftwaffe was disbanded in 1946.

Luftwaffe is also the generic term in German speaking countries for any national military aviation service, and the names of air forces in other countries are usually translated into German as "Luftwaffe" (e.g. Royal Air Force is often translated as "britische Luftwaffe"). However, Luftstreitkrfte, or "air armed force", is also sometimes used as a translation of "air force". And because "Luft" means "air" and "Waffe" may be translated into English as either "weapon" or "arm", "Air Arm" may be considered the most literal English translation of Luftwaffe (cf. Fleet Air Arm).

==Origin==

===World War I===

75px
Manfred von Richthofen with other members of Jasta 11, 1917 as part of the Luftstreitkrfte

One of the forerunners of the Luftwaffe, the Imperial German Army Air Service, was founded in 1910 with the name Die Fliegertruppen des deutschen Kaiserreiches, most often shortened to Fliegertruppe. It was renamed Luftstreitkrfte by October 1916. The air war on the Western Front received the most attention in the annals of the earliest accounts of military aviation, since it produced aces such as Manfred von Richthofen, popularly known as the Red Baron, Ernst Udet, Oswald Boelcke, Werner Voss, and Max Immelmann, many of whom would later serve in the Luftwaffe, and Manfred von Richthofen's eventual successor to the command of JG I, Hermann Gring, the Luftwaffe's commander in-chief for most of its existence.

After the defeat of Germany, the service was dissolved on 8 May 1920 under the conditions of the Treaty of Versailles, which also mandated the destruction of all military aircraft of Germany.

===Interwar period===
The NSFK pennant. Members helped form the nucleus of the Luftwaffe in 1933
Flag of the Deutscher Luftsportverband (DLV), German Airsports Association.
Since the Treaty of Versailles forbade Germany to have an air force, German pilots trained in violation of the treaty in secret. Initially, civil aviation schools within Germany were used, yet only light trainers could be used in order to maintain the faade that the trainees were going to fly with civil airlines such as Deutsche Luft Hansa. To train its pilots on the latest combat aircraft, Germany solicited the help of its future enemy, the Soviet Union, which was also isolated in Europe. A secret training airfield was established at Lipetsk in 1924 and operated for approximately nine years using mostly Dutch and Russian, but also some German, training aircraft before being closed in 1933. This base was officially known as 4th squadron of the 40th wing of the Red Army.

The first steps towards the Luftwaffe's formation were undertaken just months after Adolf Hitler came to power. Hermann Gring, a World War I ace with 22 victories and the holder of the Orden Pour le Mrite, became National Kommissar for aviation with former Deutsche Luft Hansa director Erhard Milch as his deputy. In April 1933 the Reichsluftfahrtministerium (RLM  Reich Air Ministry) was established. The RLM was in charge of development and production of aircraft, and soon afterwards the test site or Erprobungsstelle at Rechlin became its testing ground, a military airfield that had been first established in August 1918. Gring's control over all aspects of aviation became absolute. On 25 March 1933 the Deutschen Luftsportverband (DVLA) (German Air Sport Association) absorbed all private and national organizations, whilst retaining its 'sports' title. The merging of all military aviation organizations in the RLM took place on 15 May 1933, which became the Luftwaffe's official 'birthday'. Hooton 2007, Luftwaffe at War: Gathering Storm, p. 30. Many members of the Nationalsozialistisches Fliegerkorps (National Socialist Flyers Corps NSFK) transferred to the Luftwaffe. As all such prior NSFK members were also Nazi Party members, this gave the new Luftwaffe a strong Nazi ideological base in contrast to the other branches of the German military. Gring had played a leading role in the buildup of the Luftwaffe in 19331936, but played little further part in the development of the Luftwaffe until 1936, and Milch became the "de facto" minister until 1937. Hooton 2007,Luftwaffe at War: Gathering Storm, p. 31. 

The absence of Gring in planning and production matters was fortunate. Gring had little knowledge of current aviation, had last flown in 1922, and had not kept himself informed of latest events. Gring also displayed a lack of understanding of doctrine and technical issues in aerial warfare which he left to others more competent. The Commander-in-Chief left the organisation and building of the Luftwaffe, after 1936, to Erhard Milch. However Gring, as a part of Hitler's inner circle, was to provide enormous financial materials for rearming and equipping the Luftwaffe. Corum 1997, pp. 124125. 

Another prominent figure in German air power construction this time was Helmuth Wilberg. Wilberg was to play a large role in the development of German air doctrine. Having headed the Reichswehr air staff for eight years in the 1920s, Wilberg had considerable experience and was ideal for a senior staff position. Corum 1997, p. 125. Gring considered making Wilberg Chief of Staff (CS). However, it was revealed Wilberg had a Jewish mother. For that reason Gring could not have him as CS. Not wishing his talent to go to waste, Gring ensured the racial laws of the Third Reich did not apply to him. Wilberg remained in the air staff and helped draw up the principle doctrine "The Conduct of the Aerial War" and its "Regulation 16" under Walther Wever. Corum 1997, p. 127. Hooton 2010, pp. 2021. 

==Preparing for war: 19331939==

===The Wever years, 1933  1936===
Walther Wever, Chief of the Luftwaffe General Staff, 19331936.
Contrary to popular belief in American and British circles, the Luftwaffe was not "the hand maiden of the German Army." The German officer Corps was keen to develop strategic bombing capabilities against its enemies. However, economic and geopolitical considerations had to take priority. The German air power theorists continued to develop strategic theories, but emphasis was given to army support, as Germany was a continental power and expected to face ground operations following any declaration of hostilities. Murray 1983, p. 1. 

For these reasons, between 1933 and 1934, the Luftwaffe's leadership was primarily concerned with tactical and operational methods. In aerial terms, the army concept of Truppenfhrung was an operational concept, as well as a tactical doctrine. In the First World War, air units had been attached to specific army formations and acted as support. Dive bomber units were considered essential to Truppenfhrung; destroying Headquarters and lines of communications. Corum 1997, p. 129. Luftwaffe "Regulation 10: The Bomber" (Dienstvorschrift 10: Das Kampfflugzeug), published in 1934, advocated air superiority and approaches to ground attack tactics without dealing with operational matters. Until 1935, the 1926 manual "Directives for the Conduct of the Operational Air War" continued to act as the main guide for German air operations. The manual directed the OKL to focus on limited operations (not strategic-operations); the protection of specific areas and support of the army in combat. 

With an effective tactical-operational concept, Corum 1997, p. 130. the German air power theorists needed a strategic doctrine and organisation. Robert Knauss, a serviceman (not pilot) in the Luftstreitkrfte during the First World War, and later an experienced pilot with Lufthansa, Corum 1997, p. 132. was a prominent theorist of air power. Knauss promoted the Giulio Douhet theory that air power could win wars alone by destroying enemy industry and morale by "terrorizing the population" of major cities. This advocated attacks on civilians. Corum 1997, p. 133. The General Staff blocked the entry of Douhet's theory into doctrine, fearing revenge strikes against German civilians and cities. Corum 1997, pp. 133134. 

In December 1934, Chief of the Luftwaffe General Staff Walther Wever sought to mould the Luftwaffe's battle doctrine into a strategic plan. At this time, Wever conducted war games (simulated against the French) in a bid to establish his theory of a strategic bombing force that would, he thought, prove decisive by winning the war through the destruction of enemy industry, even though these exercises also included tactical strikes against enemy ground forces and communications. In 1935, "Luftwaffe Regulation 16: The Conduct of the Air War" was drawn up. In the proposal, it concluded, "The mission of the Luftwaffe is to serve these goals." Hooton 2007, Luftwaffe at War: Gathering Storm, p. 34. Hooton 2010, p. 28. 

Within this doctrine, the Luftwaffe leadership rejected the practice of "terror bombing" (see Luftwaffe strategic bombing doctrine). Corum 1997, p. 7. Terror bombing was deemed to be "counter-productive", increasing rather than destroying the enemy's will to resist. Corum 1997, pp. 143144. Such bombing campaigns were regarded as diversion from the Luftwaffe's main operations; destruction of the enemy armed forces. Corum 1997, p. 146. The bombings of Guernica, Rotterdam and Warsaw were considered tactical missions in support of military operations and were not intended as strategic terror attacks. Corum 1997, pp. 67. 

Nevertheless, Wever recognised the importance of strategic bombing. In newly introduced doctrine, The Conduct of the Aerial Air War in 1935, Wever rejected the theory of Douhet Corum 1997, p. 143. and outlined five key points to air strategy:
1. To destroy the enemy air force by bombing its bases and aircraft factories, and defeating enemy air forces attacking German targets.2. To prevent the movement of large enemy ground forces to the decisive areas by destroying railways and roads, particularly bridges and tunnels, which are indispensable for the movement and supply of forces3. To support the operations of the army formations, independent of railways, i.e, armoured forces and motorised forces, by impeding the enemy advance and participating directly in ground operations.4. To support naval operations by attacking naval bases, protecting Germany's naval bases and participating directly in naval battles5. To paralyse the enemy armed forces by stopping production in the armaments factories. Corum 1997, p. 138. 

Wever began planning for a strategic bomber force and sought to incorporate strategic bombing into a war strategy. He believed that tactical aircraft should only be used as a step to developing a strategic air force. In May 1934, Wever initiated a seven-year project for the "Ural Bomber", the bomber that would take the Luftwaffe's bombing campaign into the heart of the Soviet Union. In 1935, this led to the Dornier Do 19 and Junkers Ju 89 prototypes, although both were underpowered. In April 1936, Wever ordered a requirement for 'Bomber A' which would have a range of 6,700 km (4,163 mi) with a 900 kg (1,984 lb) bomb load. However Wever's vision of a "Ural" bomber was never realised, Hooton 2007, Luftwaffe at War: Gathering Storm, p. 33. and his emphasis on strategic aerial operations was lost, Corum 1997, p. 224. with the only design submittal for Wever's 'Bomber A' that would reach production being Heinkel's Projekt 1041, which became officially known on 5 November 1937 as the Heinkel He 177. Griehl and Dressel 1998, p. 9. 

By the late 1930s the Luftwaffe had no clear purpose. The air force was not subordinated to the army support role, and it was not given any particular strategic mission. German doctrine fell between the two concepts. The Luftwaffe was to be an organisation capable of carrying out broad and general support tasks rather than any specific mission. Mainly, this path was chosen to encourage a more flexible use of air power and offer the ground forces the right conditions for a decisive victory. In fact, on the outbreak of war, only 15% of the Luftwaffe's aircraft was devoted to ground support operations, exposing a long-held myth that the Luftwaffe was designed for only tactical and operational missions. Buckley 1998, pp. 8586. 

===A change of direction, 1936  1937===
Wever's participation in the construction of the Luftwaffe came to an abrupt end on 3 June 1936 when he was killed along with his engineer in a Heinkel He 70 Blitz, ironically on the very day that his "Bomber A" heavy bomber design competition was announced. After Wever's death Gring began taking more of an interest in the appointment of Luftwaffe staff officers. Gring appointed his successor Albert Kesselring as CS and Ernst Udet head the Reich's Air Ministry Technical Office (Technisches Amt), although he was not a technical expert. Despite this Udet was appointed to and helped change the Luftwaffe's tactical direction towards producing fast medium bombers that were to destroy enemy air power in the battle zone rather than through industrial bombing of its aviation production. 

Kesselring and Udet did not get on. During Kesselring's time as CS, 19361937, a power struggle developed between the two as Udet attempted to extend his own power within the Luftwaffe. Kesselring also had to contend with Gring appointing "yes men" to positions of importance. Corum 1997, p. 225. Udet realised his limitations, and his failures in the production and development of German aircraft would have serious long term consequences. Corum 1997, p. 227. 
Ernst Udet. Along with Kesselring, Udet was responsible for establishing the design trend of German aircraft. Udet's focus was on tactical army support air forces

The failure of the Luftwaffe to progress further towards attaining a strategic bombing force was attributable to several reasons. Many in the Luftwaffe command believed medium bombers to be sufficient power to launch strategic bombing operations against Germany's most likely enemies; France, Czechoslovakia and Poland. Murray 1983, p. 10. The United Kingdom presented greater problems. General der Flieger Hellmuth Felmy, commander of Luftflotte 2 in 1939, was charged with devising a plan for an air war over the British Isles. Felmy was convinced that Britain could be defeated through morale bombing. Felmy noted the alleged panic that had broken out in London during the Munich crisis, evidence he believed of British weakness. A second reason was technical. German designers had never solved the issues of the Heinkel He 177A's design difficulties, brought on by the requirement from its inception on 5 November 1937 to have moderate dive bombing capabilities in a 30 meter wingspan class military aircraft. Moreover, Germany did not possess the economic strength and resources to match the later British and American effort of 19431944, particularly in large-scale mass production of high power output aircraft powerplants, those capable of a maximum output of at least 1,500 kW (2,000 hp) apiece. In addition, the OKL had not foreseen the industrial and military effort strategic bombing would require. By 1939 the Luftwaffe was not much better prepared than its enemies to conduct a strategic bombing campaign, Murray 1938, p. 11. with fatal results during the Battle of Britain. Overy 1980, p. 31. 

The German rearmament program faced difficulties acquiring raw materials. Germany imported most of its essential materials for rebuilding the Luftwaffe, in particular rubber and aluminium. Petroleum imports were particularly vulnerable to blockade. The Germans pushed for synthetic fuel plants, but still failed to meet demands. In 1937 Germany imported more fuel than it had at the start of the decade. By the summer 1938 only 25% of requirements could be covered. In steel materials, industry was operating at barely 83% and by November 1938 Gring reported the economic situation was serious. Murray 1983, p. 2. The Oberkommando der Wehrmacht (OKW), the overall command for all German military forces, ordered reductions in raw and steel materials for armament production. The figures for reduction were substantial: 30% steel, 20% copper, 47% aluminium and 14% rubber. Murray 1983, p. 3. Under such circumstances, it was not possible for Milch, Udet or Kesselring to produce a formidable strategic bombing force even had they wanted to do so. Murray 1983, p.11. 

The development of aircraft was now confined to the production of twin-engined medium bombers that required much less material, manpower and aviation production capacity than Wever's 'Ural Bombers'. German industry could build two medium bombers for one heavy bomber and the RLM would not gamble on developing a heavy bomber which would also take time. Gring remarked, "the Fhrer will not ask how big the bombers there are, but only how many there are". Homze 1976, p. 125. The premature death of Wever, one of the Luftwaffe's finest officers, left the Luftwaffe without a strategic air force during World War II, which eventually proved fatal to the German war effort. Dressel and Griehl 1994, p. 176. Bergstrm 2007, pp. 129130. 

The lack of strategic capability should have been apparent much earlier. The Sudeten Crisis highlighted German unprepardness to conduct a strategic air war (although the British and French were in a much weaker position), and Hitler ordered the Luftwaffe be expanded by five times its earlier size. Ketley,Barry, and Rolfe, Mark. Luftwaffe Fledglings 19351945: Luftwaffe Training Units and their Aircraft, Aldershot, GB: Hikoki Publications, 1996, p. 3. The OKL badly neglected the need for transport aircraft; even in 1943, transport units were described as Kampfgeschwadern zur besonderen Verwendung ("Bomber Units on Special Duties", KGzbV). Ketley and Rolfe, p. 7. and only grouping them together into dedicated cargo and personnel transport wings (Transportgeschwader) during that year. In March 1938, as the Anschluss was taking place, Gring ordered Felmy to investigate the prospect of air raids against Britain. Felmy concluded it was not possible until bases in Belgium and the Netherlands were obtained and the Luftwaffe had heavy bombers. Fortunately it mattered little, as the British betrayed the Czechs, war was avoided, and the need for long-range aircraft did not arise. Hooton 2007, Luftwaffe at War: Gathering Storm, p. 77. 

These failures were not exposed until wartime. In the meantime German designs of mid-1930s origin such as the Messerschmitt Bf 109, Heinkel He 111, Junkers Ju 87 Stuka, and Dornier Do 17, performed very well. All first saw active service in the Condor Legion against Soviet-supplied aircraft. The Luftwaffe also quickly realized the days of the biplane fighter were finished, the Heinkel He 51 being switched to service as a trainer. Particularly impressive were the Heinkel and Dornier, which fulfilled the Luftwaffe's requirements for bombers that were faster than 1930s-era fighters. many of which were biplanes or strut-braced monoplanes.

Despite the participation of these aircraft (mainly from 1938 onward), it was the venerable Junkers Ju 52 (which soon became the backbone of the Transportgruppen) that made the main contribution. During the Spanish Civil War Hitler remarked, "Franco ought to erect a monument to the glory of the Junkers Ju 52. It is the aircraft which the Spanish revolution has to thank for its victory". Hooton 2007, Luftwaffe at War: Gathering Storm, p. 51. 

===Dive-bombing===
Poor accuracy from level bombers in 1937 led the Luftwaffe to grasp the benefits of dive-bombing. The latter could achieve far better accuracy against small mobile tactical targets than heavier, conventional bombers. Range was not key criteria for these tasks and it was not always viable for the Army to move heavy artillery over recently captured territory to bombard fortifications or support ground forces when faster dive-bombers could do the job more quickly. Dive-bombers, often single-engine two-man machines, could achieve better results than larger six or seven-man aircraft, at a tenth of the cost and four times the accuracy. This led to Ernst Udet championing the dive-bomber, particularly the Junkers Ju 87. Hooton 2007, The Gathering Storm, p. 38. 

Udet's "love affair" with dive-bombing seriously affected the long-term development of the Luftwaffe, especially after General Wever's untimely death. The tactical strike aircraft programs were meant to serve as interim solutions until the next generation of aircraft arrived. In 1936 the Junkers Ju 52 was the backbone of the German bomber fleet. This led to a rush on the part of the RLM to produce the Junkers Ju 86, Heinkel He 111 and Dornier Do 17 before a proper evaluation was made. The Ju 86 was poor while the He 111 showed most promise. The Spanish Civil War convinced Udet (along with limited output from the German munitions industry) that wastage was not acceptable in munition terms. Udet sought to build dive-bombing into the Junkers Ju 88 and conveyed the same idea, initiated specifically by the OKL, for the Heinkel He 177, approved in early November 1937. In the case of the Ju 88, 50,000 modifications had to be made. The weight was increased from seven to twelve tons. This resulted in a speed loss of 200 km/h. Udet merely conveyed the OKL's own dive-bombing capability request to Ernst Heinkel concerning the He 177, who vehemently opposed such an idea, which ruined its development as a heavy bomber. Murray 1983, p. 14. Gring was not able to rescind the dive bombing requirement for the He 177A until September 1942. Griehl and Dressel 1998, p. 53. 

===Mobilization, 1938  1941===
Polish civilian strafed by Luftwaffe, September 1939
By the summer of 1939, the Luftwaffe had nine Jagdgeschwader (fighter wings) mostly equipped with the Messerschmitt Bf 109E, four Zerstrergeschwader (destroyer wings) equipped with the Messerschmitt Bf 110 heavy fighter, 11 Kampfgeschwader (bomber wings) equipped with mainly the Heinkel He 111 and the Dornier Do 17Z; and as it had encountered design difficulties, was just starting to accept the Junkers Ju 88A for service with only a dozen aircraft of the type considered combat-ready, and four Sturzkampfgeschwader (dive bomber wings) ready for combat, primarily armed with the iconic Junkers Ju 87B Stuka. Hooton 2007, Luftwaffe at War: Gathering Storm, p. 79. The Luftwaffes strength at this time stood at 373,000 personnel (208,000 parachute troops, 107,000 in the Flak Corps and 58,000 in the Signals Corps). Aircraft strength was 4,201 operational aircraft; 1,191 bombers, 361 dive bombers, 788 fighters, 431 heavy fighters, and 488 transports. Despite deficiencies it was an impressive force. Corum 1997, p. 271. 

However, even by the spring of 1940, the Luftwaffe still had not mobilized fully. Despite the shortage of raw-materials Generalluftzeugmesiter Ernst Udet, had increased production through introducing a 10 hour working day for aviation industries and rationalizing of production. During this period 30 Kampfstaffeln and 16 Jagdstaffeln were being raised and equipped. A further five Zerstorergruppen were created (JGr 101, 102,126,152 and 176), all equipped with the Bf 110. Hooton 2007, Luftwaffe at War: Gathering Storm, p. 23. 

The Luftwaffe also greatly expanded its aircrew training programs by 42%, to 63 flying schools. These facilities were moved to eastern Germany, away from possible Allied threats. The number of aircrew reached 4,727, an increase of 31%. However, the rush to complete this rapid expansion scheme resulted in the deaths of 997 personnel and another 700 wounded. 946 aircraft were also destroyed in these accidents. The number of aircrew completing their training was up to 3,941, The Luftwaffes entire strength was now 2.2 million personnel. Hooton 2007, p. 24, Luftwaffe at War: Gathering Storm, p. 24. 

From 1920s to 1941, hundreds of Luftwaffe pilots and technical personnel visited, studied and were trained in the Soviet Union at Soviet air force schools in several locations in Central Russia. Stein, George H. (1962) Russo-German Military Collaboration: The Last Phase, 1933. Political Science Quarterly 77 (1), 5471.. Gring was at these Russian air force training schools several times during the 1930s, he flew Russian airplanes, had a Russian girlfriend and was engaged in numerous drinking parties while living in a suburb of Lipetsk. Roessing, Blume, Fosse, Teetsemann, Heini, Makratzki, Blumendaat and many other Luftwaffe aces were trained in Russia in joint Russian-German schools that were set up under patronage of Ernst-August Kstring. German-Soviet collaboration was facilitated, besides Gring, by Brauchitsch, Guderian, Model, Keitel, Krause, Adam, and Mannstein, all of whom studied and visited Soviet Russia prior to the beginning of World War II.

In April and May 1941, Udet headed the Luftwaffe delegation inspecting Soviet aviation industry in compliance with the MolotovRibbentrop Pact. Udet informed Gring "that Soviet air forces are very strong and technically advanced". Gring decided not to report the facts to Hitler hoping that a surprise attack will quickly destroy Russia.   ,  2008 ., . -,  "Raise and fall of the German Air Force",  1948 ., . ., ISBN 978-5-9955-0028-5 Udet realized that the upcoming war on Russia may cripple Germany. Udet, torn between truth and loyalty, suffered a psychological breakdown and even tried to tell all the truth to Hitler, but Gring told Hitler, that Udet was lying, then took Udet under control by giving him drugs at drinking parties and hunting trips. Udet's drinking and psychological condition became a problem, but Gring used Udet's dependency to manipulate him. Who is who in the Third Reich (     .   . ., 2003) 

==Luftwaffe organization==

===Luftwaffe commanders===
Hermann Gring. Gring was commander-in-chief of the Luftwaffe until April 1945.
Nuremberg Trials. Defendants in the dock. The main target of the prosecution was Hermann Gring (at the left edge on the first row of benches), considered to be the most important surviving official in the Third Reich after Hitler's death.

Throughout the history of the Third Reich, the Luftwaffe had only two commanders-in-chief. The first was Hermann Gring, with the second and last being Generalfeldmarschall Robert Ritter von Greim. His appointment as commander-in-chief of the Luftwaffe was concomitant with his promotion to Generalfeldmarschall, the last German officer in World War II to be promoted to the highest rank. Other officers promoted to the second highest military rank in Germany were Albert Kesselring, Hugo Sperrle, Erhard Milch, and Wolfram von Richthofen.

At the end of the war, with Berlin surrounded by the Red Army, Gring sent a telegram to Hitler suggesting he take over leadership of the Reich. Killen 2003, p. 291. Hitler interpreted this as an ultimatum and coup. Hitler ordered his arrest and execution. Gring's SS guards did not carry out the order and he was arrested by the United States Army in Bavaria on 9 May 1945. Gring was prosecuted at the Nuremberg Trials after the war. The indictments were for:
# Participation in a common plan or conspiracy for the accomplishment of a crime against peace
# Planning, initiating and waging wars of aggression and other crimes against peace
# War crimes
# Crimes against humanity
He was found guilty on all four counts and sentenced to death by hanging. He appealed to the court requesting to be shot as a soldier. The court refused. However, Gring defied the sentence and committed suicide by taking potassium cyanide. Killen 2003, p. 300. 

Sperrle was prosecuted at the OKW Trial, one of the last twelve of the Nuremberg Trials after the war. He was acquitted on all four counts of all charges. He died in Munich in 1953.

===Organization and chain of command===

At the start of the war the Luftwaffe had four Luftflotten ("air fleets"), each responsible for roughly a quarter of Germany. As the war progressed more air fleets were created as the areas under German rule expanded. As one example, Luftflotte 5 was created in 1940 to direct operations in Norway and Denmark, and other Luftflotten were created as necessary. Each Luftflotte would contain severalFliegerkorps (Air Corps), Fliegerdivision (Air Division), Jagdkorps (Fighter Corps),Jagddivision (Air Division) or Jagdfliegerfhrer (Fighter Air Command). Each formations would have attached to it a number of units, usually several Geschwader, but also independent Staffeln and Kampfgruppen. Luftwaffe Operational Organisation Luftflotten were also responsible for the training aircraft and schools in their operational areas. Ketley and Rolfe, p. 4. 

A Geschwader was commanded by a Geschwaderkommodore, with the rank of either major, Oberstleutnant (lieutenant colonel) or Oberst (colonel). Other "staff" officers within the unit with administrative duties included the adjutant, technical officer, and operations officer, who were usually (though not always) experienced aircrew or pilots still flying on operations. Other specialist staff were navigation, signals and intelligence personnel. A Stabschwarm (headquarters flight) was attached to each Geschwader. Luftwaffe Tactical Organisation 

Jagdgeschwader (Fighter wings) (JG) were single-seat day fighter Geschwaders (literally "hunting wings"), typically equipped with Bf 109 or Fw 190 aircraft flying in the fighter or fighter-bomber roles. It consisted of groups (Gruppen), which in turn consisted of Jagdstaffel (fighter squadrons). Hence, Fighter Wing 1 was JG 1, its first Gruppe (group) was I./JG 1, using a Roman numeral for the Gruppe number only, and its first Staffel (squadron) was 1./JG 1. Geschwader strength was usually 120  125 aircraft. 

Each Gruppe was commanded by a Kommandeur, and a Staffel by a Staffelkapitn. However, these were "appointments", not ranks, within the Luftwaffe. Usually, the Kommodore would hold the rank of Oberstleutnant (lieutenant colonel) or, exceptionally, an Oberst (colonel). Even a Leutnant (second lieutenant) could find himself commanding a Staffel.

Similarly, a bomber wing was a Kampfgeschwader (KG), a night fighter wing was a Nachtjagdgeschwader(NJG), a dive-bomber wing was a Stukageschwader (StG), and units equivalent to those in RAF Coastal Command, with specific responsibilities for coastal patrols and search and rescue duties, were Kstenfliegergruppen (K.Fl. Gr.). Specialist bomber groups were known as Kampfgruppen (KGr). The strength of Geschwader was about 80  90 aircraft. 

==Spanish Civil War==

Ruins of Guernica (1937)
The Luftwaffes Condor Legion experimented with new doctrine and aircraft during the Spanish Civil War. It helped the Falange under Francisco Franco to defeat the Republican forces. Over 20,000 German airmen gained combat experience that would give the Luftwaffe an important advantage going into the Second World War. One infamous operation was the bombing of Guernica in the Basque country. It is commonly assumed this attack was the result of a "terror doctrine" in Luftwaffe doctrine. The effects of the raids on Guernica and Madrid caused many civilian casualties and a wave of protests in the democracies. It has been suggested that the bombing of Guernica was carried out for military tactical reasons, in support of ground operations, but the town was not directly involved in any fighting at that point in time. It was not until 1942 that the Germans started to develop bombing policy in which civilians were the primary target, although The Blitz on London and many other British cities involved indiscriminate bombing of civilian areas, known as 'nuisance raids' which could even involve the machine-gunning of civilians and livestock. Neitzel and Welzer 2012, pp. 5758. 

==Second World War==
When the Second World War began, the Luftwaffe was one of the most technologically advanced air forces in the world. During the Polish Campaign that triggered the war, it established air superiority, and then air supremacy, quickly. It supported German Army (Heer) operations which ended the campaign in five weeks. The Luftwaffe's performance was as the Oberkommando der Luftwaffe had hoped. The Luftwaffe had rendered invaluable support to the army, Hooton 2007, p. 93. mopping up pockets of resistance. Gring was delighted with the performance. Hooton 2007, p. 91. Command and control problems were experienced, but owing to the flexibility and improvisation of both the army and Luftwaffe, these problems were solved. The Luftwaffe was to have in place a ground-to-air communication system, which played a vital role in the success of Fall Gelb. Buckley 1998, p. 127. 

In the spring of 1940, the Luftwaffe assisted the Kriegsmarine and Heer in the daring invasion of Norway, Operation Weserbung. Flying in reinforcements and winning air superiority, the Luftwaffe contributed decisively to the German conquest and expulsion of the Western Allies from Scandinavia. Corum 1997, pp. 274275. 

In the summer of 1940, the Luftwaffe contributed to the unexpected success in the Battle of France. It helped destroy three Allied Air Forces and secure the defeat of France in just over six weeks. Corum 1997, pp. 275277. However, during the Battle of Dunkirk despite intense bombing, it could not deliver Gring's promise to destroy the British Expeditionary Force, which escaped to continue the war. Killen 2003, pp. 114116. 
Gun camera film shows tracer ammunition from a Supermarine Spitfire Mark I of No. 609 Squadron RAF, flown by Flight Lieutenant J. H. G. McArthur, hitting a Heinkel He 111 on its starboard quarter.
During the Battle of Britain, the Luftwaffe, despite causing severe damage to the Royal Air Force's infrastructure and British cities during the subsequent Blitz, did not achieve the air superiority that Hitler demanded for Operation Sea Lion Killen 2003, p. 149. as the invasion was cancelled in December 1940, when Hitler ordered preparations to be made for Operation Barbarossa, the invasion of the Soviet Union.
The following spring, the Luftwaffe helped its Axis partner, Italy secure victory in the Balkans Campaign and continued to support the Italians in the Mediterranean, Middle East and African theatres until May 1945.

In June 1941, Germany invaded the Soviet Union. The Luftwaffe destroyed thousands of Soviet aircraft. But it failed to destroy the Red Air Force. Due to a lack of Strategic bombers  the very "Ural bombers" that General Wever had asked for six years before  the Luftwaffe could not strike at Soviet production centers regularly or with the needed force. Killen 2003, pp. 171184. As the war dragged on, the Luftwaffe was eroded in strength. The defeats at the Battle of Stalingrad and Battle of Kursk ensured the gradual decline of the Wehrmacht on the Eastern Front.

British historian Frederick Taylor asserts that "all sides bombed each other's cities during the war. Half a million Soviet citizens, for example, died from German bombing during the invasion and occupation of Russia. That's roughly equivalent to the number of German citizens who died from Allied raids". 

Meanwhile, the Luftwaffe continued to defend Germanoccupied Europe against the growing offensive power of RAF Bomber Command and the United States Army Air Forces. The Defence of the Reich campaign gradually destroyed the Luftwaffe's fighter arm. Despite its belated use of advanced turbojet and rocket propelled aircraft for bomber destroyer duties, it was overwhelmed by Allied numbers and a lack of trained pilots and fuel. A last-ditch attempt, known as Operation Bodenplatte, to win air superiority on 1 January 1945 failed. After the Bodenplatte effort, the Luftwaffe had ceased to be an effective fighting force.

==Omissions and failures==

===Mistakes in Command: The lack of aerial defence===
The failure of the Luftwaffe in the Defence of the Reich campaign was a result of a number of factors. The Luftwaffe lacked an effective air defence system early in the war. Adolf Hitler's foreign policy had pushed Germany into war before these defences could be fully developed. The Luftwaffe was forced to improvise and construct its defences during the war.
The daylight actions over German controlled territory were sparse in 19391940. The responsibility of the defence of German air space fell to the Luftgaukommandos (air district commands). The defence systems relied mostly on the Flak arm. The defences were not coordinated and communication was poor. This lack of understanding between the Flak and flying branches of the defence would plague the Luftwaffe throughout the war. Caldwell and Muller 2007, p. 42. Hitler in particular wanted the defence to rest on anti-aircraft artillery as it gave the civilian population a "psychological crutch" no matter how ineffective the weapons. Murray 1938, p. 132. 

Most of the battles fought by the Luftwaffe on the Western Front would be against the RAF's "Circus" raids and the occasional daylight raid into German air space. This was a fortunate position since the Luftwaffe's strategy of focusing its striking power on one front started to unravel with the failure of Operation Barbarossa, the invasion of the Soviet Union. The "peripheral" strategy of the Luftwaffe between 19391940 had been to deploy its fighter defences at the edges of Axis occupied territory, with little protecting the inner depths. Caldwell and Muller 2007, p. 46. Moreover the front line units in the West were complaining about the poor numbers and performance of aircraft. Units complained of lack of Zerstrer aircraft with all-weather capabilities and the "lack of climbing power of the Bf 109". The Luftwaffe's technical edge was slipping as the only formidable new aircraft in the German arsenal was the Focke-Wulf Fw 190. Generalfeldmarschall Erhard Milch was to assist Ernst Udet with aircraft production increases and introduction of more modern types of fighter aircraft. However, they explained at a meeting of the Reich Industrial Council on 18 September 1941 that the new next generation aircraft had failed to materialise, and obsolescent types had to be continued to keep up with the growing need for replacements. 

The buildup of the Jagdwaffe (Fighter Force) was too rapid and its quality suffered. It was not put under a unified command until 1943, which also affected performance. Of the nine Jagdgeschwader fighter wings in existence in 1939, no further units were formed until 1942, and the years of 19401941 were wasted. The Oberkommando der Luftwaffe failed to construct a strategy, instead its command style was reactionary, and its measures not as effective without thorough planning. This was particularly apparent with the Fw 190A-equipped Sturmbock squadrons which were armed with heavy 20 mm and 30 mm cannon to destroy heavy bombers, to replace the increasingly ineffective twin-engined Zerstrer twin-engined heavy fighter wings, initially tasked with being the Luftwaffe's primary bomber destroyer forces to repel USAAF daylight raids. This increase in weight affected the performance of the Fw 190 and Bf 109 at a time when the two aircraft were meeting large numbers of equal if not superior Allied types. Caldwell and Muller 2007, p. 286. 

===Mistakes in development and equipment===
The most troublesome of all German designs during WW II  both in development and in service  was the He 177 heavy bomber.
A significant failure in terms of technological development was not to develop a long-range bomber and capable long-range fighters during this period leaving the Luftwaffe unable to conduct a meaningful, strategic bombing campaign throughout the war. Bergstrm 2007, p. 118. However, this does not take into the account that Germany's economic situation suffered from limited resources  mainly raw materials like oil and aluminium  which did not provide for much beyond a tactical air force. Thus, the Luftwaffe's reliance on tactical mid-range, twin engined medium bombers and short range dive-bombers was a rational option under these circumstances. Homze 1976, p. 123. Bergstrm 2007, p. 108. It might also be argued that the Luftwaffe's Kampfgeschwader medium and heavy bomber wings were perfectly capable of attacking strategic targets, but the lack of a capable long range escort fighter  which, in most respects, was what the Zerstrer heavy fighters were meant to be  left the bombers unable to carry out their missions effectively against determined and well organised fighter opposition. Corum 1997, p. 282. The largest failure for the Kampfgeschwader, however, was saddling them with an aircraft meant to be as big and as apparently capable as any Allied four-engined "heavy bomber"  the perpetually troubled Heinkel He 177  which had been condemned to being designed to carry out moderate angle dive bombing missions from the day that the RLM accepted it for production in November 1937, making it overweight from the start, and mandating design features that led its "welded-together engines", a pair of cumbersome Daimler-Benz DB 606 "power systems", to perpetually catching fire in flight during operational missions over both the Eastern Front and the United Kingdom. It was not until the concluding months of 1943 that the only realized attempt out of a trio of parallel proposals from the Heinkel engineering departments to build a "true four engined" version of the A-series He 177, the He 177B emerged with only three airworthy prototypes produced by early 1944, some three years after the first flights of the Avro Lancaster's own prototypes, the most commonly encountered RAF heavy bomber pounding Germany on strategic night raids from 1942 to the end of the war in Europe.
Arguably, one of the greatest tactical failures was the neglect of naval aviation in the western theatre, 19391941.

Another failure of procurement and equipment was a lack of a dedicated naval air arm. General Felmy had already expressed a desire to build a naval air arm to support Kriegsmarine operations in the Atlantic and British waters. Britain was dependent on food and raw materials from its Empire and North America. Felmy pressed this case firmly throughout 1938 and 1939, and, on 31 October 1939, Groadmiral Erich Raeder sent a strongly worded letter to Gring in support of such proposals. The early-war twin-engined Heinkel He 115 floatplane and Dornier Do 18 flying boat were too slow and short-ranged, with the then-contemporary Blohm & Voss BV 138 trimotor flying boat becoming the Luftwaffe's primary maritime patrol platform, with nearly 300 examples built and capable of up to a 4,300 km (2,670 mi) range from its trio of Junkers Jumo 205 diesel engines. Another Blohm und Voss design of 1940, the enormous six-engined Blohm und Voss Bv 222 Wiking maritime patrol flying boat, would see it capable of a 6,800 km (4,200-mile) range at maximum endurance when using higher-output versions of the same Jumo 205 powerplants as used by the Bv 138, in later years. The Dornier Do 217 would have been ideal, but suffered production problems. Raeder also complained about the poor standard of aerial torpedoes, although their design was the Kriegsmarine's responsibility, even considering production of the Japanese Type 91 torpedo used at Pearl Harbor as the Luftorpedo LT 850 by 1942. (See:Heinkel He 111 torpedo bomber operations) Corum 1997, p. 281. Without specialised naval or maritime patrol aircraft, the Luftwaffe was forced to improvise. The Focke-Wulf Fw 200 Condor airliner's airframe  engineered for civilian airliner use  made it unsuitable as a bomber, lacking speed, armour and bomb load capacity. Nevertheless this civilian transport was adapted to the long-range reconnaissance and anti-shipping roles and, between August 1940 and February 1941, Fw 200s sank 85 vessels for a claimed total of 363,000 Grt. Had the Luftwaffe focused on naval aviation - particularly maritime patrol aircraft with long range, like the aforementioned diesel-powered multi-engine Blohm & Voss flying boats  Germany might well have been in a position to win the Battle of the Atlantic. However, Raeder and the Navy failed to press for naval air power until the war began, mitigating the Luftwaffe's responsibility. In addition, Gring regarded any other branch of the German military developing its own aviation as an encroachment on his authority and continually frustrated the navy's attempts to build its own airpower. 

The absence of a strategic bomber force for the Luftwaffe, following General Wever's accidental death in 1936 and the end of the Ural bomber program he fostered before the invasion of Poland, would not be addressed again until the authorization of the Bomber B design competition in July 1939, which sought to replace the medium bomber force with which the Luftwaffe was to begin the war, with more advanced, twin-engined high speed bomber aircraft fitted with pairs of relatively "high-power" engines of 1,500 kW (2,000 hp) output levels and upwards each, that would also be able to function as shorter range heavy bombers. Oberst Edgar Petersen, the head of the Luftwaffe's Erprobungsstellennetwork of test facilities late in WW II The spring 1942 Amerika Bomber program also sought to produce useful strategic bomber designs for the Luftwaffe, with their prime design priority being an advanced trans-oceanic range capability as the main aim of the project to directly attack the United States from Europe or the Azores. Inevitably, both the Bomber B and Amerika Bomber programs were victims of the continued emphasis of the Wehrmacht's insistence for the Luftwaffe to support the Army as its primary mission, as well as the increasingly devastating results of the RAF Bomber Command at night, and by 1943 the USAAF's Eighth and Fifteenth Air Forces' heavy bomber raids by daylight on the German aviation industry, which catastrophically diminished the Third Reich's overall aviation production capacity later in World War II.

The RLM's apparent lack of a dedicated "technical-tactical" department, that would have directly been in contact with combat pilots to assess their needs for weaponry upgrades and tactical advice, had never been seriously envisioned as a critically ongoing necessity in the planning of the original German air arm. Caldwell and Muller 2007, p. 287. The RLM did have its own Technisches Amt (T-Amt) department to handle aviation technology issues, but this was tasked with handling all aviation technology issues in the Third Reich, both military and civilian in nature, and also not known to have ever had any clear and actively administrative and consultative links with the front-line forces established for such purposes. On the front-line combat side of the issue, and for direct contact with the German aviation firms making the Luftwaffe's warplanes, the Luftwaffe did have its own reasonably effective system of four military aviation test facilities, or Erprobungstellen located at three coastal sites  Peenemnde-West (also incorporating a separate facility in nearby Karlshagen), Tarnewitz and Travemnde  and the central inland site of Rechlin, itself first established as a military airfield in late August 1918 by the German Empire, with the four-facility system commanded later in World War II by Oberst (Colonel) Edgar Petersen. As a result of the lack of co-ordination between the RLM ministry and the OKL, all fighter and bomber development was oriented toward short range aircraft, as they could be produced in greater numbers, rather than quality long range aircraft, something that put the Luftwaffe at a disadvantage as early as the Battle of Britain. Production was also slow, not reaching maximum output until 1944. Production of fighters was not given priority until 1944; Adolf Galland commented that this should have occurred at least a year earlier. Galland also points to the mistakes and challenges made in the development of the Me 262 jet  which included the protracted development time required for its Junkers Jumo 004 jet engines to improve their reliability  meaning that the Me 262A fighter variants could have entered service before the end of 1943 had such challenges been overcome, when the outcome of the air-war was still in doubt, from events such as the disastrous losses to the US Eighth Air Force from the "Black Thursday" raid in mid-October of 1943. Types that were obsolete were kept in production for far too long, in particular the Ju 87 Stuka, and the Bf 109. 

===Production failures===
The failure of German production was evident from the start of the Battle of Britain. By the end of 1940 the Luftwaffe had suffered heavy losses and needed to regroup. Deliveries of new aircraft were insufficient to meet the drain on resources; the Luftwaffe, unlike the RAF, was failing to expand its pilot and aircraft numbers. Overy 1980, p. 32. This was partly owing to production planning failures before the war and the demands of the army. Nevertheless, the German aircraft industry was being outproduced in 1940. In terms of fighter aircraft production, the British exceeded their production plans by 43%, while the Germans remained 40% "behind" target by the summer 1940. In fact German production in fighters fell from 227 to 177 per month between July and September 1940. One of the many reasons for the failure of the Luftwaffe in 1940 was that it did not have the operational and material means to destroy the British aircraft industry. Overy 1980, p. 33. 

No effort was made to address the low production output of the German aviation industry to support the expected increased attrition rates. The so-called "Gring program" envisaged the defeat of the Soviet Union in 1941. Murray 1983, p. 133. Erhard Milch's reforms expanded production rates. In 1941 an average of 981 aircraft (including 311 fighters) were produced each month. In 1942 this rose to 1,296 aircraft of which 434 were fighters. 
Milch's planned production increases were initially opposed. But in June, he was granted materials for 900 fighters per month as the average output. By the winter of 19411942 just 39% of the fighter force was operational and possessed just 60 more combat aircraft than it did in June 1941 despite its increased commitments. Murray 1983, p. 138. Throughout 1942 the Luftwaffe was out produced in fighter aircraft by 250% and in twin-engine aircraft by 196%. Murray 1983, p. 139. 

The appointment of Albert Speer as Minister of Armaments increased production. However the intensification of Allied bombing caused the dispersion of production and prevented an efficient acceleration of expansion. The German aviation production reached about 36,000 combat aircraft for 1944. However by the time this was achieved the Luftwaffe lacked the fuel and trained pilots to make this achievement worth while. Murray 1983, pp. 253255. 
The failure to maximize production immediately after the failures in the Soviet Union and North Africa ensured the Luftwaffe's effective defeat in the period of September 1943  February 1944. Despite the tactical victories won, they failed to achieve a decisive victory. By the time production reached acceptable levels, as so many other factors had for the Luftwaffe  and for the entire Wehrmacht as a whole  late in the war, it was "too little, too late". 

===Mistakes in pilot selection and training===
The bomber arm was given preference and received the "better" pilots. Later, fighter pilot leaders were few in numbers as a result of this. As with the late shift to fighter production, the Luftwaffe pilot schools did not give the fighter pilot schools preference soon enough. The Luftwaffe, the OKW argued, was still an offensive weapon, and its primary focus was on producing bomber pilots. This attitude prevailed until the second half of 1943. During the Defence of the Reich campaign in 1943 and 1944, there were not enough commissioned fighter pilots and leaders to meet attrition rates; as the need arose to replace aircrew (as attrition rates increased), the quality of pilot training deteriorated rapidly. Later this was made worse by fuel shortages for pilot training. Overall this meant a fall on training on operational types, formation flying, gunnery training, combat training and a total lack of instrument training. 

===Mistakes in leadership===
At the beginning of the war commanders were replaced with younger commanders too quickly. These younger commanders had to learn "in the field" rather than entering a post fully qualified. Training of formation leaders was not systematical until 1943, which was far too late, with the Luftwaffe already stretched. The Luftwaffe thus lacked a cadre of Staff officers to set up, man, and pass on experience. 

Moreover, Luftwaffe leadership from the start poached the training command, which undermined its ability to replace losses, while also planning for "short sharp campaigns", Ketley and Rolfe, p. 8. which did not pertain. Moreover, no plans were laid for night fighters. In fact, when protests were raised, Jeschonnek himself said, "First we've got to beat Russia, then we can start training!" Ketley and Rolfe, quoted p. 4. 

==Luftwaffe ground forces==
One of the unique characteristics of the Luftwaffe (as opposed to other independent air forces) was the possession of an organic paratrooper force called Fallschirmjger. These were established in 1938. They saw action in their proper role during 19401941, most notably in the capture of the Belgian army fortress at the Battle of Fort Eben-Emael and the Battle for The Hague in May 1940, and during the Battle of Crete in May 1941. However, more than 4,000 Fallschirmjger were killed during the Crete operation. Mayer and Taylor, p. 95. Afterwards, although continuing to be trained in parachute delivery, paratroopers were only used in a parachute role for smaller-scale operations, such as the successful rescue of Benito Mussolini, the then-deposed dictator of Italy in 1943. Fallschirmjgerformations were then used as crack foot infantry in all theatres of the war.

During 1942 surplus Luftwaffe personnel was used to form the Luftwaffe Field Divisions, standard infantry divisions that were used chiefly as rear echelon units to free up front line troops. From 1943, the Luftwaffe also had an armoured paratroop division called Fallschirm-Panzer Division 1 Hermann Gring, which was expanded to a Panzerkorps in 1944.

==War crimes==
Throughout the war civilians or prisoners were used as human guinea pigs in testing Luftwaffe equipment. It is unclear whether these tests were carried out by Luftwaffe personnel or on the orders of OKL. These illegal tests are classified as war crimes and were carried out on the Luftwaffe's behalf.

===Human experimentation in military aviation===

In 1941, experiments with the intent of discovering means to prevent and treat hypothermia were carried out. Freezing/hypothermia experiments were conducted for the Nazi high command to simulate the conditions the armies suffered on the Eastern Front, as the German forces were ill-prepared for the cold weather they encountered. The principal locales were Dachau and Auschwitz. Dr Sigmund Rascher, an SS doctor based at Dachau, reported directly to Reichsfhrer-SS Heinrich Himmler and publicised the results of his freezing experiments at the 1942 medical conference entitled "Medical Problems Arising from Sea and Winter". Tyson, Peter. "Holocaust on Trial: The Experiments." NOVA Online. Retrieved: 23 March 2008. Approximately 100 people are reported to have died as a result of these experiments. "Neurnberg Military Tribunal, Volume I, p. 200. 

In early 1942, prisoners at Dachau concentration camp were used by Rascher in experiments to perfect ejection seats at high altitudes. A low-pressure chamber containing these prisoners was used to simulate conditions at altitudes of up to 20,000 m (66,000 ft). It was rumoured that Rascher performed vivisections on the brains of victims who survived the initial experiment. Cockburn and St. Clair 1999, pp. 149150. Of the 200 subjects, 80 died outright, and the others were executed. 

==See also==
* Organization of the Luftwaffe (1933-1945)
* Military Ranks of Luftwaffe (1933-45)
* List of flags of Luftwaffe (19331945)
* Uniforms and insignia of the Luftwaffe
* German Air Fleets in World War II
* List of World War II military aircraft of Germany
* Ural bomber
* Schnellbomber
* Bomber B
* Amerika Bomber
* Luftwaffe serviceable aircraft strengths (1940-1945)
* Trial of Erhardt Milch
* High Command Trial
* List of World War II aces from Germany
* List of German World War II jet aces
* List of German World War II Ground Attack aces
* List of German World War II night fighter aces
* German war crimes
* Bombing of Guernica
* Nazi human experimentation
* Doctors' Trial
* Stalag Luft III murders

==References==

===Notes===

===Citations===

===Bibliography===

* Bekkerm Cajus. Angriffshohe 4000 (in German). Munich, Germany: Heyne, 1964.
* Bergstrm, Christer, Barbarossa: The Air Battle: JulyDecember 1941. London: Chevron/Ian Allan, 2007. ISBN 978-1-85780-270-2.
* Bergstrom, Christer. Stalingrad: The Air Battle: November 1942  February 1943. London: Chevron/Ian Allan, 2008. ISBN 978-1-85780-276-4.
* Bergstrm, Christer, Kursk: The Air Battle: July 1943. London: Chevron/Ian Allan, 2008. ISBN 978-1-903223-88-8.
* Bergstrm, Christer and Andrey Mikhailov. Black Cross/Red Star-Vol. 1, Operation Barbarossa 1941. London:

Classic Colours, 2003. ISBN 978-0-935553-48-2.
* Bergstrm, Christer and Martin Pegg. Jagdwaffe: The War in Russia: JanuaryOctober 1942. London: Classic Colours, 2003. ISBN 1-903223-23-7.
* Bowmen, Martin and Theo Boiten. Battles with the Luftwaffe: The Air War Over Germany 19421945. London:
Collins, 2001. ISBN 978-0-00-711363-7.
* Buckley, John. Air Power in the Age of Total War. West Midlands, UK: UCL Press,1999. ISBN 1-85728-589-1.

* Bungay, Stephen. The Most Dangerous Enemy: A History of the Battle of Britain. London: Aurum Press, 2000.ISBN 1-85410-721-6.
* Caldwell, Donald and Richard Muller. The Luftwaffe over Germany: Defense of the Reich. London: Greenhill Books, 2007. ISBN 978-1-85367-712-0.
* Cockburn, Alexander and Jeffrey St. Clair. Whiteout: The CIA, Drugs, and the Press. Brooklyn, New York: Verso, 1999. ISBN 1-85984-139-2. 
* Cooper, Matthew. The German Air Force 19331945: An Anatomy of Failure. New York: Jane's Publishing Incorporated, 1981. ISBN 0-531-03733-9.
* Corum, James. "The Luftwaffe's Army Support Doctrine, 19181941". The Journal of Military History, Vol. 59, No. 1, January 1995, pp. 5376.
* Corum, James. The Luftwaffe: Creating the Operational Air War, 19181940. Lawrence, Kansas: University Press of Kansas, 1997. ISBN 978-0-7006-0836-2.
* Corum, James. The Roots of Blitzkrieg: Hans von Seeckt and German Military Reform. Modern War Studies. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas. 1992. ISBN 0-7006-0541-X.
* Corum, James F. (Mueller, R. and H.E. Volkmann, eds.). "Staerken und Schwaechen der Luftwaffe". Die Wehrmacht: Mythos und Realitaet (in German). Munich, Germany: Oldenbourg Verlag, 1999.
* Crawford, Steve. Eastern Front, Day by Day. London: Spellmount Publications, 2006. ISBN 1-86227-359-6.
* de Zeng IV, Henry L. and Douglas G. Stankey. Bomber Units of the Luftwaffe 19331945: A Reference Source: Volume 1. London: Midland Publishing, 2007. ISBN 978-1-90653-708-1.
* Drabkin, Artem.The Red Air Force at War: Barbarossa and the Retreat to Moscow: Recollections of Soviet Fighter Pilots on the Eastern Front. Barnsley, South Yorkshire, UK: Pen & Sword Books, 2007.ISBN 978-1-84415-563-7.
* Dressel Joachim and Manfred Griehl. Bombers of the Luftwaffe. London: Arms and Armour:DAG Publications, 1994.ISBN 1-85409-140-9.
* Dye, Peter J. "Logistics in the Battle of Britain". Air Force Journal of Logistics, Winter 2000.
* Faber, Harold. Luftwaffe: An analysis by Former Luftwaffe Generals. London: Sidgwick & Jackson, 1979. ISBN 0-283-98516-X.
* Goss, Chris. Dornier 17 (In Focus). Surrey, UK: Red Kite, 2005. ISBN 0-9546201-4-3.
* Goss, Chris. The Bombers' Battle: Personal Accounts of the Battle of Britain by Luftwaffe Bomber Crews JulyOctober 1940. London: Crcy Publishing, 2000. ISBN 978-0-947554-82-8.
* Griehl, Manfred and Joachim Dressel. Heinkel He 177  277  274. Shrewsbury, UK: Airlife Publishing, 1998. ISBN 1-85310-364-0.
* Hayward, Joel S. Stopped At Stalingrad: The Luftwaffe and Hitler's Defeat in the East 19421943. Lawrence, Kansas: University Press of Kansas, 2001. ISBN 0-7006-1146-0.
* Hall, Steve and Lionel Quinlan.KG55. Surrey, UK: Red Kite, 2000. ISBN 0-9538061-0-3.
* Hess, William N. B-17 Flying Fortress: Combat and Development History. St. Paul, Minnesota: Motorbook International, 1994. ISBN 0-87938-881-1
* Holmes, Tony. Spitfire vs Bf 109: Battle of Britain. Oxford, UK: Osprey Publishing, 2007. ISBN 978-1-84603-190-8.
* Homze, Edward. Arming the Luftwaffe. Lincoln, Nebraska: University of Nebraska, 1976. ISBN 0-8032-0872-3.
* Hooton, E.R. Phoenix Triumphant: The Rise and Rise of the Luftwaffe. London: Brockhampton Press, 1994. ISBN 1-86019-964-X.
* Hooton, E.R. The Luftwaffe: A Study in Air Power, 19331945. London: Classic Publications, 2010. ISBN 978-1-906537-18-0.
* Hooton, E.R. Luftwaffe at War: Gathering Storm 193339: Volume 1. London: Chevron/Ian Allan, 2007. ISBN 978-1-903223-71-0.
* Hooton, E.R. Luftwaffe at War: Blitzkrieg in the West: Volume 2 . London: Chevron/Ian Allan, 2007. ISBN 978-1-85780-272-6.
* Hooton, E.R. Eagle in Flames: The Fall of the Luftwaffe. London: Weidenfeld Military, 1997. ISBN 978-1-85409-343-1.
* Irving, David. The Rise and Fall of the Luftwaffe: The Life of Field Marshal Erhard Milch. London: Little, Brown, 1974. ISBN 978-0-316-43238-2.
* Just, Gunther. J. Stuka Pilot Hans Ulrich Rudel. Atglen, Pennsylvania: Schiffer Military History, 1986.ISBN 0-88740-252-6 
* Kaplan, Philip. Fighter Aces of the Luftwaffe in World War II. Barnsley, South Yorkshire, UK: Pen & Sword Books, 2007. ISBN 1-84415-460-2. 
* Ketley, Barry, and Mark Rolfe. Luftwaffe Fledglings 19351945: Luftwaffe Training Units and their Aircraft. Aldershot, GB: Hikoki Publications, 1996. ISBN 0-9519899-2-8.
* Killen, John. The Luftwaffe: A History. Barnsley, South Yorkshire: Pen & Sword Books, 2003. ISBN 978-0-85052-925-8.
* Manrho, John and Ron Putz. Bodenplatte: The Luftwaffe's Last HopeThe Attack on Allied Airfields, New Year's Day 1945. Aldershot, UK: Hikoki Publications, 2004. ISBN 1-902109-40-6.
* Macksey, K. The Memoirs of Field-Marshal Kesselring. London: Greenhill Books, 2006. ISBN 978-1-85367-287-3.
* Nowarra, Heinz. J. The Flying Pencil. Atglen, Pennsylvania: Schiffer Military History. 1990. ISBN 0-88740-236-4.
* Neitzel, Shnke. Der Einsatz der Deutschen Luftwaffe ber der Nordsee und dem Atlantik: 193945 (in German). Bonn, Germany: Bernard & Graefe, 1995. ISBN 978-3-76375-938-5.
* Neitzel, Shnke and Harald Weltzer. Soldaten: On Fighting, Killing and Dying: The Secret Second World War Tapes of German POWs. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2012. ISBN 978-1-84983-948-8.

* Pegg, M. Transporter Vol. 1: Luftwaffe Transport Units 19371943. London: Classic Publications, 2007. ISBN 978-1-90322-363-5.
* Price, Alfred. The Last Year of the Luftwaffe: May 1944  May 1945. London: Greenhill Books, 2001. iSBN 978-1-85367-440-2.
* Probert, H. A. The Rise and Fall of the German Air Force 19331945. Arms & Armour, 1987. ISBN 978-0-85368-560-9.
* Ruffner, Kevin. Luftwaffe Field Divisions, 194145. Oxford, UK: Osprey, 1997. ISBN 1-85532-100-9
* Scutts, Jerry. Mustang Aces of the Eighth Air Force. Oxford, UK: Osprey Publishing, 1994. ISBN 1-85532-447-4.
* Scutts, Jerry. Bf 109 Aces of North Africa and the Mediterranean. Oxford, UK: Osprey Publishing, 1994. ISBN 1-85532-448-2.
* Smith, Peter. Luftwaffe at War: Defeat in the West 19431945 (Luftwaffe at War, Vol. 6). London: Greenhill Books, 1998. ISBN 978-1-85367-318-4.
* Smith, Peter. Luftwaffe at War: The Sea Eagles: The Luftwaffe's Maritime Operations. London: Greenhill Books, 2001. ISBN 978-1-85367-442-6.
* Smith, Peter. Luftwaffe at War: Stukas Over Steppe, Blitzkrieg in the East 19411944 (Luftwaffe at War Series, Vol. 9). London: Greenhill Books, 1999. ISBN 978-1-85367-355-9.
* Smith, Peter and E.J. Creek. Kampfflieger: Bombers of the Luftwaffe: 19421943. London: Classic Publications, 2004. ISBN 978-1-903223-49-9.
* Stenman, K. Luftwaffe Over Finland (Luftwaffe at War Series, Vol. 18). London: Greenhill Books, 2002. ISBN 978-1-85367-469-3.
* Surhone, Lambert M., Miriam T. Timpledon and Susan F. Marseken. Stalin's Missed Chance (based on * Mikhail Meltyukhov's study. Dsseldorf, Germany: VDM Publishing, 2010. ISBN 978-6-13041-822-9.
* Taylor, A.J.P. and S.L. Mayer. History of World War II. London: Octopus Books, 1974. ISBN 978-0-7064-0399-2.
* Tooze, Adam. Wages of Destruction|The Wages of Destruction: The Making and Breaking of the Nazi Economy]. London: Allen Lane, 2006. ISBN 0-7139-9566-1.
* "US Strategic Bombing Survey". Maxwell Air Force Base, Alabama: Air University Press (US Air Force), 1987. (Reprint of the Summary Reports (Europe and the Pacific) of the strategic bombing surveys conducted near the close of World War II.)
* van Creveld, M., S. Cranby and K. Brower. Airpower and Maneuver Warfare Air. Maxwell Air Force Base, Alabama: Air University Press (US Air Force), 1994.
* Vasco, John. Zerstorer: Luftwaffe Fighter Bombers and Destroyers 19391945: Volume 1. London: Classic Publications, 2005. ISBN 978-1-903223-57-4.
* Weal, John. Bf 109 Aces of the Russian Front. Oxford, UK: Osprey, 2003a. ISBN 1-84176-084-6.
* Weal, John. Bf 109 Defence of the Reich Aces. Oxford, UK: Osprey, 2006. ISBN 1-84176-879-0.
* Weal, John. Focke-Wulf Fw 190 Aces of the Russian Front. Oxford, UK: Osprey, 1998. ISBN 1-85532-518-7.
* Weal, John. Junkers Ju 87 Stukageschwader of North Africa and the Mediterranean. Oxford, UK: Osprey, 2003b. ISBN 1-84176-538-4.
* Weal, John. Junkers Ju 87 Stukageschwader 193741. Oxford, UK: Osprey, 1997. ISBN 1-85532-636-1.
* Weal, John. Messerschmitt Bf 110 Zerstrer Aces World War Two. Oxford, UK: Osprey, 1998. ISBN 1-85532-753-8.
* Weal, John. Jagdgeschwader 27 'Afrika'.Oxford, UK: Osprey, 2003. ISBN 1-84176-538-4.
* Williamson, Murray. Strategy for Defeat: The Luftwaffe 19331945. Maxwell AFB, Alabama: Air University Press (US Air Force), 1983. ISBN 978-1-58566-010-0.

== External links ==

* Traditionsgemeinschaft JG 52
* Graf and Grislawski
* Air War over the Eastern Front
* The Pre-Normandy Air Battle
* Losing Air Superiority  A Case Study from World War II
* Lt.Col. Gunzinger Air Power as a Second Front  PDF File
* Forum Discussion on reasons for Luftwaffe Defeat in BoB
* Davis, R. General Spaatz and D-Day
* Andrews, W.F. The Luftwaffe and the Battle for Air Superiority PDF-File
* Hayward, J.S. Stalingrad An Examination of Hitler's Decision to Airlift
* Carter, W. Air Power in the Battle of the Bulge
* iBiblio Hyperwar  The Air War over Europe
* Bomber Command War Diary Online
* USAF Historical Research Agency at Maxwell AFB
* Book Review of American Raiders discusses some of the Luftwaffe secrets captured at the end of the war.
* German article on Operation Paperclip
* 
* The Luftwaffe 19331945
* Book  Strategy for defeat : the Luftwaffe 19331945
* The Luftwaffe Over Germany By Donald Caldwell, Richard Muller  Details of Gring's rant for heavy bombers.
* The Second World War: Europe and the Mediterranean By Thomas B. Buell, Thomas E. Griess, John H. Bradley, Jack W. Dice
* of the Third Reich: Men of the Luftwaffe in World War II By Samuel W. Mitcham, Jr.

 



[[Lafora disease]]

Lafora disease, also called Lafora progressive myoclonic epilepsy or MELF, http://www.rightdiagnosis.com/medical/melf.htm is a fatal autosomal recessive genetic disorder characterized by the presence of inclusion bodies, known as Lafora bodies, within the cytoplasm of the cells of the heart, liver, muscle, and skin. In a later study, Lafora disease has been now viewed as a neurodegenerative disease, since prior to the actual formation of Lafora bodies there has been seen to be an impairment in the development of cerebral cortical neurons. It was further concluded that Lafora disease is a complex neurodegenerative disease and also a glycogen metabolism disorder. Ortolano S, Vieitez I et al. Loss of cortical neurons underlies the neuropathology of Lafora disease. Mol Brain 2014;7:7 PMCID: PMC3917365 

Most patients with this disease do not live past the age of twenty-five, and death within ten years of symptoms is usually inevitable. At present, there is no cure or treatment for this disease.

== Signs and symptoms ==
Patients develop the first symptoms mainly during adolescence. Major problems include seizures, drop attacks, myoclonus, ataxia, and, most significantly, a quickly-developing and severe dementia. 

== Genetics ==

Lafora disease is an autosomal recessive disorder, caused by mutations in one of two known genes: EPM2A and EPM2B. Minassian, B. A.; Lee, J. R.; Herbrick, J.-A.; Huizenga, J.; Soder, S.; Mungall, A. J.; Dunham, I.; Gardner, R.; Fong, C. G.; Carpenter, S.; Jardim, L.; Satishchandra, P.; Andermann, E.; Snead, O. C., III; Lopes-Cendes, I.; Tsui, L.-C.; Delgado-Escueta, A. V.; Rouleau, G. A.; Scherer, S. W.: Mutations in a gene encoding a novel protein tyrosine phosphatase cause progressive myoclonus epilepsy. Nature Genet. 20: 171-174, 1998. Chan, E. M.; Bulman, D. E.; Paterson, A. D.; Turnbull, J.; Andermann, E.; Andermann, F.; Rouleau, G. A.; Delgado-Escueta, A. V.; Scherer, S. W.; Minassian, B. A.: Genetic mapping of a new Lafora progressive myoclonus epilepsy locus (EPM2B) on 6p22. J. Med. Genet. 40: 671-675, 2003. EPM2A codes for the protein laforin, a dual-specificity phosphatase with a carbohydrate binding domain (CBM-20). Vertebrates have only one such protein with DSP domain as well as CBM-20 domain. EPM2B encodes the protein malin, an E3 ubiquitin ligase. At least one other gene is thought to contribute to the disease. Both discovered genes are present on chromosome 6 in humans.

== Diagnosis ==

Diagnosis is based on the clinical picture including history and EEG findings. The demonstration of Lafora bodies within the apocrine sweat gland of the skin by an axillary skin biopsy examination is a classic approach that may now be substituted by genetic testing. The inclusion bodies, which seem to contain high levels of carbohydrates, are typically labeled by a specific stain called PAS (Periodic acid-Schiff) which is resistant to diastase treatment. Under strong clinical suspicion, liver and brain biopsies may be undertaken. Currently the preferred method of certain diagnosis is DNA sequencing.

=== Lafora bodies ===
Lafora disease is distinguished by the presence of inclusions called "Lafora bodies" within the cytoplasm. Lafora bodies are composed of abnormal glycogen called polyglucosans. These starch-like polyglucosans are insoluble and hence precipitate inside cells.

Polyglucosan bodies appear with age; in Lafora disease, their numbers have increased enormously. Lafora bodies have been observed in virtually all organs of patients with the disease. In the brain, their presence appears to be restricted to neurons; they do not seem to present in astrocytes. Their morphology varies from tissue to tissue, but they generally contain a central core and have a peripheral fluffy appearance. 

== Pathophysiology ==
Lafora disease has an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance.
Current understanding of pathophysiology is largely restricted to understanding the generation of Lafora bodies, and their exclusive appearance in neurons and not in astrocytes.

Normal glycogen is soluble in the cellular environment, which has been attributed to its fractal structure. By contrast, the "abnormal glycogen" in Lafora bodies has an excessive phosphate content and branches at abnormally long intervals. It has been shown that laforin dephosphorylates glycogen and preserves its solubility. Hence, in a laforin mutation, glycogen would be hyperphosphorylated. This has been confirmed in laforin knock-out mice.

Research literature suggests that over-activity of glycogen synthase, the key enzyme in synthesizing glycogen, can lead to the formation of polyglucosans. Glycogen synthase can be inactivated by phosphorylation at various amino acid residues by many molecules, including GSK-3beta. Protein phosphatase 1 can take out these phosphate moieties and make glycogen synthase active. However, PP-1 needs other proteins, like PTG (Protein Targeted to Glycogen), to assist. Malin, another protein mutated in Lafora disease, aids in the degradation of PTG, with assistance from laforin via the ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS). Hence in a malin mutation, PTG might accumulate and cause excessive glycogen synthase activity, leading to abnormal glycogen production. However, this supposition has not been confirmed by animal models.

Neurons, though having a capacity to express glycogen synthase, lack capacity to degrade it. They seem not to have glycogen phosphorylase, which is present in astrocytes to degrade glycogen. Astrocytes contribute almost exclusively to brain glycogen storage yet do not develop Lafora bodies, which might highlight the importance of the capacity to degrade glycogen. In a laforin or malin mutation, a laforinmalin complex would cease to exist and drive neurons to make glycogen. This could be detrimental to neuronal function and possibly result in the manifestation of dementia.

Removal of PTG in mice resulted in the near-complete disappearance of polyglucosans and in resolution of neurodegeneration and myoclonic epilepsy. Turnbull J, Depaoli-Roach AA, Zhao X, Cortez MA, Pencea N, Tiberia E, Piliguian M, Roach PJ, Wang P, Ackerley CA, Minassian BA (2011) PTG Depletion Removes Lafora Bodies and Rescues the Fatal Epilepsy of Lafora Disease. PLoS Genet 7(4):e1002037 

== Prognosis ==
There is no treatment, and therapy is mainly supportive and symptomatic. Although seizure and myoclonus can be controlled for a long period by using antiepileptic drugs, patients rarely survive beyond one or two decades due to the devastating effects of dementia and ataxia. One medication, Zonisamide, has been shown to lengthen the life of those with the disease. This medication helps control and decrease the severity of the seizures affected patients often experience. Gene therapy strategies are being tried in a mouse model.

== Epidemiology ==

Epilepsy occurs in one percent of all humans. Progressive myoclonic epilepsies (PME) account for about one percent of all epilepsies. Lafora disease is one of the common PMEs. Symptoms of Lafora disease begin to manifest themselves in children from 10 to 17 years old. Males and females are equally affected.

== History ==
The disease is named after Gonzalo Rodrguez Lafora (18861971), a Spanish neuropathologist who first recognized small inclusion bodies in Lafora patients. 

== References ==

== External links ==
* Lafora disease - OxfordJournals.org
* Chelsea's Hope- Lafora Children's Research Fund
* GeneReview/NCBI/NIH/UW entry on Progressive Myoclonus Epilepsy, Lafora Type
* Support for owners of mini wire dachshunds affected by Lafora



[[Lassa fever]]

Lassa fever or Lassa hemorrhagic fever (LHF) is an acute viral hemorrhagic fever caused by the Lassa virus and first described in 1969 in the town of Lassa, in Borno State, Nigeria. Lassa fever is a member of the arenaviridae virus family. Similar to Ebola, Donaldson, Ross. The Lassa Ward. New York:St.Martin's Press, 2009 clinical cases of the disease had been known for over a decade but had not been connected with a viral pathogen. The infection is endemic in West African countries, and causes 300,000500,000 cases annually, with approximately 5,000 deaths. Outbreaks of the disease have been observed in Nigeria, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Guinea, and the Central African Republic, but it is believed that human infections also exist in Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali, and Senegal. The primary animal host of the Lassa virus is the Natal Multimammate Mouse (Mastomys natalensis), an animal indigenous to most of Sub-Saharan Africa. The virus is probably transmitted by contact with the feces or urine of animals accessing grain stores in residences. Given its high rate of incidence, Lassa fever has become a major problem in the African region. 

==Epidemiology==

===Vectors===
Mastomys natalensis, the natural reservoir of the Lassa fever virus
Lassa virus is zoonotic (transmitted from animals), in that it spreads to man from rodents, specifically multi-mammate rats (Mastomys natalensis). This is probably the most common rodent in equatorial Africa, ubiquitous in human households and eaten as a delicacy in some areas. In these rats infection is in a persistent asymptomatic state. The virus is shed in their excreta (urine and feces), which can be aerosolized. In piemel cases, Lassa fever is characterized by impaired or delayed cellular immunity leading to fulminant viremia.

Infection in humans typically occurs by exposure to animal excrement through the respiratory or gastrointestinal tracts. Inhalation of tiny particles of infective material (aerosol) is believed to be the most significant means of exposure. It is possible to acquire the infection through broken skin or mucous membranes that are directly exposed to infective material. Transmission from person to person has also been established, presenting a disease risk for healthcare workers. Frequency of transmission via sexual contact has not been established.

===Prevalence===
The dissemination of the infection can be assessed by prevalence of antibodies to the virus in populations of:
* Sierra Leone 852%
* Guinea 455%
* Nigeria approx. 21%

Lassa fever is a viral hemorrhagic fever in West Africa. Studies show up to half a million cases of Lassa fever per year in West Africa, with about 5,000 resulting in death. Results Lassa virus was detected in 25 of 60 (42%) patients in northern and central Edo. The Lassa Virus affects adults and children alike; no matter your age you can be at risk for Lassa. 

Like other hemorrhagic fevers, Lassa fever can be transmitted directly from one human to another. It can be contracted by an airborne route or with direct contact with infected human blood, urine, or semen. Transmission through breast milk has also been observed. 

==Medical aspects==

===Prevention===
Control of the Mastomys rodent population is impractical, so measures are limited to keeping rodents out of homes and food supplies, as well as maintaining effective personal hygiene. Gloves, masks, laboratory coats, and goggles are advised while in contact with an infected person. These issues in many countries are monitored by a department of public health. In less developed countries these types of organizations may not have the necessary means to effectively control outbreaks.

Researchers at the USAMRIID facility, where military biologists study infectious diseases, have a promising vaccine candidate. They have developed a replication-competent vaccine against Lassa virus based on recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus vectors expressing the Lassa virus glycoprotein. After a single intramuscular injection, test primates have survived lethal challenge, while showing no clinical symptoms. 

===Symptoms===
In 80% of cases, the disease is inapparent, but in the remaining 20%, it takes a complicated course. It is estimated that the virus is responsible for about 5,000 deaths annually. The fever accounts for up to one third of deaths in hospitals within the affected regions and 10 to 16% of total cases.

After an incubation period of six to twenty-one days, an acute illness with multiorgan involvement develops. Non-specific symptoms include fever, facial swelling, and muscle fatigue, as well as conjunctivitis and mucosal bleeding. The other symptoms arising from the affected organs are:
* Gastrointestinal tract
** Nausea
** Vomiting (bloody)
** Diarrhea (bloody)
** Stomach ache
** Constipation
** Dysphagia (difficulty swallowing)
** Hepatitis
* Cardiovascular system
** Pericarditis
** Hypertension
** Hypotension
** Tachycardia (abnormally high heart rate)
* Respiratory tract
** Cough
** Chest pain
** Dyspnoea
** Pharyngitis
** Pleuritis
* Nervous system
** Encephalitis
** Meningitis
** Unilateral or bilateral hearing deficit
** Seizures

Clinically, Lassa fever infections are difficult to distinguish from other viral hemorrhagic fevers such as Ebola and Marburg, and from more common febrile illnesses such as malaria.

The virus is excreted in urine for three to nine weeks and in semen for three months.

===Diagnosis===
There is a range of laboratory investigations that are performed to diagnose the disease and assess its course and complications. ELISA test for antigen and IgM antibodies gives 88% sensitivity and 90% specificity for the presence of the infection. Other laboratory findings in Lassa fever include lymphopenia (low white blood cell count), thrombocytopenia (low platelets), and elevated aspartate aminotransferase (AST) levels in the blood. Lassa fever can also be found in cerebrospinal fluid. In West Africa, where Lassa is most prevalent, it is difficult for doctors to diagnose due to the absence of proper equipment to perform tests. In cases with abdominal pain, diagnoses in endemic countries are often made for other illnesses, such as appendicitis and intussusception, delaying treatment with Ribavirin. 

Research has been done in the last few years by a team of specialists in order to diagnose the Lassa fever on a molecular level. 

===Prognosis===
About 15%-20% of hospitalized Lassa fever patients will die from the illness. It is estimated that the overall mortality rate is 1%, however during epidemics mortality can climb as high as 50%. The mortality rate is greater than 80% when it occurs in pregnant women during their third trimester; fetal death also occurs in nearly all those cases. Abortion decreases the risk of death to the mother.

Thanks to treatment with Ribavirin, fatality rates are continuing to decline. Work on a vaccine is continuing, with multiple approaches showing positive results in animal trials.

===Treatment===
All persons suspected of Lassa fever infection should be admitted to isolation facilities and their body fluids and excreta properly disposed of.

Early and aggressive treatment using Ribavirin was pioneered by Joe McCormick in 1979. After extensive testing, it was determined that early administration is critical to success. Additionally, Ribavirin is almost twice as effective when given intravenously as when taken by mouth. Ribavirin is a prodrug which appears to interfere with viral replication by inhibiting RNA-dependent nucleic acid synthesis, although the precise mechanism of action is disputed. The drug is relatively inexpensive, but the cost of the drug is still very high for many of those in West African states. Fluid replacement, blood transfusion and fighting hypotension are usually required. Intravenous interferon therapy has also been used.

When Lassa fever infects pregnant women late in their third trimester, it is necessary to induce delivery for the mother to have a good chance of survival. This is because the virus has an affinity for the placenta and other highly vascular tissues. The fetus has only a one in ten chance of survival no matter what course of action is taken; hence focus is always on saving the life of the mother. Following delivery, women should receive the same treatment as other Lassa fever patients.

SIGA Technologies is developing an antiviral drug that has been shown effective in treating experimentally infected guinea pigs. In a study conducted at the U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases (USAMRIID), treatment with ST-193 once a day for 14 days resulted in significant reduction in mortality (71% of the animals survived at the low dose), whereas all untreated animals and those treated with ribavirin died within 20 days of the infection.Due to threat of disease being used as a potential military weapon, a vaccine to reverse the disease is still being worked on. 

As serious as the disease is, there are numerous accounts of survival. However, there have been lasting effects of the disease. 

==See also==
*Aniru Conteh
*Lujo virus
*List of cutaneous conditions

==References==

* Garrett, Laurie. The coming plague: newly emerging diseases in a world out of balance. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1994. Print. Call Number: RA651 .G37
* Lashley, Felissa R., and Jerry D. Durham. Emerging infectious diseases: trends and issues. New York: Springer Pub., 2002. Print. Call Number: RA643 .E465
* http://crisisboom.com/2011/02/16/biodefense-lassa-fever/
* R. T. D. Emond, Barbara Bannister, G. Lloyd, T. J. Southee and E. T. W. Bowen. A Case Of Lassa Fever: Clinical And Virological Findings. British Medical Journal (Clinical Research Edition), Vol. 285, No. 6347 (Oct. 9, 1982), pp. 10011002

==External links==

* WHO factsheet
* CDC infoviral fevers
* Health Protection Agency - viral haemorrhagic fevers
* Merlin
* Map
* http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/12/12/06-0812_article.htm



[[Leon Trotsky]]

Leon Trotsky (; ; born Lev Davidovich Bronshtein;  21 August 1940) was a Russian Marxist revolutionary and theorist, Soviet politician, and the founder and first leader of the Red Army.

Trotsky was initially a supporter of the Menshevik Internationalists faction of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party. He joined the Bolsheviks immediately prior to the 1917 October Revolution, and eventually became a leader within the Party. During the early days of the Soviet Union, he served first as People's Commissar for Foreign Affairs and later as the founder and commander of the Red Army as People's Commissar of Military and Naval Affairs. He was a major figure in the Bolshevik victory in the Russian Civil War (191823). He was also among the first members of the Politburo.

After leading a failed struggle of the Left Opposition against the policies and rise of Joseph Stalin in the 1920s and the increasing role of bureaucracy in the Soviet Union, Trotsky was successively removed from power in 1927, expelled from the Communist Party, and finally deported from the Soviet Union in 1929. As the head of the Fourth International, Trotsky continued in exile in Mexico to oppose the Stalinist bureaucracy in the Soviet Union. An early advocate of Red Army intervention against European fascism, See, for example, the letter published in the Internal Bulletin of the Communist League of America, No. 11, 31 March 1933 in the late 1930s, Trotsky opposed Stalin's non-aggression pact with Adolf Hitler. He was assassinated on Stalin's orders in Mexico, by Ramn Mercader, a Spanish-born Soviet agent in August 1940. The murder weapon was a hidden cut-down ice axe, not an ice pick. Many history and reference books have confused the two. See Robert Conquest, The Great Terror: A Reassessment, Oxford University Press, 1991, ISBN 0-19-507132-8, p. 418 for a detailed account Most of his family members were also killed in separate attacks.

Trotsky's ideas were the basis of Trotskyism, a major school of Marxist thought that is opposed to the theories of Stalinism. He was one of the few Soviet political figures who were not rehabilitated by the government under Nikita Khrushchev in the 1950s. In the late 1980s, his books were released for publication in the Soviet Union.

==Before the 1917 Revolution==

===Childhood and family (18791895)===
8-year-old Lev Davidovich Bronshtein, 1888
Leon Trotsky was born Lev Davidovich Bronshtein () on 7 November 1879, in Yanovka () or Yanivka (), in the Kherson guberniya of the Russian Empire (today's Bereslavka (; ) in the Bobrynets Raion, Kirovohrad Oblast, Ukraine), a small village 15 mi from the nearest post office. He was the fifth child of eight of well-to-do Jewish farmers, David Leontyevich Bronshtein (18471922) and his wife Anna Bronshtein (18501910). The family was Jewish but reportedly not religious. The language spoken at home was a mixture of Russian and Ukrainian (known as Surzhyk). North, David (2010). In Defense of Leon Trotsky, Mehring Books, p. 145 
Trotsky's younger sister, Olga, married Lev Kamenev, a leading Bolshevik.

When Trotsky was nine, his father sent him to Odessa to be educated. He was enrolled in a German school, which became Russified during his years in Odessa, consequent to the Imperial government's policy of Russification. As Isaac Deutscher notes in his biography of Trotsky, Odessa was then a bustling cosmopolitan port city, very unlike the typical Russian city of the time. This environment contributed to the development of the young man's international outlook.

Although Trotsky stated in his autobiography My Life that he was never perfectly fluent in any language but Russian and Ukrainian, Raymond Molinier wrote that Trotsky spoke French fluently. "On Meeting with Trotsky", Revolutionary History Website 

===Revolutionary activity and exile (18961902)===
Lev Davidovich Bronshtein, 1897

Trotsky became involved in revolutionary activities in 1896 after moving to Nikolayev (now Mykolaiv). At first a narodnik (revolutionary populist), he was introduced to Marxism later that year, which he originally opposed. During periods of exile and imprisonment, he gradually became a Marxist. Instead of pursuing a mathematics degree, Trotsky helped organize the South Russian Workers' Union in Nikolayev in early 1897. Using the name 'Lvov', See chapter VII of his autobiography, My Life he wrote and printed leaflets and proclamations, distributed revolutionary pamphlets, and popularized socialist ideas among industrial workers and revolutionary students.

In January 1898, more than 200 members of the union, including Trotsky, were arrested. He spent the next two years in prison awaiting trial. Two months into his imprisonment, on 1  3 March 1898, the first Congress of the newly formed Russian Social Democratic Labor Party (RSDLP) was held. Leonard Shapiro, The Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Vintage Books: New York, 1971) p. 645. From then on Trotsky identified as a member of the party. While in prison, he married Aleksandra Sokolovskaya (or Sokolovskaia) (18721938), a fellow Marxist. While serving his sentence, he studied philosophy. In 1900 he was sentenced to four years in exile in Ust-Kut and Verkholensk in the Irkutsk region of Siberia.

His wife was also sent there to join him. Their two daughters, Zinaida (1901  5 January 1933) and Nina (1902  9 June 1928), were born in Siberia. They were raised by Trotsky's parents after Leon and Alexandra soon separated and divorced. Both daughters married and Zinaida had children, but the daughters died before their parents. Nina Nevelson died from tuberculosis (TB), cared for in her last months by her older sister. Zinaida Volkova died after following her father into exile in Berlin with her son by her second marriage, leaving her daughter in Russia. Suffering also from tuberculosis, then a fatal disease, and depression, Volkova committed suicide.

In Siberia, Trotsky became aware of the differences within the party, which had been decimated by arrests in 1898 and 1899. Some social democrats known as "economists" argued that the party should focus on helping industrial workers improve their lot in life and were not so worried about changing the government Leonard Shapiro, The Communist Party of the Soviet Union, pp. 3132. or thought that these societal reforms would grow out of the worker's struggle for higher pay and better working conditions. Others argued that overthrowing the monarchy was more important and that a well-organized and disciplined revolutionary party was essential. The latter was led by the London-based newspaper Iskra, or in English, The Spark, which was founded in 1900. Trotsky quickly sided with the Iskra position and began writing for Iskra. Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed: Trotsky, 18791921 (Vintage Books: New York, 1965) p. 67. 

===First emigration and second marriage (19021903)===

In early, 1898, Trotsky was arrested for subversive activities while working to unionize workers in the harbor town of Nikolayev on the Ukrainian coast with the Black Sea. Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed: Trotsky, 18791921, p. 36. Imprisoned in Nikolayev, then Kherson, and then Odessa, Trotsky was transferred to a Moscow prison. In the prison in Moscow, Trotsky came into contact with other revolutionaries. Here he first heard about Lenin and read Lenin's book, The Development of Capitalism in Russia. Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed, 18791921, p. 40. 

While in the prison in Moscow in the summer of 1900, Trotsky met and married Alexandra Sokolovskaya. Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed: Trotsky, 18791921,p. 42. The wedding ceremony was performed by a Jewish chaplain. Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed: Trotsky, 18791921, p. 42. Because of the marriage, Trotsky and his new wife were allowed to be exiled to the same location in Siberia. Accordingly, the couple was exiled to Ust-Kut and the Verkholensk in the Baikal Lake region of Siberia. Here Trotsky remained until the summer of 1902, when he escaped from Siberia hidden in a load of hay on a wagon. Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed: Trotsky, 18791921, p. 55. He escaped from Siberia at the urging of his wife. There were two children as result of this marriage who later escaped from Siberia with their mother.

Until this point in his life Trotsky had used his real nameLev or Leon Bronstein. Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed: Trotsky 18791921, p. 7. It was at this time that he changed his name to "Trotsky"the name he would use for the rest of his life. It is said he adopted the name of a jailer of the Odessa prison in which he had earlier been held, cf, for instance, "Leon Trotsky", The Columbia Encyclopedia which became his primary revolutionary pseudonym. Once abroad, he moved to London to join Georgi Plekhanov, Vladimir Lenin, Julius Martov and other editors of Iskra. Under the pen name Pero ("feather" or "pen" in Russian), Trotsky soon became one of the paper's leading authors.

Unknown to Trotsky, the six editors of Iskra were evenly split between the "old guard" led by Plekhanov and the "new guard" led by Lenin and Martov. Not only were Plekhanov's supporters older (in their 40s and 50s), but they had spent the previous 20 years together in exile in Europe. Members of the new guard were in their early 30s and had only recently come from Russia. Lenin, who was trying to establish a permanent majority against Plekhanov within Iskra, expected Trotsky, then 23, to side with the new guard and wrote in March 1903: Quoted in chapter XII of 'My Life' 

Because of Plekhanov's opposition, Trotsky did not become a full member of the board. But, from then on he participated in its meetings in an advisory capacity, which earned him Plekhanov's enmity.

In late 1902, Trotsky met Natalia Ivanovna Sedova, who soon became his companion and, from 1903 until his death, his wife. They had two children together, Lev Sedov (1906  16 February 1938) and Sergei Sedov (21 March 1908  29 October 1937), both of whom would predecease their parents. Regarding his sons' surnames, Trotsky later explained that See Trotsky's 'Thermidor and anti-Semitism' (1937) after the 1917 revolution:

Trotsky never used the name "Sedov" either privately or publicly. Natalia Sedova sometimes signed her name "Sedova-Trotskaya". Trotsky and his first wife Aleksandra maintained a friendly relationship after their divorce. She disappeared in 1935 during the Great Purges and was murdered by Stalinist forces three years later.

===Split with Lenin (19031904)===
In the meantime, after a period of secret police repression and internal confusion that followed the first party Congress in 1898, Iskra succeeded in convening the party's 2nd congress in London in August 1903. Trotsky and other Iskra editors attended. The first congress went as planned, with Iskra supporters handily defeating the few "economist" delegates. Then the congress discussed the position of the Jewish Bund, which had co-founded the RSDLP in 1898 but wanted to remain autonomous within the party. 

Shortly thereafter, the pro-Iskra delegates split into two factions. Service 2005, pp. 5354. Lenin and his supporters, the Bolsheviks, argued for a smaller but highly organized party while Martov and his supporters, the Mensheviks, argued for a larger and less disciplined party. In a surprise development, Trotsky and most of the Iskra editors supported Martov and the Mensheviks, while Plekhanov supported Lenin and the Bolsheviks. During 1903 and 1904, many members changed sides in the factions. Plekhanov soon parted ways with the Bolsheviks. Trotsky left the Mensheviks in September 1904 over their insistence on an alliance with Russian liberals and their opposition to a reconciliation with Lenin and the Bolsheviks.

From 1904 until 1917, he described himself as a "non-factional social democrat". Trotsky spent much of his time between 1904 and 1917 trying to reconcile different groups within the party, which resulted in many clashes with Lenin and other prominent party members. Trotsky later maintained that he had been wrong in opposing Lenin on the issue of the party. During these years Trotsky began developing his theory of permanent revolution, which led to a close working relationship with Alexander Parvus in 19041907. 

Lenin later denounced Trotsky as a "Judas", Lenin: Judas Trotsky's Blush of Shame. Marxists.org. Retrieved on 26 July 2013. a "scoundrel" CPGB: Stalin: Slander and Truth. Marxists.org. Retrieved on 26 July 2013. and a "swine". Lenin: 123. TO ALEXANDRA KOLLONTAI. Marxists.org (9 June 2006). Retrieved on 26 July 2013. 

===1905 revolution and trial (19051906)===
The unrest and agitation against the Russian government came to a head in Saint Petersburg on 3 January 1905 (Julian Calendar), when a strike broke at the Putilov Works in Saint Petersburg. Leon Trotsky, 1905 (Vintage Books: New York, 1971) p. 73. This single strike grew into a general and by 7 January 1905 there were 140,000 strikers in Saint Petersburg. Leon Trotsky, 1905, p. 73. On Sunday, 9 January 1905, Father Georgi Gapon led a peaceful procession of citizens through the streets to the Winter Palace to beseech the tsar for food and relief from the oppressive government. The peaceful demonstration was fired upon by the Palace Guard resulting in the death of 1,000 demonstrators. Thus, Sunday 9 January 1905 became known as Bloody Sunday.

Following the events of Bloody Sunday, Trotsky secretly returned to Russia in February 1905, by way of Kiev. Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed: Trotsky 18791921 p. 117. At first he wrote leaflets for an underground printing press in Kiev, but soon moved to the capital, Saint Petersburg, where he worked with both Bolsheviks, such as Central Committee member Leonid Krasin, and the local Menshevik committee, which he pushed in a more radical direction. The latter, however, were betrayed by a secret police agent in May, and Trotsky had to flee to rural Finland. There he worked on fleshing out his theory of permanent revolution. Leon Trotsky, "Results and Prospects" contained in Permanent Revolution (Pathfinder Press: New York, 1969) pp. 27122. 

On 19 September 1905, the typesetters at the Sytin Print Works in Moscow went out onstrike for shorter hours and higher pay. Leon Trotsky, 1905, p. 85. By the evening of 24 September, the workers at 50 other printing shops in Moscow were also on strike. Leon Trosky, 1905, p. 86. On 2 October 1905, the typesetters in printing shops in Saint Petersburg, decided to strike in support of the Moscow strikers. Leon Trotsky, 1905, p. 86. On 7 October 1905, the railway workers of the MoscowKazan Railway went out on strike. Leon Trotsky, 1905, p. 88. The confusion engendered by these strikes made it possible for Trotsky to return from Finland to Saint Petersburg on 15 October 1905. Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed: Trotsky, 18791921, p. 126. On the same day that he returned to Saint Petersburg, Trotsky appeared before the Saint Petersburg Soviet Council of Workers Deputies which was meeting at the Technological Institute in Saint Petersburg. Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed: Trotsky, 18791921, 126. Not only were the elected Deputies present at this meeting, but also attending were some 200,000 peopleabout 50% of all workers in Saint Petersburg. After returning to the capital, Trotsky and Parvus took over the newspaper Russian Gazette and increased its circulation to 500,000. Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed: Trotsky, 18791921, pp. 138139. Trotsky also co-founded, together with Parvus and Julius Martov and other Mensheviks, Nachalo ("The Beginning"), which also proved to be a very successful newspaper in the revolutionary atomosphere of Saint Petersburg in 1905. Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed: Trotsky, 18791921, p. 138. 

Just before Trotsky's return, the Mensheviks had independently come up with the same idea that Trotsky had: an elected non-party revolutionary organization representing the capital's workers, the first Soviet ("Council") of Workers. By the time of Trotsky's arrival, the Saint Petersburg Soviet was already functioning headed by Khrustalyev-Nosar (Georgy Nosar, alias Pyotr Khrustalyov). Khrustalyev-Nosar had been a compromise figure when elected as the head of the Saint Petersburg Soviet. Khrustalev-Nosar was a lawyer that stood above the political factions contained in the Soviet. Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed: Trotsky, 18791921 p. 131. However, since his election, he proved to be very popular with the workers in spite of the Bolsheviks' original opposition to him. Khrustalev-Nosar became famous in his position as spokesman for the Saint Petersburg Soviet. Leon Trotsky, 1905, p. 218. Indeed to the outside world, Khrustalev-Nosar was the embodiment of the Saint Petersburg Soviet. Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed: Trotsky, 18791921, p. 131. Trotsky joined the Soviet under the name "Yanovsky" (after the village he was born in, Yanovka) and was elected vice-Chairman. He did much of the actual work at the Soviet and, after Khrustalev-Nosar's arrest on 26 November 1905, was elected its chairman. On 2 December, the Soviet issued a proclamation which included the following statement about the Tsarist government and its foreign debts: Quoted in Chapter XIV of My Life 

The following day, the Soviet was surrounded by troops loyal to the government and the deputies were arrested. Leon Trotsky, 1905, pp.231233. Trotsky and other Soviet leaders were tried in 1906 on charges of supporting an armed rebellion. At the trial on 4 October 1906, Trotsky delivered one of the best speeches of his life. Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed: Trotsky, 18791921, pp. 164168. It was this speech that solidified his reputation as an effective public speaker. He was convicted and sentenced to internal exile to Siberia.

===Second emigration (19071914)===
While en route to exile in Obdorsk, Siberia, in January 1907, Trotsky escaped at Berezov See Chapter XXIII of 1905 and once again made his way to London, where he attended the 5th Congress of the RSDLP. In October, he moved to Vienna where he often took part in the activities of the Austrian Social Democratic Party and, occasionally, of the German Social Democratic Party, for seven years.

In Vienna, Trotsky became close to Adolph Joffe, his friend for the next 20 years, who introduced him to psychoanalysis. See Chapter XVII of My Life In October 1908 he started Pravda ("Truth"), a bi-weekly, Russian-language social democratic paper for Russian workers, which he co-edited with Joffe, Matvey Skobelev and Victor Kopp. It was smuggled into Russia. Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed: Trotsky, 18791921, p. 191. The paper appeared very irregularly, only five issues appeared in the first year of publication. However, the paper avoided factional politics and proved popular with Russian industrial workers. Both the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks split multiple times after the failure of the 19051907 revolution. Money was very scarce for publication of Pravda. Trotsky approached the Russian Central Committee to seek financial backing for the newspaper throughout 1909. Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed: Trotsky 18791921, p. 192. The Central Committee was controlled by a majority of Bolsheviks at this time in 1910. Thus, Lenin agreed to the financing of Pravda, but required a Bolshevik be appointed as co-editor of the paper. Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed: Trotsky, 18791921, p. 192. When various Bolshevik and Menshevik factions tried to re-unite at the January 1910 RSDLP Central Committee meeting in Paris over Lenin's objections, V. I. Lenin, "Towards Unity" contained in Lenin Collected Works: Volume 16, (Progress Publishers: Moscow, 1974) pp. 147155. Trotsky's Pravda was made a party-financed 'central organ'. Lev Kamenev, Trotsky's brother-in-law, was added to the editorial board from the Bolsheviks, but the unification attempts failed in August 1910 when Kamenev resigned from the board amid mutual recriminations. Trotsky continued publishing Pravda for another two years until it finally folded in April 1912.

The Bolsheviks started a new workers-oriented newspaper in Saint Petersburg on 22 April 1912, and also called it Pravda. Trotsky was so upset by what he saw as a usurpation of his newspaper's name that in April 1913 he wrote a letter to Nikolay Chkheidze, a Menshevik leader, bitterly denouncing Lenin and the Bolsheviks. Though he quickly got over the disagreement, the letter was intercepted by the police, and a copy was put into their archives. Shortly after Lenin's death in 1924, the letter was pulled out of the archives and made public by Trotsky's opponents within the Communist Party to portray him as Lenin's enemy.

This was a period of heightened tension within the RSDLP, leading to numerous frictions between Trotsky, the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks. The most serious disagreement that Trotsky and the Mensheviks had with Lenin at the time was over the issue of "expropriations", See Chapter XVI of My Life i.e., armed robberies of banks and other companies by Bolshevik groups to procure money for the Party. These actions had been banned by the 5th Congress, but were continued by the Bolsheviks.

In January 1912, the majority of the Bolshevik faction, led by Lenin and a few Mensheviks, held a conference in Prague and expelled their opponents from the party. In response, Trotsky organized a "unification" conference of social democratic factions in Vienna in August 1912 (a.k.a. "The August Bloc") and tried to re-unite the party. The attempt was generally unsuccessful.

In Vienna, Trotsky continuously published articles in radical Russian and Ukrainian newspapers, such as Kievskaya Mysl, under a variety of pseudonyms, often using "Antid Oto". In September 1912, Kievskaya Mysl sent him to the Balkans as its war correspondent, where he covered the two Balkan Wars for the next year and became a close friend of Christian Rakovsky. The latter was later a leading Soviet politician and Trotsky's ally in the Soviet Communist Party. On 3 August 1914, at the outbreak of World War I, in which Austria-Hungary fought against the Russian empire, Trotsky was forced to flee Vienna for neutral Switzerland to avoid arrest as a Russian migr. 

===World War I (19141917)===

The outbreak of World War I caused a sudden realignment within the RSDLP and other European social democratic parties over the issues of war, revolution, pacifism and internationalism. Within the RSDLP, Lenin, Trotsky and Martov advocated various internationalist anti-war positions, while Plekhanov and other social democrats (both Bolsheviks and Mensheviks) supported the Russian government to some extent. In Switzerland, Trotsky briefly worked within the Swiss Socialist Party, prompting it to adopt an internationalist resolution. He wrote a book opposing the war, The War and the International, Marxists.org, The War and the International and the pro-war position taken by the European social democratic parties, primarily the German party.
Leon Trotsky with his daughter Nina in 1915
As a war correspondent for the Kievskaya Mysl, Trotsky moved to France on 19 November 1914. In January 1915 in Paris, he began editing (at first with Martov, who soon resigned as the paper moved to the left) Nashe Slovo ("Our Word"), an internationalist socialist newspaper. He adopted the slogan of "peace without indemnities or annexations, peace without conquerors or conquered." Lenin advocated Russia's defeat in the war and demanded a complete break with the Second International.

Trotsky attended the Zimmerwald Conference of anti-war socialists in September 1915 and advocated a middle course between those who, like Martov, would stay within the Second International at any cost and those who, like Lenin, would break with the Second International and form a Third International. The conference adopted the middle line proposed by Trotsky. At first opposed, in the end Lenin voted for Trotsky's resolution to avoid a split among anti-war socialists. See Christian Rakovsky's biography by Gus Fagan for details 

On 31 March Trotsky was deported from France to Spain for his anti-war activities. Spanish authorities did not want him and deported him to the United States on 25 December 1916. He arrived in New York City on 13 January 1917. He stayed for nearly three months at 1522 Vyse Avenue in The Bronx. In New York he wrote articles for the local Russian language socialist newspaper, Novy Mir, and the Yiddish-language daily, Der Forverts (The Forward), in translation. He also made speeches to Russian migrs. He was officially earning some $15 a week.

Trotsky was living in New York City when the February Revolution of 1917 overthrew Tsar Nicholas II. He left New York on 27 March, but his ship, the SS Kristianiafjord, was intercepted by British naval officials in Canada at Halifax, Nova Scotia. He was detained for a month at Amherst Internment Camp in Nova Scotia. After initial hesitation, the Russian foreign minister Pavel Milyukov demanded the release of Trotsky as a Russian citizen, and the British government freed him on 29 April.

He reached Russia on 4 May. After his return, Trotsky substantively agreed with the Bolshevik position, but did not join them right away. Russian social democrats were split into at least six groups, and the Bolsheviks were waiting for the next party Congress to determine which factions to merge with. Trotsky temporarily joined the Mezhraiontsy, a regional social democratic organization in Saint Petersburg, and became one of its leaders. At the First Congress of Soviets in June, he was elected a member of the first All-Russian Central Executive Committee ("VTsIK") from the Mezhraiontsy faction. 

After an unsuccessful pro-Bolshevik uprising in Petrograd, Trotsky was arrested on 7 August 1917. He was released 40 days later in the aftermath of the failed counter-revolutionary uprising by Lavr Kornilov. After the Bolsheviks gained a majority in the Petrograd Soviet, Trotsky was elected chairman on 8 October. He sided with Lenin against Grigory Zinoviev and Lev Kamenev when the Bolshevik Central Committee discussed staging an armed uprising, and he led the efforts to overthrow the Provisional Government headed by Aleksandr Kerensky.

Leon Trotsky in 1918.
The following summary of Trotsky's role in 1917 was written by Stalin in Pravda, 10 November 1918. (Although this passage was quoted in Stalin's book The October Revolution (1934), it was expunged from Stalin's Works (1949).

After the success of the uprising on 78 November, Trotsky led the efforts to repel a counter-attack by Cossacks under General Pyotr Krasnov and other troops still loyal to the overthrown Provisional Government at Gatchina. Allied with Lenin, he defeated attempts by other Bolshevik Central Committee members (Zinoviev, Kamenev, Alexey Rykov, etc.) to share power with other socialist parties. By the end of 1917, Trotsky was unquestionably the second man in the Bolshevik Party after Lenin. He overshadowed the ambitious Zinoviev, who had been Lenin's top lieutenant over the previous decade, but whose star appeared to be fading. This reversal of position contributed to continuing competition and enmity between the two men, which lasted until 1926 and did much to destroy them both. 

==After the Russian Revolution==

===Commissar for Foreign Affairs and Brest-Litovsk (19171918)===
After the Bolsheviks came to power, Trotsky became the People's Commissar for Foreign Affairs and published the secret treaties previously signed by the Triple Entente that detailed plans for post-war reallocation of colonies and redrawing state borders.

White Army propaganda poster depicting Trotsky as Satan wearing a Pentagram, and xenophobically portraying the Bolsheviks' Asian supporters as mass murderers. The caption reads, "Peace and Liberty in Sovdepiya".
Bolshevik propaganda portrait from 1918 depicting Trotsky as a modern-day Saint George of communism slaying the dragon in a top hat with the word "counterrevolution" written on its body. This also alludes to Russian religion, as the depiction of Saint George slaying the dragon was a very popular theme in Russian iconography.

Trotsky led the Soviet delegation during the peace negotiations in Brest-Litovsk from 22 December 1917 to 10 February 1918. At that time the Soviet government was split on the issue. Left Communists, led by Nikolai Bukharin, continued to believe that there could be no peace between a Soviet republic and a capitalist country and that only a revolutionary war leading to a pan-European Soviet republic would bring a durable peace. They cited the successes of the newly formed (15 January 1918) voluntary Red Army against Polish forces of Gen. Jzef Dowbor-Municki in Belarus, White forces in the Don region, and newly independent Ukrainian forces as proof that the Red Army could repel German forces, especially if propaganda and asymmetrical warfare were used. They did not mind holding talks with the Germans as a means of exposing German imperial ambitions (territorial gains, reparations, etc.) in the hope of accelerating the hopedfor Soviet revolution in the West, but they were dead set against signing any peace treaty. In case of a German ultimatum, they advocated proclaiming a revolutionary war against Germany in order to inspire Russian and European workers to fight for socialism. This opinion was shared by Left Socialist Revolutionaries, who were then the Bolsheviks' junior partners in a coalition government.

Lenin, who had earlier hoped for a speedy Soviet revolution in Germany and other parts of Europe, quickly decided that the imperial government of Germany was still firmly in control and that, without a strong Russian military, an armed conflict with Germany would lead to a collapse of the Soviet government in Russia. He agreed with the Left Communists that ultimately a pan-European Soviet revolution would solve all problems, but until then the Bolsheviks had to stay in power. Lenin did not mind prolonging the negotiating process for maximum propaganda effect, but, from January 1918 on, advocated signing a separate peace treaty if faced with a German ultimatum. Trotsky's position was between these two Bolshevik factions. Like Lenin, he admitted that the old Russian military, inherited from the monarchy and the Provisional Government and in advanced stages of decomposition, was unable to fight: See the "Brest-Litovsk" chapter in Trotsky's 1925 book Lenin 

But he agreed with the Left Communists that a separate peace treaty with an imperialist power would be a terrible morale and material blow to the Soviet government, negate all its military and political successes of 1917 and 1918, resurrect the notion that the Bolsheviks secretly allied with the German government, and cause an upsurge of internal resistance. He argued that any German ultimatum should be refused, and that this might well lead to an uprising in Germany, or at least inspire German soldiers to disobey their officers since any German offensive would be a naked grab for territories. He wrote in 1925: See Lenin 

Throughout January and February 1918, Lenin's position was supported by 7 members of the Bolshevik Central Committee and Bukharin's by 4. Trotsky had 4 votes (his own, Felix Dzerzhinsky's, Nikolai Krestinsky's and Adolph Joffe's) and, since he held the balance of power, he was able to pursue his policy in Brest-Litovsk. When he could no longer delay the negotiations, he withdrew from the talks on 10 February 1918, refusing to sign on Germany's harsh terms. After a brief hiatus, the Central Powers notified the Soviet government that they would no longer observe the truce after 17 February. At this point Lenin again argued that the Soviet government had done all it could to explain its position to Western workers and that it was time to accept the terms. Trotsky refused to support Lenin since he was waiting to see whether German workers would rebel and whether German soldiers would refuse to follow orders. 

Germany resumed military operations on 18 February. Within a day, it became clear that the German army was capable of conducting offensive operations and that Red Army detachments, which were relatively small, poorly organized and poorly led, were no match for it. In the evening of 18 February 1918, Trotsky and his supporters in the committee abstained and Lenin's proposal was accepted 74. The Soviet government sent a telegram to the German side accepting the final Brest-Litovsk peace terms. 

Germany did not respond for three days, and continued its offensive encountering little resistance. The response arrived on 21 February, but the proposed terms were so harsh that even Lenin briefly thought that the Soviet government had no choice but to fight. But in the end, the committee again voted 74 on 23 February 1918; the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk was signed on 3 March and ratified on 15 March 1918. Since Trotsky was so closely associated with the policy previously followed by the Soviet delegation at Brest-Litovsk, he resigned from his position as Commissar for Foreign Affairs in order to remove a potential obstacle to the new policy.

===Head of the Red Army (Spring 1918)===
Trotsky with Vladimir Lenin and Klim Voroshilov among soldiers in Petrograd in 1921.
The failure of the recently formed Red Army to resist the German offensive in February 1918 revealed its weaknesses: insufficient numbers, lack of knowledgeable officers, and near absence of coordination and subordination. Celebrated and feared Baltic Fleet sailors, one of the bastions of the new regime led by Pavel Dybenko, fled from the German army at Narva. The notion that the Soviet state could have an effective voluntary or militia type military was seriously undermined. 

Trotsky was one of the first Bolshevik leaders to recognize the problem and he pushed for the formation of a military council of former Russian generals that would function as an advisory body. Lenin and the Bolshevik Central Committee agreed on 4 March to create the Supreme Military Council, headed by former chief of the imperial General Staff Mikhail Bonch-Bruevich.

The entire Bolshevik leadership of the Red Army, including People's Commissar (defense minister) Nikolai Podvoisky and commander-in-chief Nikolai Krylenko, protested vigorously and eventually resigned. They believed that the Red Army should consist only of dedicated revolutionaries, rely on propaganda and force, and have elected officers. They viewed former imperial officers and generals as potential traitors who should be kept out of the new military, much less put in charge of it. Their views continued to be popular with many Bolsheviks throughout most of the Russian Civil War and their supporters, including Podvoisky, who became one of Trotsky's deputies, were a constant thorn in Trotsky's side. The discontent with Trotsky's policies of strict discipline, conscription and reliance on carefully supervised non-Communist military experts eventually led to the Military Opposition (Russian:  )), which was active within the Communist Party in late 19181919. 

On 13 March 1918, Trotsky's resignation as Commissar for Foreign Affairs was officially accepted and he was appointed People's Commissar of Army and Navy Affairs  in place of Podvoisky  and chairman of the Supreme Military Council. The post of commander-in-chief was abolished, and Trotsky gained full control of the Red Army, responsible only to the Communist Party leadership, whose Left Socialist Revolutionary allies had left the government over Brest-Litovsk. With the help of his deputy Ephraim Sklyansky, Trotsky spent the rest of the Civil War transforming the Red Army from a ragtag network of small and fiercely independent detachments into a large and disciplined military machine, through forced conscription, party-controlled blocking squads, compulsory obedience and officers chosen by the leadership instead of the rank and file. He defended these positions throughout his life.

===Civil War (19181920)===

====1918====
The military situation soon tested Trotsky's managerial and organization-building skills. In MayJune 1918, the Czechoslovak Legions en route from European Russia to Vladivostok rose against the Soviet government. This left the Bolsheviks with the loss of most of the country's territory, an increasingly well-organized resistance by Russian anti-Communist forces (usually referred to as the White Army after their best-known component) and widespread defection by the military experts whom Trotsky relied on.

Trotsky and the government responded with a full-fledged mobilization, which increased the size of the Red Army from fewer than 300,000 in May 1918 to one million in October, and an introduction of political commissars into the army. The latter had the task of ensuring the loyalty of military experts (mostly former officers in the imperial army) and co-signing their orders. Trotsky regarded the organization of the Red Army as built on the ideas of the October Revolution. As he later wrote in his autobiography: 
See Chapter XXXIV of My Life 

Trotsky c. 1920

In response to Fanya Kaplan's failed assassination of Lenin on 30 August 1918, and to the successful assassination of the Petrograd Cheka chief Moisei Uritsky on 17 August 1918, the Bolsheviks instructed Felix Dzerzhinsky to commence a Red Terror, announced in 1 September 1918 issue of the Krasnaya Gazeta (Red Gazette). Regarding the Red Terror Trotsky wrote:

In dealing with deserters, Trotsky often appealed to them politically, arousing them with the ideas of the Revolution.

Given the lack of manpower and the 16 opposing foreign armies, Trotsky also insisted on the use of former Tsarist officers as military specialists within the Red Army, in combination with Bolshevik political commissars to ensure the revolutionary nature of the Red Army. Lenin commented on this:

In September 1918 the Boshevik government, facing continuous military difficulties, declared what amounted to martial law and reorganized the Red Army. The Supreme Military Council was abolished and the position of commander-in-chief was restored, filled by the commander of the Latvian Riflemen, Ioakim Vatsetis (a.k.a. Jukums Vcietis), who had formerly led the Eastern Front against the Czechoslovak Legions. Vatsetis took charge of day-to-day operations of the army while Trotsky became chairman of the newly formed Revolutionary Military Council of the Republic and retained overall control of the military. Trotsky and Vatsetis had clashed earlier in 1918, while Vatsetis and Trotsky's adviser Mikhail Bonch-Bruevich were also on unfriendly terms. Nevertheless, Trotsky eventually established a working relationship with the often prickly Vatsetis.

The reorganization caused yet another conflict between Trotsky and Stalin in late September. Trotsky appointed former imperial general Pavel Pavlovich Sytin to command the Southern Front, but in early October 1918 Stalin refused to accept him and so he was recalled from the front. Lenin and Yakov Sverdlov tried to make Trotsky and Stalin reconcile, but their meeting proved unsuccessful.

====1919====
Trotsky with troops at the Polish front, 1919.
Throughout late 1918 and early 1919, there were a number of attacks on Trotsky's leadership of the Red Army, including veiled accusations in newspaper articles inspired by Stalin and a direct attack by the Military Opposition at the VIIIth Party Congress in March 1919. On the surface, he weathered them successfully and was elected one of only five full members of the first Politburo after the Congress. But he later wrote: 

In mid-1919 the dissatisfied had an opportunity to mount a serious challenge to Trotsky's leadership: the Red Army grew from 800,000 to 3,000,000, and fought simultaneously on sixteen fronts. The Red Army had defeated the White Army's spring offensive in the east and was about to cross the Ural Mountains and enter Siberia in pursuit of Admiral Alexander Kolchak's forces. But in the south, General Anton Denikin's White Russian forces advanced, and the situation deteriorated rapidly. On 6 June commander-in-chief Vatsetis ordered the Eastern Front to stop the offensive so that he could use its forces in the south. But the leadership of the Eastern Front, including its commander Sergey Kamenev (a former colonel of the Imperial army), and Eastern Front Revolutionary Military Council members Ivar Smilga, Mikhail Lashevich and Sergey Gusev vigorously protested and wanted to keep the emphasis on the Eastern Front. They insisted that it was vital to capture Siberia before the onset of winter and that once Kolchak's forces were broken, many more divisions would be freed up for the Southern Front. Trotsky, who had earlier had conflicts with the leadership of the Eastern Front, including a temporary removal of Kamenev in May 1919, supported Vatsetis.

Victims of Red Terror in Crimea
At the 34 July Central Committee meeting, after a heated exchange the majority supported Kamenev and Smilga against Vatsetis and Trotsky. Trotsky's plan was rejected and he was much criticized for various alleged shortcomings in his leadership style, much of it of a personal nature. Stalin used this opportunity to pressure Lenin See Chapter XXXVII of My Life to dismiss Trotsky from his post. But when Trotsky offered his resignation on 5 July, the Politburo and the Orgburo of the Central Committee unanimously rejected it.

However, some significant changes to the leadership of the Red Army were made. Trotsky was temporarily sent to the Southern Front, while the work in Moscow was informally coordinated by Smilga. Most members of the Revolutionary Military Council who were not involved in its day-to-day operations were relieved of their duties on 8 July, and new members, including Smilga, were added. The same day, while Trotsky was in the south, Vatsetis was suddenly arrested by the Cheka on suspicion of involvement in an anti-Soviet plot, and replaced by Sergey Kamenev. After a few weeks in the south, Trotsky returned to Moscow and resumed control of the Red Army. A year later, Smilga and Tukhachevsky were defeated during the Battle of Warsaw, but Trotsky refused this opportunity to pay Smilga back, which earned him Smilga's friendship and later support during the intra-Party battles of the 1920s. See Isai Abramovich's memoirs re: the Smilga episode. Abramovich (19001985), a friend of Smilga's, was one of the few Trotskyists who survived the Great Purges and returned from Stalin's camps in the late 1950s. 

By October 1919, the government was in the worst crisis of the Civil War: Denikin's troops approached Tula and Moscow from the south, and General Nikolay Yudenich's troops approached Petrograd from the west. Lenin decided that since it was more important to defend Moscow, Petrograd would have to be abandoned. Trotsky argued See Chapter XXXV of My Life that Petrograd needed to be defended, at least in part to prevent Estonia and Finland from intervening. In a rare reversal, Trotsky was supported by Stalin and Zinoviev and prevailed against Lenin in the Central Committee. He immediately went to Petrograd, whose leadership headed by Zinoviev he found demoralized, and organized its defense, sometimes personally stopping fleeing soldiers. By 22 October the Red Army was on the offensive and in early November, Yudenich's troops were driven back to Estonia, where they were disarmed and interned. Trotsky was awarded the Order of the Red Banner for his actions in Petrograd.

====1920====
A Polish poster depicts Trotsky on a pile of skulls and holding a bloody knife, during the Polish-Russian war of 1920
With the defeat of Denikin and Yudenich in late 1919, the Soviet government's emphasis shifted to the economy. Trotsky spent the winter of 19191920 in the Urals region trying to restart its economy. Based on his experiences, he proposed abandoning the policies of War Communism, See Chapter XXXVIII of My Life which included confiscating grain from peasants, and partially restoring the grain market. Still committed to War Communism, Lenin rejected his proposal. He put Trotsky in charge of the country's railroads (while retaining overall control of the Red Army), which he directed should be militarized in the spirit of War Communism. It was not until early 1921, due to economic collapse and social uprisings, that Lenin and the rest of the Bolshevik leadership abandoned War Communism in favor of the New Economic Policy.

In early 1920, SovietPolish tensions eventually led to the PolishSoviet War. In the run-up and during the war, Trotsky argued that the Red Army was exhausted and the Soviet government should sign a peace treaty with Poland as soon as possible. He did not believe that the Red Army would find much support in Poland proper. Lenin later wrote that he and other Bolshevik leaders believed the Red Army's successes in the Russian Civil War and against the Poles meant "The defensive period of the war with worldwide imperialism was over, and we could, and had the obligation to, exploit the military situation to launch an offensive war." See Political Report of the Central Committee of the RKP(b) to the Ninth All-Russian Conference of the Communist Party delivered by Lenin on 20 September 1920, Document 59 in The Unknown Lenin, ed. Richard Pipes, Yale University Press, 1996, ISBN 0-300-06919-7 

The Red Army offensive was turned back during the Battle of Warsaw in August 1920, in part because of Stalin's failure to obey Trotsky's orders in the run-up to the decisive engagements. Back in Moscow, Trotsky again argued for a peace treaty and this time prevailed.

===Trade union debate (19201921)===

In late 1920, after the Bolsheviks won the Civil War and before the Eighth and Ninth Congress of Soviets, the Communist Party had a heated and increasingly acrimonious debate over the role of trade unions in the Soviet state. The discussion split the party into many "platforms" (factions), including Lenin's, Trotsky's and Bukharin's; Bukharin eventually merged his with Trotsky's. Smaller, more radical factions like the Workers' Opposition (headed by Alexander Shlyapnikov) and the Group of Democratic Centralism were particularly active.

Trotsky's position formed while he led a special commission on the Soviet transportation system, Tsektran. He was appointed there to rebuild the rail system ruined by the Civil War. Being the Commissar of War and a revolutionary military leader, he saw a need to create a militarized "production atmosphere" by incorporating trade unions directly into the State apparatus. His unyielding stance was that in a worker's state the workers should have nothing to fear from the state, and the State should fully control the unions. In the Ninth Party Congress he argued for "such a regime under which each worker feels himself to be a soldier of labor who cannot freely dispose of himself; if he is ordered transferred, he must execute that order; if he does not do so, he will be a deserter who should be punished. Who will execute this? The trade union. It will create a new regime. That is the militarization of the working class." 
Serrati and Trotsky.
Lenin sharply criticised Trotsky and accused him of "bureaucratically nagging the trade unions" and of staging "factional attacks". His view did not focus on State control as much as the concern that a new relationship was needed between the State and the rank-and-file workers. He said, "Introduction of genuine labor discipline is conceived only if the whole mass of participants in productions take a conscious part in the fulfillment of these tasks. This cannot be achieved by bureaucratic methods and orders from above." This was a debate that Lenin thought the party could not afford. His frustration with Trotsky was used by Stalin and Zinoviev with their support for Lenin's position, to improve their standing within the Bolshevik leadership at Trotsky's expense.

Disagreements threatened to get out of hand and many Bolsheviks, including Lenin, feared that the party would splinter. The Central Committee was split almost evenly between Lenin's and Trotsky's supporters, with all three Secretaries of the Central Committee (Krestinsky, Yevgeny Preobrazhensky and Leonid Serebryakov) supporting Trotsky.

At a meeting of his faction at the Tenth Party Congress in March 1921, Lenin's faction won a decisive victory and a number of Trotsky's supporters (including all three secretaries of the Central Committee) lost their leadership positions. Krestinsky was replaced as a member of the Politburo by Zinoviev, who had supported Lenin. Krestinsky's place in the secretariat was taken by Vyacheslav Molotov. The congress also adopted a secret resolution on "Party unity", which banned factions within the Party except during pre-Congress discussions. The resolution was later published and used by Stalin against Trotsky and other opponents. At the end of the Tenth Congress, after peace negotiations had failed, Trotsky gave the order for the suppression of the Kronstadt rebellion, the last major revolt against Bolshevik rule. "More on the Suppression of Kronstadt" by Leon Trotsky
 

Years later, anarchist Emma Goldman and others criticized Trotsky's actions as Commissar for War for his role in the suppression of the rebellion, and argued that he ordered unjustified incarcerations and executions of political opponents such as anarchists, although Trotsky did not participate in the actual suppression. "Hue and Cry Over Kronstadt" by Leon Trotsky
 "Trotsky Protests too Much" by Emma Goldman Some Trotskyists, most notably Abbie Bakan, have argued that the claim that the Kronstadt rebels were "counterrevolutionary" has been supported by evidence of White Army and French government support for the Kronstadt sailors' March rebellion. 
"Kronstadt  A Tragic Necessity"  by Abbie Bakan
 Other historians, most notably Paul Avrich, claimed the evidence did not point towards this conclusion, and saw the Kronstadt Rebellion as spontaneous. Anarchist Writers 

===Lenin's illness (19221923)===
In late 1921 Lenin's health deteriorated, he was absent from Moscow for even longer periods, and eventually had three strokes between 26 May 1922 and 10 March 1923, which caused paralysis, loss of speech and finally death on 21 January 1924. With Lenin increasingly sidelined throughout 1922, Stalin (elevated to the newly created position of the Central Committee general secretary Yakov Sverdlov was the Central Committee's senior secretary responsible for personnel affairs from 1917 and until his death in March 1919. He was replaced by Elena Stasova, and in November 1919 by Nikolai Krestinsky. After Krestinsky's ouster in March 1921, Vyacheslav Molotov became the senior secretary, but he lacked Krestinsky's authority since he was not a full Politburo member. The position was taken over by Stalin and formalized at the XIth Party Congress in April 1922, with Molotov becoming second secretary. earlier in the year), Zinoviev and Lev Kamenev It is not clear why Kamenev, a mild mannered man with few leadership ambitions as well as Trotsky's brother-in-law, sided with Zinoviev and Stalin against Trotsky in 1922. Trotsky later speculated that it may have been due to Kamenev's love of comfort, which Trotsky found "repell" and let Kamenev know in late 1920 or early 1921: formed a troika (triumvirate) to ensure that Trotsky, publicly the number-two-man in the country and Lenin's heir presumptive, would not succeed Lenin.

The rest of the recently expanded Politburo (Rykov, Mikhail Tomsky, Bukharin) was at first uncommitted, but eventually joined the troika. Stalin's power of patronage in his capacity as general secretary clearly played a role, but Trotsky and his supporters later concluded that a more fundamental reason was the process of slow bureaucratization of the Soviet regime once the extreme conditions of the Civil War were over: much of the Bolshevik elite wanted 'normalcy' while Trotsky was personally and politically personified as representing a turbulent revolutionary period that they would much rather leave behind.

Although the exact sequence of events is unclear, evidence suggests that at first the troika nominated Trotsky to head second rate government departments (e.g., Gokhran, the State Depository for Valuables See Document 103 (22 May 1922) in The Unknown Lenin ) and then, when Trotsky predictably refused, tried using it as an excuse to oust him. At this time there was speculation about Trotsky's health and whether he had epilepsy.

When, in mid-July 1922, Kamenev wrote a letter to the recovering Lenin to the effect that "(the Central Committee) is throwing or is ready to throw a good cannon overboard", Lenin was shocked and responded: See Document 106 in The Unknown Lenin 

From then until his final stroke, Lenin spent much of his time trying to devise a way to prevent a split within the Communist Party leadership, which was reflected in Lenin's Testament. As part of this effort, on 11 September 1922 Lenin proposed that Trotsky become his deputy at the Council of People's Commissars (Sovnarkom). The Politburo approved the proposal, but Trotsky "categorically refused". See Document 109 in The Unknown Lenin 

In late 1922, Lenin's relationship with Stalin deteriorated over Stalin's heavy-handed and chauvinistic handling of the issue of merging Soviet republics into one federal state, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR). At that point, according to Trotsky's autobiography, See Chapter XXXIX of My Life 
Lenin offered Trotsky an alliance against Soviet bureaucracy in general and Stalin in particular. The alliance proved effective on the issue of foreign trade, but it was complicated by Lenin's progressing illness. In January 1923 the relationship between Lenin and Stalin completely broke down when Stalin rudely insulted Lenin's wife, Nadezhda Krupskaya. At that point Lenin amended his Testament suggesting that Stalin should be replaced as the party's general secretary, although the thrust of his argument was somewhat weakened by the fact that he also mildly criticized other Bolshevik leaders, including Trotsky. In March 1923, days before his third stroke, Lenin prepared a frontal assault on Stalin's "Great-Russian nationalistic campaign" against the Georgian Communist Party (the so-called Georgian Affair) and asked Trotsky to deliver the blow at the XIIth Party Congress. With Lenin no longer active, Trotsky did not raise the issue at the Congress. See Chapter 11 of Trotsky's unfinished book, entitled Stalin 

At the XIIth Party Congress in April 1923, just after Lenin's final stroke, the key Central Committee reports on organizational and nationalities questions were delivered by Stalin and not by Trotsky, while Zinoviev delivered the political report of the Central Committee, traditionally Lenin's prerogative. Trotsky explained in Chapter 12 of his unfinished book Stalin that he refused to deliver the report because "it seemed to me equivalent to announcing my candidacy for the role of Lenin's successor at a time when Lenin was fighting a grave illness". Stalin's power of appointment had allowed him to gradually replace local party secretaries with loyal functionaries and thus control most regional delegations at the congress, which enabled him to pack the Central Committee with his supporters, mostly at the expense of Zinoviev and Kamenev's backers. See Chapter 12 of Trotsky's unfinished book, entitled Stalin 

At the congress, Trotsky made a speech about intra-party democracy, among other things, but avoided a direct confrontation with the troika. The delegates, most of whom were unaware of the divisions within the Politburo, gave Trotsky a standing ovation, which couldn't help but upset the troika. The troika was further infuriated by Karl Radek's article Leon Trotsky  Organizer of Victory Radek wrote: published in Pravda on 14 March 1923.

The resolutions adopted by the XIIth Congress called, in general terms, for greater democracy within the Party, but were vague and remained unimplemented. In an important test of strength in mid-1923, the troika was able to neutralize Trotsky's friend and supporter Christian Rakovsky by removing him from his post as head of the Ukrainian government (Sovnarkom) and sending him to London as Soviet ambassador. When regional Party secretaries in Ukraine protested against Rakovsky's reassignment, they too were reassigned to various posts all over the Soviet Union. 

===Left opposition (19231924)===

Trotsky in a 1922 cubist portrait by Yury Annenkov, a version of this appeared on one of the earliest covers of Time magazine.
Starting in mid-1923, the Soviet economy ran into significant difficulties, which led to numerous strikes countrywide. Two secret groups within the Communist Party, Workers' Truth and Workers' Group, were uncovered and suppressed by the Soviet secret police. On 8 October 1923 Trotsky sent a letter to the Central Committee and the Central Control Commission, attributing these difficulties to lack of intra-Party democracy. Trotsky wrote:

Other senior communists who had similar concerns sent The Declaration of 46 to the Central Committee on 15 October in which they wrote:

Although the text of these letters remained secret at the time, they had a significant effect on the Party leadership and prompted a partial retreat by the troika and its supporters on the issue of intra-Party democracy, notably in Zinoviev's Pravda article published on 7 November. Throughout November, the troika tried to come up with a compromise to placate, or at least temporarily neutralize, Trotsky and his supporters. (Their task was made easier by the fact that Trotsky was sick in November and December.) The first draft of the resolution was rejected by Trotsky, which led to the formation of a special group consisting of Stalin, Trotsky and Kamenev, which was charged with drafting a mutually acceptable compromise. On 5 December, the Politburo and the Central Control Commission unanimously adopted the group's final draft as its resolution. On 8 December Trotsky published an open letter, in which he expounded on the recently adopted resolution's ideas. The troika used his letter as an excuse to launch a campaign against Trotsky, accusing him of factionalism, setting "the youth against the fundamental generation of old revolutionary Bolsheviks" Quoted in Max Shachtman. The Struggle for the New Course, New York, New International Publishing Co., 1943. See The Campaign Against Trotskyism and other sins. Trotsky defended his position in a series of seven letters which were collected as The New Course in January 1924. Leon Trotsky, "The New Course" contained in The Challenge of the Left Opposition: 19231925, pp. 63144. The illusion of a "monolithic Bolshevik leadership" was thus shattered and a lively intra-Party discussion ensued, both in local Party organizations and in the pages of Pravda. The discussion lasted most of December and January until the XIIIth Party Conference of 1618 January 1924. Those who opposed the Central Committee's position in the debate were thereafter referred to as members of the Left Opposition.

Since the troika controlled the Party apparatus through Stalin's Secretariat and Pravda through its editor Bukharin, it was able to direct the discussion and the process of delegate selection. Although Trotsky's position prevailed within the Red Army and Moscow universities and received about half the votes in the Moscow Party organization, it was defeated elsewhere, and the Conference was packed with pro-troika delegates. In the end, only three delegates voted for Trotsky's position and the Conference denounced "Trotskyism" The term "Trotskyism" was first coined by the Russian liberal politician Pavel Milyukov, the first foreign minister in the Provisional Government who, in April 1917, was forced to demand that the British government release Trotsky  see above. 
as a "petty bourgeois deviation". After the Conference, a number of Trotsky's supporters, especially in the Red Army's Political Directorate, were removed from leading positions or reassigned. Nonetheless, Trotsky kept all of his posts and the troika was careful to emphasize that the debate was limited to Trotsky's "mistakes" and that removing Trotsky from the leadership was out of the question. In reality, Trotsky had already been cut off from the decision making process.

Immediately after the Conference, Trotsky left for a Caucasian resort to recover from his prolonged illness. On his way, he learned about Lenin's death on 21 January 1924. He was about to return when a follow up telegram from Stalin arrived, giving an incorrect date of the scheduled funeral, which would have made it impossible for Trotsky to return in time. Many commentators speculated after the fact that Trotsky's absence from Moscow in the days following Lenin's death contributed to his eventual loss to Stalin, although Trotsky generally discounted the significance of his absence.

===After Lenin's death (1924)===

There was little overt political disagreement within the Soviet leadership throughout most of 1924. On the surface, Trotsky remained the most prominent and popular Bolshevik leader, although his "mistakes" were often alluded to by troika partisans. Behind the scenes, he was completely cut off from the decision making process. Politburo meetings were pure formalities since all key decisions were made ahead of time by the troika and its supporters. Trotsky's control over the military was undermined by reassigning his deputy, Ephraim Sklyansky, and appointing Mikhail Frunze, who was being groomed to take Trotsky's place.

At the thirteenth Party Congress in May, Trotsky delivered a conciliatory speech: See Chapter VIII of Boris Souvarine's Stalin: A Critical Survey of Bolshevism 

The attempt at reconciliation, however, did not stop troika supporters from taking potshots at him.

In the meantime, the Left Opposition, which had coagulated somewhat unexpectedly in late 1923 and lacked a definite platform aside from general dissatisfaction with the intra-Party "regime", began to crystallize. It lost some less dedicated members to the harassment by the troika, but it also began formulating a program. Economically, the Left Opposition and its theoretician Yevgeni Preobrazhensky came out against further development of capitalist elements in the Soviet economy and in favor of faster industrialization. That put them at odds with Bukharin and Rykov, the "Right" group within the Party, who supported the troika at the time. On the question of world revolution, Trotsky and Karl Radek saw a period of stability in Europe while Stalin and Zinoviev confidently predicted an "acceleration" of revolution in Western Europe in 1924. On the theoretical plane, Trotsky remained committed to the Bolshevik idea that the Soviet Union could not create a true socialist society in the absence of the world revolution, while Stalin gradually came up with a policy of building 'Socialism in One Country'. These ideological divisions provided much of the intellectual basis for the political divide between Trotsky and the Left Opposition on the one hand and Stalin and his allies on the other.

At the thirteenth Congress Kamenev and Zinoviev helped Stalin defuse Lenin's Testament, which belatedly came to the surface. But just after the congress, the troika, always an alliance of convenience, showed signs of weakness. Stalin began making poorly veiled accusations about Zinoviev and Kamenev. Yet in October 1924, Trotsky published Lessons of October, Leon Trotsky "Lessons of October" contained in Challenge of the Left Opposition: 19231925, pp. 199258. an extensive summary of the events of the 1917 revolution. In it, he described Zinoviev's and Kamenev's opposition to the Bolshevik seizure of power in 1917, something that the two would have preferred left unmentioned. This started a new round of intra-party struggle, which became known as the Literary Discussion, with Zinoviev and Kamenev again allied with Stalin against Trotsky. Their criticism of Trotsky was concentrated in three areas:

* Trotsky's disagreements and conflicts with Lenin and the Bolsheviks prior to 1917.
* Trotsky's alleged distortion of the events of 1917 in order to emphasize his role and diminish the roles played by other Bolsheviks.
* Trotsky's harsh treatment of his subordinates and other alleged mistakes during the Russian Civil War.

Trotsky was again sick and unable to respond while his opponents mobilized all of their resources to denounce him. They succeeded in damaging his military reputation so much that he was forced to resign as People's Commissar of Army and Fleet Affairs and Chairman of the Revolutionary Military Council on 6 January 1925. Zinoviev demanded Trotsky's expulsion from the Communist Party, but Stalin refused to go along and played the role of a moderate. Trotsky kept his Politburo seat, but was effectively put on probation.

=== A year in the wilderness (1925) ===
1925 was a difficult year for Trotsky. After the bruising Literary Discussion and losing his Red Army posts, he was effectively unemployed throughout the winter and spring. In May 1925, he was given three posts: chairman of the Concessions Committee, head of the electro-technical board, and chairman of the scientific-technical board of industry. Trotsky wrote in My Life See Chapter 42 of My Life that he "was taking a rest from politics" and "naturally plunged into the new line of work up to my ears" Leon Trotsky, My Life (Pathfinder Press: New York, 1970) p. 520. but some contemporary accounts paint a picture of a remote and distracted man. See Nikolai Valentinov-Volsky's account of his work with Trotsky in 1925 in Novaia Ekonomicheskaia Politika i Krizis Partii Posle Smerti Lenina: Gody Raboty v VSNKh vo Vremia NEP, Moscow, Sovremennik, 1991. No English translation currently available. Later in the year, Trotsky resigned his two technical positions (maintaining Stalin-instigated interference and sabotage) and concentrated on his work in the Concessions Committee.

In one of the few political developments that affected Trotsky in 1925, the circumstances surrounding the controversy around Lenin's Testament were described by American Marxist Max Eastman in his book Since Lenin Died (1925). The Soviet leadership denounced Eastman's account and used party discipline to force Trotsky to write an article denying Eastman's version of the events.

In the meantime, the troika finally broke up. Bukharin and Rykov sided with Stalin while Krupskaya and Soviet Commissar of Finance Grigory Sokolnikov aligned with Zinoviev and Kamenev. The struggle became open at the September 1925 meeting of the Central Committee and came to a head at the XIVth Party Congress in December 1925. With only the Leningrad Party organization behind them, Zinoviev and Kamenev, dubbed The New Opposition, were thoroughly defeated while Trotsky refused to get involved in the fight and didn't speak at the Congress.

=== United Opposition (19261927) ===
During a lull in the intra-party fighting in the spring of 1926, Zinoviev, Kamenev and their supporters in the "New Opposition" gravitated closer to Trotsky's supporters and the two groups soon formed an alliance, which also incorporated some smaller opposition groups within the Communist Party. The alliance became known as the "United Opposition".

The United Opposition was repeatedly threatened with sanctions by the Stalinist leadership of the Communist Party and Trotsky had to agree to tactical retreats, mostly to preserve his alliance with Zinoviev and Kamenev. The opposition remained united against Stalin throughout 1926 and 1927, especially on the issue of the Chinese Revolution. The methods used by the Stalinists against the Opposition became more and more extreme. At the XVth Party Conference in October 1926 Trotsky could barely speak because of interruptions and catcalls, and at the end of the Conference he lost his Politburo seat. In 1927 Stalin started using the GPU (Soviet secret police) to infiltrate and discredit the opposition. Rank and file oppositionists were increasingly harassed, sometimes expelled from the Party and even arrested.

Soviet policy toward the Chinese Revolution became the ideological line of demarcation between Stalin and the United Opposition. The Chinese Revolution began on 10 October 1911, Sterling Seagrave, Dragon Lady (Alfred A. Knopf Inc.: New York, 1992) p. 454. resulting in the abdication of the Chinese Emperor 12 February 1912. Compilation Group for the "History of Modern China Series, The Revolution of 1911 (Foreign Languages Press: Peking, 1976) p. 153. Sun Yat-sen established the Republic of China. In reality, however, the Republic controlled very little of the country. Much of China was divided between various regional warlords. The Republican government established a new "nationalist people's army and a national people's partythe Kuomintang. In 1920, the Kuomintang opened relations with Soviet Russia. With Soviet help, the Republic of China built up the nationalist people's army. With the development of the nationalist army, a Northern Expedition was planned to smash the power of the warlords of the northern part of the country. This Northern Expedition became a point of contention over foreign policy by Stalin and Trotsky. Stalin tried to persuade the small Chinese Communist Party to merge with the Kuomintang (KMT) Nationalists to bring about a bourgeois revolution before attempting to bring about a Soviet-style working class revolution. Joseph Stalin, "The Prospects of Revolution in China" a speech to the Chinese Commission of the Executive Committee of the Communist International on 30 November 1926" contained in J. Stalin on Chinese Revolution (Suren Dutt Publishers: Calcutta, India, 1970) pp. 521. Stalin, like Lenin, believed that the KMT bourgeoisie, together with all patriotic national liberation forces in the country, would defeat the western imperialists in China.

Trotsky wanted the Communist party to complete an orthodox proletarian revolution and opposed the KMT. Stalin funded the KMT during the expedition. Stalin countered Trotskyist criticism by making a secret speech in which he said that Chiang's right wing Kuomintang were the only ones capable of defeating the imperialists, that Chiang Kai-shek had funding from the rich merchants, and that his forces were to be utilized until squeezed for all usefulness like a lemon before being discarded. However, Chiang quickly reversed the tables in the Shanghai massacre of 1927 by massacring the Communist party in Shanghai midway in the Northern Expedition. 

=== Defeat and exile (19271928) ===
In October 1927, Trotsky and Zinoviev were expelled from the Central Committee. When the United Opposition tried to organize independent demonstrations commemorating the 10th anniversary of the Bolshevik seizure of power in November 1927, the demonstrators were dispersed by force and Trotsky and Zinoviev were expelled from the Communist Party on 12 November. Their leading supporters, from Kamenev down, were expelled in December 1927 by the XVth Party Congress, which paved the way for mass expulsions of rank and file oppositionists as well as internal exile of opposition leaders in early 1928.

When the XVth Party Congress made Opposition views incompatible with membership in the Communist Party, Zinoviev, Kamenev and their supporters capitulated and renounced their alliance with the Left Opposition. Trotsky and most of his followers, on the other hand, refused to surrender and stayed the course.
Trotsky's house on the island of Bykada, Istanbul, as it appears today
Trotsky was exiled to Alma Ata in Kazakhstan on 31 January 1928. He was expelled from the Soviet Union to Turkey in February 1929, accompanied by his wife Natalia Sedova and his son Lev Sedov.

After Trotsky's expulsion from the country, exiled Trotskyists began to waver. Between 1929 and 1934, most of the leading members of the Opposition surrendered to Stalin, "admitted their mistakes" and were reinstated in the Communist Party. Christian Rakovsky, who had inspired Trotsky between 1929 and 1934 from his Siberian exile, was the last prominent Trotskyist to capitulate. Almost all of them were executed in the Great Purges of 19371938.

== Exile (19291940) ==
Trotsky reading The Militant.
Trotsky was deported from the Soviet Union in February 1929. His first station in exile was at Bykada off the coast of Istanbul, Turkey, where he stayed for the next four years. He was at risk from the many former White Army officers in the city, who had opposed the Bolshevik Revolution, but Trotsky's European supporters volunteered to serve as bodyguards and assured his safety.

In 1933 Trotsky was offered asylum in France by Prime Minister douard Daladier. He stayed first at Royan, then at Barbizon. He was not allowed in Paris, though he did visit the city in secret during December 1933, to meet with various political allies. The philosopher and activist Simone Weil arranged for Trotsky and his bodyguards to stay for a few days at her parents' house. Petrement, Simone (1976) Simone Weil: A Life. New York: Schocken Books. 1988 edition. pp 189191 In 1935 he was told he was no longer welcome in France. After weighing alternatives, he moved to Norway. Having obtained permission from then Justice Minister Trygve Lie to enter the country, Trotsky became a guest of Konrad Knudsen near Oslo. On 2 September 1936 he was transferred En sensasjonell rettssak to a farm in Hurum where he was under house arrest, allegedly because of Soviet influence on the government. Before Christmas 1936 he and his wife were deported to Mexico, on a freighter under guard by Jonas Lie. The Mexican president Lzaro Crdenas welcomed Trotsky and arranged for a special train to bring him to Mexico City from the port of Tampico.

Trotsky's house in Mexico City.
Trotsky lived in the Coyoacn area of Mexico City at the home (The Blue House) of the painter Diego Rivera and Rivera's wife and fellow painter, Frida Kahlo, with whom Trotsky had an affair. Herrera, Hayden (1983). A Biography of Frida Kahlo. New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-008589-6. Patenaude, Bertrand M. (2009) Trotsky: Downfall of a Revolutionary New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-082068-8 His final move was a few blocks away to a residence on Avenida Viena in May 1939, following a break with Rivera. 

He wrote prolifically in exile, penning several key works, including his History of the Russian Revolution (1930) and The Revolution Betrayed (1936), a critique of the Soviet Union under Stalinism. Trotsky argued that the Soviet state had become a degenerated workers' state controlled by an undemocratic bureaucracy, which would eventually either be overthrown via a political revolution establishing a workers' democracy, or degenerate into a capitalist class.

While in Mexico, Trotsky also worked closely with James P. Cannon, Joseph Hansen, and Farrell Dobbs of the Socialist Workers Party of the United States, and other supporters.

Cannon, a long-time leading member of the American communist movement, had supported Trotsky in the struggle against Stalinism since he first read Trotsky's criticisms of the Soviet Union in 1928. Trotsky's critique of the Stalinist regime, though banned, was distributed to leaders of the Comintern. Among his other supporters was Chen Duxiu, founder of the Chinese Communist Party. 

===Moscow show trials===

In August 1936, the first Moscow show trial of the so-called "Trotskyite-Zinovievite Terrorist Center" was staged in front of an international audience. During the trial, Zinoviev, Kamenev and 14 other accused, most of them prominent Old Bolsheviks, confessed to having plotted with Trotsky to kill Stalin and other members of the Soviet leadership. The court found everybody guilty and sentenced the defendants to death, Trotsky in absentia. The second show trial, of Karl Radek, Grigory Sokolnikov, Yuri Pyatakov and 14 others, took place in January 1937, during which more alleged conspiracies and crimes were linked to Trotsky. In April 1937, an independent "Commission of Inquiry" into the charges made against Trotsky and others at the "Moscow Trials" was held in Coyoacn, with John Dewey as chairman. Marxists.org The findings were published in the book Not Guilty. See Not Guilty; Report of the Commission of Inquiry into the Charges Made Against Leon Trotsky in the Moscow Trials, John Dewey, chairman, New York, London, Harper & brothers, 1938, xv, 422 pp. 2nd edition New York, Monad Press, distributed by Pathfinder Press 1973, c. 1972 xxiii, 422 pp. 

===Fourth International===

James Cannon and Felix Morrow, with a bust of Trotsky.

For fear of splitting the Communist movement, Trotsky initially opposed the idea of establishing parallel Communist parties or a parallel international Communist organization that would compete with the Third International. In mid-1933, he changed his mind after the Nazi takeover in Germany and the Comintern's response to it. He said, Marxists.org that:

In 1938, Trotsky and his supporters founded the Fourth International, which was intended to be a revolutionary and internationalist alternative to the Stalinist Comintern.

===Dies Committee===
Towards the end of 1939 Trotsky agreed to go to the United States to appear as a witness before the Dies Committee of the House of Representatives, a forerunner of the House Committee on Un-American Activities. Representative Martin Dies, chairman of the committee, demanded the suppression of the American Communist Party. Trotsky intended to use the forum to expose the NKVD's activities against him and his followers.

He made it clear that he also intended to argue against the suppression of the American Communist Party, and to use the committee as a platform for a call to transform World War II into a world revolution. Many of his supporters argued against his appearance. When the committee learned the nature of the testimony Trotsky intended to present, it refused to hear him, and he was denied a visa to enter the United States. On hearing about it, the CPSU immediately accused Trotsky of being in the pay of the oil magnates and the Federal Bureau of Investigation. See Isaac Deutscher. The Prophet Outcast: Trotsky, 19291940, London, New York, Oxford University Press, 1963, p. 482 

==Final months==
Trotsky with American comrades, including Harry DeBoer (left) in Mexico, shortly before his assassination, 1940.

After quarreling with Diego Rivera, Trotsky moved to his final residence on Avenida Viena. Patenaude op. cit pp. 171173 He was ill, suffering from high blood pressure, and feared that he would suffer a cerebral hemorrhage. He even prepared himself for the possibility of ending his life through suicide. "Trotsky's Testament" (27 February 1940) Retrieved 12 June 2011 

On 27 February 1940, Trotsky wrote a document known as "Trotsky's Testament", in which he expressed his final thoughts and feelings for posterity. After forcefully denying Stalin's accusations that he had betrayed the working class, he thanked his friends, and above all his wife and dear companion, Natalia Sedova, for their loyal support:

===Assassination===
Study where the attack on Leon Trotsky took place

Stalin assigned the organisation and execution of a plan to assassinate Trotsky to Nahum Eitingon who recruited Ramn Mercader during the Spanish Civil War.

On 24 May 1940, Trotsky survived a raid on his home New York Times by armed Stalinist assassins led by GPU agent Iosif Grigulevich, Mexican painter and Stalinist David Alfaro Siqueiros, and Vittorio Vidale. Trotsky's young grandson, Vsievolod Platonovich "Esteban" Volkov (born 1926), was shot in the foot and a young assistant and bodyguard of Trotsky, Robert Sheldon Harte, was abducted and later murdered, but other guards saw off the attack. Trotsky's grandson recalls ice pick killing, BBC News, Mike Lanchin, 28 August 2012 

On 20 August 1940, Trotsky was attacked in his home in Mexico with a mountaineers' ice axe by undercover NKVD agent Ramn Mercader. University of San Diego  Historical Monograph #4: The KGB in San Francisco and Mexico City and the GRU in New York and Washington accessed 29 July 2007 The blow to Trotsky's head was poorly delivered and failed to kill Trotsky instantly, as Mercader had intended. Witnesses stated that Trotsky spat on Mercader and began struggling fiercely with him. Hearing the commotion, Trotsky's bodyguards burst into the room and nearly killed Mercader, but Trotsky stopped them, laboriously stating that the assassin should be made to answer questions. Trotsky was taken to a hospital, operated on, and survived for more than a day, dying at the age of 60 on 21 August 1940 as a result of blood loss and shock. Walsh, Lynn, The Assassination of Trotsky, Militant International Review, Summer 1980; retrieved 29 July 2007 Enrique Soto-Perez-de-Celis MD, The Death of Leon Trotsky, Neurosurgery 67: 417423, 2010 Mercader later testified at his trial: According to James P. Cannon, the secretary of the Socialist Workers Party (USA), Trotsky's last words were "I will not survive this attack. Stalin has finally accomplished the task he attempted unsuccessfully before." Australian Associated Press, Death of Leon Trotsky, The Age 150th Anniversary edition reprint, 23 August 1940; retrieved 22 March 2007 

Leon Trotsky's grave in Coyoacn, where his ashes are buried

=== Epilogue ===
Trotsky's house in Coyoacn was preserved in much the same condition as it was on the day of the assassination and is now a museum run by a board which includes his grandson Esteban Volkov. The current director of the museum is Carlos Ramirez Sandoval. Trotsky's grave is located on its grounds. A new foundation (International Friends of the Leon Trotsky Museum) has been organized to raise funds to further improve the Museum.

Trotsky was never formally rehabilitated during the rule of the Soviet government, despite the Glasnost-era rehabilitation of most other Old Bolsheviks killed during the Great Purges. His son, Sergei Sedov, killed in 1937, was rehabilitated in 1988, as was Nikolai Bukharin. Above all, beginning in 1989, Trotsky's books, forbidden until 1987, were finally published in the Soviet Union.

Trotsky was rehabilitated in 16 June 2001 on the basis of the decision of the General Prosecutor's Office (Certificates of Rehabilitation  13/2182-90,  13-2200-99 in Archives Research Center "Memorial"). . . .  .   

Trotsky's grandson, Esteban Volkov, who lives in Mexico, is an active promoter of his grandfather. Trotsky's great-granddaughter, Mexican-born Nora Volkow (Volkov's daughter), is currently head of the U.S. National Institute on Drug Abuse.

==Contributions to theory==

Trotsky considered himself a "Bolshevik-Leninist", arguing for the establishment of a vanguard party. He considered himself an advocate of orthodox Marxism. His politics differed in many respects from those of Stalin or Mao Zedong, most importantly in his rejection of the theory of Socialism in One Country and his declaring the need for an international "permanent revolution". Numerous Fourth Internationalist groups around the world continue to describe themselves as Trotskyist and see themselves as standing in this tradition, although they have different interpretations of the conclusions to be drawn from this. Supporters of the Fourth International echo Trotsky's opposition to Stalinist totalitarianism, advocating political revolution, arguing that socialism cannot sustain itself without democracy.

===Permanent Revolution===

Permanent Revolution is the theory that the bourgeois democratic tasks in countries with delayed bourgeois democratic development can only be accomplished through the establishment of a workers' state, and that the creation of a workers' state would inevitably involve inroads against capitalist property. Thus, the accomplishment of bourgeois democratic tasks passes over into proletarian tasks. Although most closely associated with Leon Trotsky, the call for Permanent Revolution is first found in the writings of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels in March 1850, in the aftermath of the 1848 Revolution, in their Address of the Central Committee to the Communist League:

Trotsky's conception of Permanent Revolution is based on his understanding, drawing on the work of the founder of Russian Marxism Georgy Plekhanov, that in 'backward' countries the tasks of the Bourgeois Democratic Revolution could not be achieved by the bourgeoisie itself. This conception was first developed by Trotsky in collaboration with Alexander Parvus in late 19041905. The relevant articles were later collected in Trotsky's books 1905 and in Permanent Revolution, which also contains his essay "Results and Prospects".

According to Trotskyists, the October Revolution (which Trotsky directed) was the first example of a successful Permanent Revolution. The proletarian, socialist October Revolution took place precisely because the bourgeoisie, which took power in February, had not been able to solve any of the tasks of the bourgeois-democratic revolution. It had not given the land to the peasants (which the Bolsheviks did on 25 October), nor given freedom to the oppressed minority nations, nor emancipated Russia from foreign domination by ending the war which, at that point, was fought mainly to please the English and French creditors. Trotskyists today argue that the state of the Third World shows that capitalism offers no way forward for underdeveloped countries, thus again proving the central tenet of the theory. In contrast, Stalinist policy in the former colonial countries has been characterized by the so-called Two-Stage Theory, which argues that the working class must fight for "progressive capitalism" along with the "progressive national bourgeoisie" before any attempts at socialism can be made. 

===The United Front===

Trotsky was a central figure in the Comintern during its first four congresses. During this time he helped to generalise the strategy and tactics of the Bolsheviks to newly formed Communist parties across Europe and further afield. From 1921 onwards the united front, a method of uniting revolutionaries and reformists in common struggle while winning some of the workers to revolution, was the central tactic put forward by the Comintern after the defeat of the German revolution.

After he was exiled and politically marginalised by Stalinism, Trotsky continued to argue for a united front against fascism in Germany and Spain. His articles on the united front represent an important part of his political legacy. Joseph Choonara, "The United Front" in International Socialism 117 

== Trotsky in art ==
Trotsky as depicted in Marx Reloaded.

* In Mexico in the late 1930s Trotsky met Frida Kahlo, Diego Rivera and Andr Breton who in 1938 wrote Pour un art rvolutionnaire indpendant (For an Independent Revolution in Art) Manifesto: Towards A Free Revolutionary Art 9 August 2010 and as the leader of Surrealism Breton befriended Trotsky. Rivera, Breton and Trotsky Retrieved 9 August 2010 After Trotsky's death in 1940, Breton denounced him for not successfully bringing forth the Revolution promised in Breton's manifesto.
* Trotsky was admired by Mexican muralist Diego Rivera, husband of Frida Kahlo. Rivera twice painted Trotsky's face as part of a montage of Communist figures, in Communist Unity Panel (1933) Fbuch.com and again in Man at the Crossroads (1933). After the destruction of the latter, it was re-created as Man, Controller of the Universe (1934). Fbuch.com Marxists.org 
* In 1969 German playwright Peter Weiss wrote the play Trotski Im Exil (Trotsky in Exile).
* Trotsky's death was dramatized in the 1972 film The Assassination of Trotsky, directed by Joseph Losey and starring Richard Burton as Trotsky. It was also the subject of a 1993 short play, Variations on the Death of Trotsky, written by David Ives. In the 2002 film Frida, Trotsky was portrayed by Geoffrey Rush.
* The characters of Snowball and Emmanuel Goldstein in George Orwell's novels, Animal Farm and Nineteen Eighty-Four respectively, are based on Trotsky. 
* A Spanish language documentary, El Asesinato de Trotsky (The Murder of Trotsky) was co-produced in 2006 by The History Channel and Anima Films, and directed by Argentinian director Matas Gueilburt. Documental retrata el ltimo ao de vida de Trotsky en Mxico, http://www.tercera.cl/contenido/29_38940_9.shtml Documental argentino revive a Len Trotsky, http://diario.elmercurio.cl/detalle/index.asp?id={4a56ff74-3ab5-4369-8ee3-597706d01d04} "El asesinato de Trotsky", un episodio novelesco reconstruido por The History Channel, http://www.clarin.com/diario/2007/08/21/um/m-01482546.htm 
* Third-wave ska band Catch-22 released a concept album in 2006 centered around the life of Trotsky, entitled Permanent Revolution. 
* In the 2011 documentary film Marx Reloaded, Trotsky meets Karl Marx in an animated cartoon parody of the 1999 science fiction-action film The Matrix. Although the scene is fictional, Trotsky is credited and depicted on the film's movie poster alongside contemporary philosophers including Slavoj iek.
* The 2009 Canadian comedy film The Trotsky centers on a teenager born with Trotsky's original name (Leon Bronstein) who believes he is Trotsky's reincarnation and patterns his life after Trotsky's, including education, ideology, and hairstyle.

== Selected works ==
* The Real Situation in Russia, Max Eastman, tr. New York: Harcourt, Brace and Company, 1928
* 1905
* Autobiography, 18791917.
* Between Red and White
* Fascism What It Is and How To Fight It
* History of the Russian Revolution
* In Defence of Marxism
* In Defence of October
* Literature and Revolution
* Marxism in Our Time
* My Life, Trotsky's autobiography
* The Permanent Revolution
* Platform of the Joint Opposition
* Problems of the Chinese Revolution
* Terrorism and Communism
* The Case of Leon Trotsky
* The First Five Years of the Communist International, Volume 1
* The First Five Years of the Communist International, Volume 2
* The Lessons of October
* The New Course
* The Revolution Betrayed
* The Stalin School of Falsification
* The Third International After Lenin
* The Transitional Program for Socialist Revolution
* Their Morals and Ours
* Trotsky's Military Writings, Volume 3
* Trotsky's Military Writings, Volume 4
* Trotsky's Military Writings, Volume 5
* War and the International

==See also==
* Ash heap of history
* Bolsheviks
* Fourth International
* Group of Democratic Centralism
* History of Russia, a series of articles.
* Labor army
* List of Trotskyist internationals
* Marxism
* Stalinism
* Trotskyism
* Variations on the Death of Trotsky
* Writings of Leon Trotsky

==Notes==

==References==

==Further reading==
* Blackledge, Paul (2006) Leon Trotsky's Contribution to the Marxist Theory of History in Studies in East European Thought Vol. 58, No. 1: 131.
* Brou Pierre, Trotsky, ed. Fayard, Paris, 1988
* Cliff, Tony (198993) Trotsky (4 Vols.) London: Bookmarks
* Isaac Deutscher wrote the classicand largely sympatheticbiography in three volumes:
** (1954) Trotsky: The Prophet Armed
** (1959) Trotsky: The Prophet Unarmed
** (1963) Trotsky: The Prophet Outcast
* Isaac Deutscher (1966) Ironies of History.
* Daniels, Robert V (1991) Trotsky, Stalin & Socialism. Westview Press. ISBN 0-8133-1223-X
* Dunn, Bill & Radice, Hugo eds. Permanent Revolution  Results and Prospects 100 Years On London: Pluto Press
* Dimitri Volkogonov (1996) Trotsky, the Eternal Revolutionary. Free Press.
* Gilbert, Helen (2003) Leon Trotsky: His Life and Ideas. Red Letter Press ISBN 0-932323-17-0
* Hallas, Duncan (1979) Trotsky's Marxism London: Pluto Press
* Hansen, Joseph, ed. (1969) Leon Trotsky: the Man and His Work. Reminiscences and Appraisals. New York: Merit Publishers.
* Levine, Isaac Don (1960) The Mind of an Assassin. New York: New American Library/Signet Book.
* Maitan, Livio (1985) Destino di Trotsky, Milano, ed. Rizzoli.
* Mandel, Ernest (1980) La pense politique de Leon Trotsky
* Molyneux, John (1981) Leon Trotsky's Theory of Revolution, Brighton: Harvester Press
* Richard Pipes, ed. (1996) The Unknown Lenin. Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-06919-7
* Renton, David (2004) Trotsky.
* Rogovin, Vadim Z. (1998). 1937 Stalin's Year of Terror. Oak Park, MI: Mehring Books, Inc. ISBN 0-929087-77-1
* Service, Robert (2005). Stalin: A Biography. Cambridge: Belknap Press. ISBN 0-674-01697-1.
* Thatcher, Ian D. (2003) Trotsky. ISBN 0-415-23251-1
* Jean van Heijenoort (1978) With Trotsky in Exile: From Prinkipo to Coyoacn. Harvard University Press.
* The Modern Encyclopedia of Russian and Soviet History, Volume 39, Academic International Press

== External links ==

* 
* Trotsky in Havana by Dimitri Prieto from Havana Times
* 65 years since Trotsky's Death an essay by Rob Sewell
* FBI records relating to Trotsky's murder
* 'Ice-pick that killed Trotsky' found in Mexico which is stained with his blood
* Dossier on Trotsky, International Viewpoint
* January 2006 images of Trotsky House, Mexico City
* Lenin and Trotsky What they Really Stood For by Alan Woods and Ted Grant
* The Contradiction of Trotsky by Claude Lefort
* The Leon Trotsky Internet Archive at Marxists.org (under GNU Free Documentation License)
* 
* The Lubitz TrotskyanaNet, dealing with Leon Trotsky, Trotskyism and Trotskyists
* In The Service of Historical Falsification: A Review of Robert Service's Trotsky by David North
* Historians in the Service of the Big Lie: An Examination of Professor Robert Services Biography of Trotsky
* Leon TrotskyThe Transitional Program1938
* Leon Trotsky, Soviet Historiography, and the Fate of Classical Marxism
* Uncommon Knowledge Interview with Christopher Hitchens and Robert Service on Leon Trotsky
* Leon Trotsky: Jews on the Left, Video Lecture by Dr. Henry Abramson

 
 

 
 

 
*



[[Latin (disambiguation)]]

Latin is an Italic language, originally spoken in ancient Rome and its empire.

Latin can also refer to: 

== Ethnic groups ==
* Latins (Italic tribe), an ancient Italic tribe inhabiting ancient Italy
* Latin peoples, the modern people of Latin descent

== Language and languages ==
* Latin alphabet, which became the basic script used by most European languages
* Wheelock's Latin, a textbook for teaching the Latin language

== Music ==
* Latin (album), an album by the band Holy Fuck
* "Latin", the fourth movement of Mike Oldfield's Tubular Bells 2003 album

== People with the surname ==
* Denis Latin (born 1966), Croatian television host
* Ivo Latin (19292002), former speaker of the Parliament of Croatia and Mayor of Zagreb

== See also ==
* Dog Latin, a whimsical pseudo-language utilizing Latin elements
* Ladin (disambiguation)
* Lateen
* Latin Quarter (disambiguation)
* Latina (disambiguation)
* Latino (disambiguation)
* Latino sine Flexione, an artificial language based on Latin but without inflections
* Latinism, the use of words from or like Latin
* Latinization (literature), the alteration of foreign words into Latin-like ones
* Lattin (disambiguation)
* Latinus
* Pig Latin, a whimsical pseudo-language based on sound alternations in English
* Macaronic Latin, the basis for defining Macaronic language, a mixed language
* 



[[Library reference desk]]

The reference desk or information desk of a library is a public service counter where professional librarians provide library users with direction to library materials, advice on library collections and services, and expertise on multiple kinds of information from multiple sources.

Librarian, Ballard Carnegie Library, Seattle, Washington ca. 1907
== Purpose and usage ==

Library users can consult the staff at the reference desk for help in finding information. Using a structured reference interview, the librarian works with the library user to clarify their needs and determine what information sources will fill them. To borrow a medical analogy, reference librarians diagnose and treat information deficiencies.

The ultimate help provided may consist of reading material in the form of a book or journal article, instruction in the use of specific searchable information resources such as the library's online catalog or subscription bibliographic/fulltext databases, or simply factual information drawn from the library's print or online reference collection. Typically, a reference desk can be consulted either in person, by telephone, through email or online chat, although a library user may be asked to come to the library in person for help with more involved research questions. A staffed and knowledgeable reference desk is an essential part of a library.

The services that are provided at a reference desk may vary depending on the type of library, its purpose, its resources, and its staff.

== Resources ==

Resources that are often kept at a library reference desk may include:
* A computer with internet access. Librarians use both the public web and subscription databases to find and evaluate information and research sources. 
* A small collection of reference books (called ready reference) that are most often used, so that the librarians can reach them quickly, especially when they are on the phone, and so that the books will be returned in time for someone else to use later the same day. The library's full reference collection is usually nearby as well.
* Newspaper clipping files and other rare or restricted items that must be returned to the reference desk.
* Index cards with the answers to frequently asked questions, and/or drawers with folders of pamphlets and photocopies of pages that, from previous experience, were difficult to find. These enable librarians to find such information quickly without leaving the deskeven faster than they could look it up in a reference book or using the Internet.
* Books and other items that are being held for library users who asked the librarian by phone to set them aside for them to pick up later the same day, or within the next few days.
* Books from the circulating collection that have been set aside for students working on a special assignment, and are temporarily designated to be used only within the library until the project is due.
* Printed lists of items in the library that are not in the catalogue, such as newspapers, school yearbooks, old telephone directories, college course catalogues, and local history sources.

== Services ==

Services that are often available at a library reference desk include:
* A sign up sheet for reserving computers with Internet access, or word processing software.
* The ability to place the book 'on hold', which prevents the person who has borrowed it from renewing it. The person who placed the 'hold' is notified when the book has been returned. (Some libraries provide this service at the circulation desk.)
* The ability to request Interlibrary loan of books and other material from other branch libraries in the same library system, or from a cooperating library anywhere in the world. (Some libraries provide this service at the circulation desk.)
* The opportunity to recommend that the library purchase something for its collection that it doesn't have, which may be needed or of interest to other library users.

The librarian who staffs the reference desk can usually do the following by virtue of their professional training and experience:
* The librarian can look up a brief, factual answer to a specific question.
* The librarian can use the catalogue to find out whether the library owns an item with a particular title or author, or that contains a short story, chapter, song, or poem with a particular title, or to compile a list of books by a particular author or on a particular subject.
* The librarian can briefly teach the user how to use the catalogue and how to use its advanced features, or recommend the proper subject words or terms that are used in the catalogue for the topic the user has in mind.
* The librarian can often take the library user directly to the shelves with books on a certain topic without using the catalogue.
* The librarian is familiar with the contents of hundreds of reference books, and can recommend books that might contain the answer to a particular question.
* The librarian can teach the library user to use online databases such as magazine and newspaper articles, and recommend words and search strategies for the topic the user has in mind.
* The librarian can recommend reliable web sites, give advice on searching the Internet for information, and evaluate the reliability of the information on web sites.
* If the library doesn't have information on a given topic, or if the library user wants more information, the librarian can refer the library user to another library or to an organization that can be contacted by phone or mail.

== Staff qualifications ==

In the United States, those who staff library reference desks are usually required to have an accredited Masters degree in Library Science from the American Library Association. (In Sri Lanka Sri Lanaka Library Association's Library and Information Science) However, if there is a lack of qualified applicants, particularly in rural areas of the country, a person with an Associate Degree, a Certificate in Library Technology, or a Bachelors Degree in Library Science may be performing these duties. In many academic libraries, student assistants are used as the primary contact, sometimes at an "information desk."

==Electronic reference services==
With the development of the Web, digital reference services are beginning to take over some of the roles of the traditional reference desk in a library. There is disagreement over whether or not this development is desirable or inevitable. Are Reference Desks Dying Out? by Scott Carlson, Chronicle of Higher Education April 20, 2007. 

==See also==
*Digital reference services
*Reference scenarios
*Virtual reference
*Ask a Librarian
*Wikipedia Reference Desk
*Internet Search Engines and Libraries

==References==

==External links==
*UCLA DIS 245 "Info Access" Wiki on Reference Services, edited by John V. Richardson Jr. and Debbie Weismann
*24 Hour Reference Service article by Ben Chan
*Trends and Issues in Digital Reference Services
*Building and Maintaining Digital Reference Services
*Management by Wandering Around: Reference Rovering and Quality Reference Service
*Reference and User Services Association Guidelines


[[Leap year]]

A leap year (or intercalary or bissextile year) is a year containing one additional day (or, in the case of lunisolar calendars, a month) in order to keep the calendar year synchronized with the astronomical or seasonal year. Meeus, Jean. (1998.) Astronomical Algorithims. Willmann-Bell. pp. 62. Because seasons and astronomical events do not repeat in a whole number of days, calendars that have the same number of days in each year, over time, drift with respect to the event that the year is supposed to track. By inserting (or intercalating) an additional day or month into the year, the drift can be corrected. A year that is not a leap year is called a common year.

For example, in the Gregorian calendar, each leap year lasts 366 days instead of the usual 365, by extending February to 29 days rather than the common 28 days. Similarly, in the lunisolar Hebrew calendar, Adar Aleph, a 13th lunar month is added seven times every 19 years to the twelve lunar months in its common years to keep its calendar year from drifting through the seasons.

The name "leap" year comes from the fact that while a fixed date in the Gregorian calendar normally advances one day of the week from one year to the next, in a leap year the day of the week will advance two days (from March onwards) due to the year's extra day inserted at the end of February (thus "leaping over" one of the days in the week). For example, Christmas Day fell on Tuesday in 2001, Wednesday in 2002 and Thursday in 2003 but then "leapt" over Friday to fall on a Saturday in 2004. Douglas Harper, "leap year", Online Etymology Dictionary, 2012. 

==Gregorian calendar==
In the Gregorian calendar, the current standard calendar in most of the world, most years that are integer multiples of 4 are leap years. In each leap year, the month of February has 29 days instead of 28. Adding an extra day to the calendar every four years compensates for the fact that a period of 365 days is shorter than a solar year by almost 6 hours. This calendar was first used in 1582.

Some exceptions to this basic rule are required since the duration of a solar year is slightly less than 365.25 days. Over a period of 4 centuries, the accumulated error of adding a leap day every 4 years amounts to about 3 extra days. The Gregorian Calendar therefore omits 3 (Julian) leap days every 400 years, which is the length of its leap cycle. This is done by omitting February 29 in the 3 century years (integer multiples of 100) that are not also integer multiples of 400. United States Naval Observatory. (June 14, 2011). Leap Years. Author. For example, 1700, 1800, 1900, 2100 and 2200 are common years, but 1600, 2000 and 2400 are leap years. By this rule, the average number of days per year is 365 + 1/4  1/100 + 1/400 = 365.2425. Richards, E. G. (2013). Calendars. in S. E. Urban and P. K. Seidelmann eds. Explanatory Supplement to the Astronomical Almanac 3rd ed. Mill Valley CA: University Science Books. p. 598. ISBN 9781891389856 The rule can be applied to years before the Gregorian reform (the proleptic Gregorian calendar). The rule is not directly applicable to years numbered with BC notation. Since 0 is divisible by 4, 100, and 400, the "year 0" (1 BC) is a leap year. Thus the rule can be applied to years before AD 1 if astronomical year numbering is used. Dogget, L.E. (1992). "Calendars" in P. K. Seidelmann (ed.). Explanatory Supplement to the Astronomical Almanac, 2nd ed. Sausalito, CA: University Science Books. p. 580&ndash;1. 

This graph shows the variations in date and time of the June Solstice due to unequally spaced \"leap day\" rules. Contrast this with the Iranian Solar Hijri calendar, which has 8 leap year days every 33 years. 

=== Precision ===
The Gregorian calendar was designed to keep the vernal equinox on or close to March 21, so that the date of Easter (celebrated on the Sunday after the 14th day of the Mooni.e. a full moonthat falls on or after March 21) remains close to the vernal equinox. E.G. Richards, E.G. (1998). Mapping time: The calendar and its history. Oxford University Press. p. 240. ISBN 0-19-286205-7. The vernal equinox year is about days long, measured in ephemeris time. Meeus, J. & Savoie, D. (1992). The history of the tropical year. Journal of the British Astronomical Association, 102(1), p. 42. 
===Algorithm===

The following Pseudocode determines whether a year is a leap year or not in the Gregorian calendar (and in the proleptic Gregorian calendar before 1582). The year variable being tested is the integer representing the number of the year in the Gregorian calendar, and the tests are arranged to dispatch the most common cases first. Care should be taken in translating mathematical integer divisibility into specific programming languages.

if year is not divisible by 4 then common year
else if year is not divisible by 100 then leap year
else if year is not divisible by 400 then common year
else leap year

===Leap day===

A Swedish pocket calendar from the year 2008 showing February 29

February 29 is a date that usually occurs every four years, and is called leap day. This day is added to the calendar in leap years as a corrective measure, because the Earth does not orbit around the sun in precisely 365 days.

The Gregorian calendar is a modification of the Julian calendar first used by the Romans. The Roman calendar originated as a lunisolar calendar and named many of its days after the syzygies of the moon: the new moon (Kalendae or calends, hence "calendar") and the full moon (Idus or ides). The Nonae or nones was not the first quarter moon but was exactly one nundinae or Roman market week of nine days before the ides, inclusively counting the ides as the first of those nine days. In 1825, Ideler believed that the lunisolar calendar was abandoned about 450 BC by the decemvirs, who implemented the Roman Republican calendar, used until 46 BC. The days of these calendars were counted down (inclusively) to the next named day, so February 24 was ante diem sextum Kalendas Martii ("the sixth day before the calends of March") often abbreviated a. d. VI Kal. Mar. The Romans counted days inclusively in their calendars, so this was actually the fifth day before March 1 when counted in the modern exclusive manner (not including the starting day). Thomas Hewitt Key, Calendarium (1875) 

The Republican calendar's intercalary month was inserted on the first or second day after the Terminalia (a. d. VII Kal. Mar., February 23). The remaining days of Februarius were dropped. This intercalary month, named Intercalaris or Mercedonius, contained 27 days. The religious festivals that were normally celebrated in the last five days of February were moved to the last five days of Intercalaris. Because only 22 or 23 days were effectively added, not a full lunation, the calends and ides of the Roman Republican calendar were no longer associated with the new moon and full moon.

The Julian calendar, which was developed in 46 BC by Julius Caesar, and became effective in 45 BC, distributed an extra ten days among the months of the Roman Republican calendar. Caesar also replaced the intercalary month by a single intercalary day, located where the intercalary month used to be. To create the intercalary day, the existing ante diem sextum Kalendas Martii (February 24) was doubled, producing ante diem bis sextum Kalendas Martii. Hence, the year containing the doubled day was a bissextile (bis sextum, "twice sixth") year. For legal purposes, the two days of the bis sextum were considered to be a single day, with the second half being intercalated; but in common practice by 238, when Censorinus wrote, the intercalary day was followed by the last five days of February, a. d. VI, V, IV, III and pridie Kal. Mar. (the days numbered 24, 25, 26, 27, and 28 from the beginning of February in a common year), so that the intercalated day was the first half of the doubled day. Thus the intercalated day was effectively inserted between the 23rd and 24th days of February. All later writers, including Macrobius about 430, Bede in 725, and other medieval computists (calculators of Easter), continued to state that the bissextum (bissextile day) occurred before the last five days of February.

In the older Roman Missal, feast days falling on or after February 24 are celebrated one day later in leap year.
Until 1970, the Roman Catholic Church always celebrated the feast of Saint Matthias on a. d. VI Kal. Mar., so if the days were numbered from the beginning of the month, it was named February 24 in common years, but the presence of the bissextum in a bissextile year immediately before a. d. VI Kal. Mar. shifted the latter day to February 25 in leap years, with the Vigil of St. Matthias shifting from February 23 to the leap day of February 24. This shift did not take place in pre-Reformation Norway and Iceland; Pope Alexander III ruled that either practice was lawful (Liber Extra, 5. 40. 14. 1). Other feasts normally falling on February 2528 in common years are also shifted to the following day in a leap year (although they would be on the same day according to the Roman notation). The practice is still observed by those who use the older calendars.

=== Synchronized calendars ===
The Indian National Calendar and the Revised Bangla Calendar of Bangladesh organise their leap years so that the leap day is always close to February 29 in the Gregorian calendar. This makes it easy to convert dates to or from Gregorian.

The Bah' calendar is structured such that the leap day always falls within Ayym-i-H, a period of four or five days corresponding to Gregorian February 26  March 1. Because of this, Baha'i dates consistently line up with exactly one Gregorian date.

The Thai solar calendar uses the Buddhist Era (BE), but has been synchronized with the Gregorian since AD 1941.

==Julian, Coptic and Ethiopian calendars==
Since AD 8 the Julian calendar added, or will add, an extra day to February in years that are integer multiples of 4.

The Coptic calendar and Ethiopian calendar also add an extra day to the end of the year once every four years before a Julian 29-day February.

This rule gives an average year length of 365.25 days. However, it is 11 minutes longer than a vernal equinox year. This means that the vernal equinox moves a day earlier in the calendar about every 131 years.

==Revised Julian calendar==
The Revised Julian calendar adds an extra day to February in years that are integer multiples of four, except for years that are integer multiples of 100 that do not leave a remainder of 200 or 600 when divided by 900. This rule agrees with the rule for the Gregorian calendar until 2799. The first year that dates in the Revised Julian calendar will not agree with those in the Gregorian calendar will be 2800, because it will be a leap year in the Gregorian calendar but not in the Revised Julian calendar.

This rule gives an average year length of 365.242222 days. This is a very good approximation to the mean tropical year, but because the vernal equinox year is slightly longer, the Revised Julian calendar does not do as good a job as the Gregorian calendar of keeping the vernal equinox on or close to March 21.

==Chinese calendar==
The Chinese calendar is lunisolar, so a leap year has an extra month, often called an embolismic month after the Greek word for it. In the Chinese calendar the leap month is added according to a rule which ensures that month 11 is always the month that contains the northern winter solstice. The intercalary month takes the same number as the preceding month; for example, if it follows the second month i.e. February () then it is simply called "leap second month" i.e. "Leap February" ().

==Hebrew calendar==
The Hebrew calendar is lunisolar with an embolismic month. This extra month is called Adar Alef (first Adar) and is added before Adar, which then becomes Adar Bet (second Adar). According to the Metonic cycle, this is done seven times every nineteen years (specifically, in years 3, 6, 8, 11, 14, 17, and 19). This is to ensure that Pesah (Passover) is always in the spring as required by the Torah (Pentateuch) in many verses Exodus 23,15 ; Exodus 34,18 ; Deuteronomy 15,1 ; Deuteronomy 15, 13 relating to Pesah.

In addition, the Hebrew calendar has postponement rules that postpone the start of the year by one or two days. These postponement rules reduce the number of different combinations of year length and starting days of the week from 28 to 14, and regulate the location of certain religious holidays in relation to the Sabbath. In particular, the first day of the Hebrew year can never be Sunday, Wednesday or Friday. This rule is known in Hebrew as "lo adu rosh" ( " ), i.e., "Rosh first day of the year is not Sunday, Wednesday or Friday" (as the Hebrew word adu is written by three Hebrew letters signifying Sunday, Wednesday and Friday). Accordingly, the first day of Pesah (Passover) is never Monday, Wednesday or Friday. This rule is known in Hebrew as "lo badu Pesah" ( " ), which has a double meaning  "Pesah is not a legend", but also "Pesah is not Monday, Wednesday or Friday" (as the Hebrew word badu is written by three Hebrew letters signifying Monday, Wednesday and Friday).

One reason for this rule is that Yom Kippur, the holiest day in the Hebrew calendar and the tenth day of the Hebrew year, now must never be adjacent to the weekly Sabbath (which is Saturday), i.e. it must never fall on Friday or Sunday, in order not to have two adjacent Sabbath days. However, Yom Kippur can still be on Saturday. These rules for the Feasts do not apply to the years from the Creation to the deliverance of the Hebrews from Egypt under Moses. It was at that time (cf. Exodus 13) that the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob gave the Hebrews their "Law" including the days to be kept holy and the Feast Days and Sabbaths.

Years consisting of 12 months have between 353 and 355 days. In a k'sidra ("in order") 354-day year, months have alternating 30 and 29 day lengths. In a chaser ("lacking") year, the month of Kislev is reduced to 29 days. In a malei ("filled") year, the month of Cheshvan is increased to 30 days. 13-month years follow the same pattern, with the addition of the 30-day Adar Alef, giving them between 383 and 385 days.

==Islamic calendar==
The observed and calculated versions of the Islamic calendar do not have regular leap days, even though both have lunar months containing 29 or 30 days each in no apparent order. However, the tabular Islamic calendar used by Islamic astronomers during the Middle Ages and still used by some Muslims does have a regular leap day added to the last month of the lunar year in 11 years of a 30-year cycle. "The Islamic leap year". (n.d.). Time and Date AS. Retrieved February 29, 2012. This additional day is found at the end of the last month, Dhu 'l-Hijja, which is also the month of the Hajj. "Leap year trivia you might want to know". (n.d.) GMA News. Retrieved February 29, 2012. 

The Hijri-Shamsi calendar, also adopted by the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community, is based on solar calculations and is similar to the Gregorian calendar in its structure with the exception that the first year starts with Hijra. 

==Hindu calendar==
In the Hindu calendar, which is a lunisolar calendar, the embolismic month is called adhika maasa (extra month). It is the month in which the sun is in the same sign of the stellar zodiac on two consecutive dark moons. Adhika maasa occurs once every two or three years, compensating for the approximately eleven fewer days per year in twelve lunar months than the solar calendar. Thus, Hindu festivals tend to occur within a given span of the Gregorian calendar. For example: the No Moon during Diwali festival tends to occur between October 22 and November 15. Buddhist calendars in several related forms (each a simplified version of the Hindu calendar) are used on mainland Southeast Asia in the countries of Cambodia, Laos, Thailand, Myanmar (formerly Burma) and Sri Lanka.

The Hindu Calendar also known as Vikram Samvat is used in Nepal as National Calendar. All the official work is done based on this calendar.

The calendar followed in some parts of South India (mainly in Tamil Nadu) is solar. It has a leap year every four years.

==Solar Hejri calendar==

The Iranian calendar is an observational calendar that starts on the spring equinox and adds a single intercalated day to the last month (Esfand) once every four or five years; the first leap year occurs as the fifth year of the typical 33 year cycle and the remaining leap years occur every four years through the remainder of the 33 year cycle. The system used is more accurate and more complicated, and is based on the time of the March equinox as observed from Tehran. The 33 year period is not completely regular; every so often the 33-year cycle will be broken by a cycle of 29 or 37 years. M. Heydari-Malayeri, A concise review of the Iranian calendar, Paris Observatory, 2004. 

==Folk traditions==
A spinster eagerly awaits the upcoming leap day, in this 1903 cartoon by Bob Satterfield.
In Ireland and Britain, it is a tradition that women may propose marriage only in leap years. While it has been claimed that the tradition was initiated by Saint Patrick or Brigid of Kildare in 5th century Ireland, this is dubious, as the tradition has not been attested before the 19th century. Mikkelson, B. & Mikkelson, D.P. (2010). The Privilege of Ladies by Barbara Mikkelson. The Urban Legends Reference Pages. snopes.com. Supposedly, a 1288 law by Queen Margaret of Scotland (then age five and living in Norway), required that fines be levied if a marriage proposal was refused by the man; compensation was deemed to be a pair of leather gloves, a single rose, 1 and a kiss. Virtually no laws of Margaret survive. Indeed, none concerning her subjects are recorded in the twelve volume Acts of the Parliaments of Scotland (181475) covering the period 11241707 (two laws concerning young Margaret herself are recorded on pages 424 & 4412 of volume I). In some places the tradition was tightened to restricting female proposals to the modern leap day, February 29, or to the medieval (bissextile) leap day, February 24.

According to Felten: "A play from the turn of the 17th century, 'The Maydes Metamorphosis,' has it that 'this is leape year/women wear breeches.' A few hundred years later, breeches wouldn't do at all: Women looking to take advantage of their opportunity to pitch woo were expected to wear a scarlet petticoatfair warning, if you will." 
Felten, E. (February 23, 2008). The bissextile beverage. Wall Street Journal. 

In Finland, the tradition is that if a man refuses a woman's proposal on leap day, he should buy her the fabrics for a skirt.

In Greece, marriage in a leap year is considered unlucky. A Greek Wedding Anagnosis Books Retrieved January 12, 2012. One in five engaged couples in Greece will plan to avoid getting married in a leap year. Teaching Tips 63, at Developing Teachers; retrieved January 12, 2012. 

==Birthdays==
A person born on February 29 may be called a "leapling" or a "leaper". Hall, C. (February 29, 2008). Leap year babies hop through hoops of joy, pain of novelty birthday. Detroit Free Press. Retrieved February 29, 2008. In common years they usually celebrate their birthdays on February 28. In some situations, March 1 is used as the birthday in a non-leap year since it is the day following February 28.

Technically, a leapling will have fewer birthday anniversaries than their age in years. This phenomenon is exploited when a person claims to be only a quarter of their actual age, by counting their leap-year birthday anniversaries only. In Gilbert and Sullivan's 1879 comic opera The Pirates of Penzance, Frederic the pirate apprentice discovers that he is bound to serve the pirates until his 21st birthday rather than until his 21st year.

For legal purposes, legal birthdays depend on how local laws count time intervals.

===Republic of China===

The Civil Code of the Republic of China since October 10, 1929, Legislative history of the Civil Code of the Republic of China now in effect in Taiwan implies that the legal birthday of a leapling is February 28 in common years:

===Hong Kong===
Since 1990 non-retroactively, Hong Kong considers the legal birthday of a leapling March 1 in common years: 
[http://www.legislation.gov.hk/blis_ind.nsf/E1BF50C09A33D3DC482564840019D2F4/22F10EC537B1BEBAC825648300339AA3?OpenDocument "Age of Majority (Related Provisions) Ordinance" (Ch. 410 Sec. 5) (June 30, 1997). Hong Kong Department of Justice(Enacted in 1990). 

==See also==
* Century leap year
* Leap week calendar
* Leap second
* Zeller's congruence
* Sansculottides
* Leap year bug

==References==

==External links==
* 
* Famous persons born on Leap Day
* Leap Day Campaign: Galileo Day



[[Ludwig Mies van der Rohe]]

Ludwig Mies van der Rohe (born Maria Ludwig Michael Mies; March 27, 1886  August 17, 1969) was a German-American architect. He is commonly referred to and was addressed as Mies, his surname. Along with Le Corbusier, Alvar Aalto, and Frank Lloyd Wright, he is widely regarded as one of the pioneering masters of modern architecture.

Mies, like many of his post-World War I contemporaries, sought to establish a new architectural style that could represent modern times just as Classical and Gothic did for their own eras. He created an influential twentieth-century architectural style, stated with extreme clarity and simplicity. His mature buildings made use of modern materials such as industrial steel and plate glass to define interior spaces. He strove toward an architecture with a minimal framework of structural order balanced against the implied freedom of free-flowing open space. He called his buildings "skin and bones" architecture. He sought a rational approach that would guide the creative process of architectural design, but he was always concerned with expressing the spirit of the modern era. He is often associated with his quotation of the aphorisms, "less is more" and "God is in the details".

==Early career==
Mies was born in Aachen, Germany. He worked in his father's stone-carving shop and at several local design firms before he moved to Berlin, where he joined the office of interior designer Bruno Paul. He began his architectural career as an apprentice at the studio of Peter Behrens from 1908 to 1912, where he was exposed to the current design theories and to progressive German culture, working alongside Walter Gropius and Le Corbusier, who were later also involved in the development of the Bauhaus. Mies served as construction manager of the Embassy of the German Empire in Saint Petersburg under Behrens. 

His talent was quickly recognized and he soon began independent commissions, despite his lack of a formal college-level education. A physically imposing, deliberative, and reticent man, Ludwig Mies renamed himself as part of his rapid transformation from a tradesman's son to an architect working with Berlin's cultural elite, adding "van der" and his mother's surname "Rohe", using the Dutch "van der", rather than the German form "von" which was legally restricted to those of genuine aristocratic lineage. "Do Italian last names beginning with 'de,' 'del,' or 'della' indicate nobility?" (April 6, 1990)The Straight Dope 

He began his independent professional career designing upper-class homes, joining the movement seeking a return to the purity of early nineteenth-century Germanic domestic styles. He admired the broad proportions, regularity of rhythmic elements, attention to the relationship of the man-made to nature, and compositions using simple cubic forms of the early nineteenth century Prussian Neo-Classical architect Karl Friedrich Schinkel. He rejected the eclectic and cluttered classical styles so common at the turn of the twentieth century as irrelevant to the modern times.

==Personal==
In 1913, Mies married Adele Auguste (Ada) Bruhn (1885-1951), the daughter of a wealthy industrialist. The couple separated in 1918, but had three daughters: Dorothea (1914-2008), an actress and dancer who was known as Georgia, Marianne (1915-2003), and Waltraut (1917-1959), who was a research scholar and curator at the Art Institute of Chicago. During his military service in 1917, Mies fathered a son out of wedlock. In 1925 Mies began a relationship with designer Lilly Reich that ended when he moved to the United States; from 1940 until his death, artist Lora Marx (1900-1989) was his primary companion. Mies carried on a romantic relationship with sculptor and art collector Mary Callery for whom he designed an artist's studio in Huntington, Long Island, New York. He also was rumored to have a brief relationship with Edith Farnsworth, who commissioned his work for the Farnsworth House. Marianne's son Dirk Lohan (b. 1938) studied under, and later worked for, Mies.

==Traditionalism to Modernism==
Villa Tugendhat built in 1930 in Brno, in today's Czech Republic, for Fritz Tugendhat
Barcelona Pavilion, 1929. (reconstruction)

After World War I, Mies began, while still designing traditional neoclassical homes, a parallel experimental effort. He joined his avant-garde peers in the long-running search for a new style that would be suitable for the modern industrial age. The weak points of traditional styles had been under attack by progressive theorists since the mid-nineteenth century, primarily for the contradictions of hiding modern construction technology with a facade of ornamented traditional styles.

The mounting criticism of the historical styles gained substantial cultural credibility after World War I, a disaster widely seen as a failure of the old world order of imperial leadership of Europe. The aristocratic classical revival styles were particularly reviled by many as the architectural symbol of a now-discredited and outmoded social system. Progressive thinkers called for a completely new architectural design process guided by rational problem-solving and an exterior expression of modern materials and structure rather than, what they considered, the superficial application of classical facades.

While continuing his traditional neoclassical design practice Mies began to develop visionary projects that, though mostly unbuilt, rocketed him to fame as an architect capable of giving form that was in harmony with the spirit of the emerging modern society. Boldly abandoning ornament altogether, Mies made a dramatic modernist debut with his stunning competition proposal for the faceted all-glass Friedrichstrae skyscraper in 1921, followed by a taller curved version in 1922 named the Glass Skyscraper. Compare Arthur Lubow's "The Contextualizer," New York Times. April 6, 2008, p. 4; excerpt, "...a skyscraper that Nouvel (adapting a term from the artist Brncui) called the tour sans fins, or endless tower. Conceived as a kind of minaret alongside the squat, monumental Grande Arche de La Dfense, the endless tower has taken on some of the mystique of Mies van der Rohes unbuilt Friedrichstrasse glass skyscraper of 1921. To obscure its lower end, the tower was designed to sit within a crater. Its facade, appearing to vanish in the sky, changed as it rose, from charcoal-colored granite to paler stone, then to aluminum and finally to glass that became increasingly reflective, all to enhance the illusion of dematerialization." 

He continued with a series of pioneering projects, culminating in his two European masterworks: the temporary German Pavilion for the Barcelona exposition (often called the Barcelona Pavilion) in 1929 Farnsworth House. "History", Farnsworth House, Retrieved on 30 January 2013. (a 1986 reconstruction is now built on the original site) and the elegant Villa Tugendhat in Brno, Czech Republic, completed in 1930.

He joined the German avant-garde, working with the progressive design magazine G which started in July 1923. He developed prominence as architectural director of the Werkbund, organizing the influential Weissenhof Estate prototype modernist housing exhibition. He was also one of the founders of the architectural association Der Ring. He joined the avant-garde Bauhaus design school as their director of architecture, adopting and developing their functionalist application of simple geometric forms in the design of useful objects. He served as its last director.

Like many other avant-garde architects of the day, Mies based his architectural mission and principles on his understanding and interpretation of ideas developed by theorists and critics who pondered the declining relevance of the traditional design styles. He selectively adopted theoretical ideas such as the aesthetic credos of Russian Constructivism with their ideology of "efficient" sculptural assembly of modern industrial materials. Mies found appeal in the use of simple rectilinear and planar forms, clean lines, pure use of color, and the extension of space around and beyond interior walls expounded by the Dutch De Stijl group. In particular, the layering of functional sub-spaces within an overall space and the distinct articulation of parts as expressed by Gerrit Rietveld appealed to Mies.

The design theories of Adolf Loos found resonance with Mies, particularly the ideas of replacing elaborate applied artistic ornament with the straightforward display of innate visual qualities of materials and forms. Loos had proposed that art and crafts should be entirely independent of architecture, that the architect should no longer control those cultural elements as the Beaux Arts principles had dictated. Mies also admired his ideas about the nobility that could be found in the anonymity of modern life.

The bold work of American architects was greatly admired by European architects. Like other architects who viewed the exhibitions of Frank Lloyd Wright's Wasmuth Portfolio, Mies was enthralled with the free-flowing spaces of inter-connected rooms which encompass their outdoor surroundings as demonstrated by the open floor plans of the Wright's American Prairie Style. American engineering structures were also held up to be exemplary of the beauty possible in functional construction, and its skyscrapers were greatly admired.

==Significance and meaning==
Mies pursued an ambitious lifelong mission to create a new architectural language that could be used to represent the new era of technology and production. He saw a need for an architecture expressive of and in harmony with his epoch, just as Gothic architecture was for an era of spiritualism. He applied a disciplined design process using rational thought to achieve his spiritual goals. He believed that the configuration and arrangement of every architectural element, particularly including the character of enclosed space, must contribute to a unified expression. One notable way that Mies connected his buildings with nature was by extending outdoor plaza tiles into the floor of a lobby, synthesizing the exterior and interior spaces of the site. The device accentuated the effortless flow between natural conditions and artificial structures. This characteristic is often found in his large building projects such as the Seagram Building.

The self-educated Mies painstakingly studied the great philosophers and thinkers, past and present, to enhance his own understanding of the character and essential qualities of the technological times he lived in. More than perhaps any other practising pioneer of modernism, Mies mined the writings of philosophers and thinkers for ideas that were relevant to his architectural mission. Mies' architecture was guided by principles at a high level of abstraction, and his own generalized descriptions of those principles intentionally leave much room for interpretation. Yet his buildings are executed as objects of beauty and craftsmanship, and seem very direct and simple when viewed in person.

Every aspect of his architecture, from overall concept to the smallest detail, supports his effort to express the modern age. The depth of meaning conveyed by his work, beyond its aesthetic qualities, has drawn many contemporary philosophers and theoretical thinkers to continue to further explore and speculate about his architecture.

==Emigration to the United States==
Commission opportunities dwindled with the worldwide depression after 1929. Starting in 1930, Mies served as the last director of the faltering Bauhaus, at the request of his colleague and competitor Walter Gropius. In 1932, Nazi political pressure forced the state-supported school to leave its campus in Dessau, and Mies moved it to an abandoned telephone factory in Berlin. By 1933, however, the continued operation of the school was untenable (it was raided by the Gestapo in April), and in July of that year, Mies and the faculty voted to close the Bauhaus. He built very little in these years (one built commission was Philip Johnson's New York apartment); the Nazis rejected his style as not "German" in character.

Frustrated and unhappy, he left his homeland reluctantly in 1937 as he saw his opportunity for any future building commissions vanish, accepting a residential commission in Wyoming and then an offer to head the department of architecture of the newly established Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT) in Chicago. There he introduced a new kind of education and attitude later known as Second Chicago School, which became very influential in the following decades in North America and Europe.

==Career in the United States==
IBM Plaza, Chicago, Illinois
Mies settled in Chicago, Illinois where he was appointed head of the architecture school at Chicago's Armour Institute of Technology (later renamed Illinois Institute of Technology). One of the benefits of taking this position was that he would be commissioned to design the new buildings and master plan for the campus. All his buildings still stand there, including Alumni Hall, the Chapel, and his masterpiece the S.R. Crown Hall, built as the home of IIT's School of Architecture. Crown Hall is widely regarded as Mies' finest work, the definition of Miesian architecture.

In 1944, he became an American citizen, completing his severance from his native Germany. His thirty years as an American architect reflect a more structural, pure approach toward achieving his goal of a new architecture for the twentieth century. He focused his efforts on enclosing open and adaptable "universal" spaces with clearly arranged structural frameworks, featuring prefabricated steel shapes filled in with large sheets of glass.

His early projects at the IIT campus, and for developer Herb Greenwald, presented to Americans a style that seemed a natural progression of the almost forgotten nineteenth century Chicago School style. His architecture, with origins in the German Bauhaus and western European International Style, became an accepted mode of building for American cultural and educational institutions, developers, public agencies, and large corporations.

==American work==
Mies worked from his studio in downtown Chicago for his entire 31-year period in America. His significant projects in the U.S. include in Chicago and the area: the residential towers of 860880 Lake Shore Dr, the Chicago Federal Center complex, the Farnsworth House, Crown Hall and other structures at IIT; and the Seagram Building in New York. These iconic works became the prototypes for his other projects. He also built homes for wealthy clients.

===Farnsworth House===

Mies van der Rohe's Farnsworth House

Between 1946 and 1951, Mies van der Rohe designed and built the Farnsworth House, a weekend retreat outside Chicago for an independent professional woman, Dr. Edith Farnsworth. Here, Mies explored the relationship between people, shelter, and nature. The glass pavilion is raised six feet above a floodplain next to the Fox River, surrounded by forest and rural prairies.

The highly crafted pristine white structural frame and all-glass walls define a simple rectilinear interior space, allowing nature and light to envelop the interior space. A wood-panelled fireplace (also housing mechanical equipment, kitchen, and toilets) is positioned within the open space to suggest living, dining and sleeping spaces without using walls. No partitions touch the surrounding all-glass enclosure. Without solid exterior walls, full-height draperies on a perimeter track allow freedom to provide full or partial privacy when and where desired. The house has been described as sublime, a temple hovering between heaven and earth, a poem, a work of art.

The Farnsworth House and its 60 acre wooded site was purchased at auction for US$7.5 million by preservation groups in 2004 and is now owned and operated by the National Trust for Historic Preservation as a public museum. The building influenced the creation of hundreds of modernist glass houses, most notably the Glass House by Philip Johnson, located near New York City and also now owned by the National Trust.

The house is an embodiment of Mies' mature vision of modern architecture for the new technological age: a single unencumbered space within a minimal "skin and bones" framework, a clearly understandable arrangement of architectural parts. His ideas are stated with clarity and simplicity, using materials that are configured to express their own individual character.

===860880 Lake Shore Drive===

860880 Lake Shore Drive, Chicago, Illinois
Mies designed a series of four middle-income high-rise apartment buildings for developer Herb Greenwald: the 860880 (which was built between 1949 and 1951) and 900910 Lake Shore Drive towers on Chicago's Lakefront. These towers, with faades of steel and glass, were radical departures from the typical residential brick apartment buildings of the time. Mies found their unit sizes too small for him, choosing instead to continue living in a spacious traditional luxury apartment a few blocks away. The towers were simple rectangular boxes with a non-hierarchical wall enclosure, raised on stilts above a glass-enclosed lobby.

The lobby is set back from the perimeter columns, which were exposed around the perimeter of the building above, creating a modern arcade not unlike those of the Greek temples. This configuration created a feeling of light, openness, and freedom of movement at the ground level that became the prototype for countless new towers designed both by Mies's office and his followers. Some historians argue that this new approach is an expression of the American spirit and the boundless open space of the frontier, which German culture so admired.

Once Mies had established his basic design concept for the general form and details of his tower buildings, he applied those solutions (with evolving refinements) to his later high-rise building projects. The architecture of his towers appears to be similar, but each project represents new ideas about the formation of highly sophisticated urban space at ground level. He delighted in the composition of multiple towers arranged in a seemingly casual non-hierarchical relation to each other.

Just as with his interiors, he created free flowing spaces and flat surfaces that represented the idea of an oasis of uncluttered clarity and calm within the chaos of the city. He included nature by leaving openings in the pavement, through which plants seem to grow unfettered by urbanization, just as in the pre-settlement environment.

===Seagram Building===

In 1958, Mies van der Rohe designed what is often regarded as the pinnacle of the modernist high-rise architecture, the Seagram Building in New York City. Mies was chosen by the daughter of the client, Phyllis Bronfman Lambert, who has become a noted architectural figure and patron in her own right. The Seagram Building has become an icon of the growing power of the corporation, that defining institution of the twentieth century. In a bold and innovative move, the architect chose to set the tower back from the property line to create a forecourt plaza and fountain on Park Avenue.

Although now acclaimed and widely influential as an urban design feature, Mies had to convince Bronfman's bankers that a taller tower with significant "unused" open space at ground level would enhance the presence and prestige of the building. Mies' design included a bronze curtain wall with external H-shaped mullions that were exaggerated in depth beyond what was structurally necessary. Detractors criticized it as having committed Adolf Loos's "crime of ornamentation". Philip Johnson had a role in interior materials selections, and he designed the sumptuous Four Seasons Restaurant, which has endured un-remodeled to today. The Seagram Building is said to be an early example of the innovative "fast-track" construction process, where design documentation and construction are done concurrently.

Using the Seagram as a prototype, Mies' office designed a number of modern high-rise office towers, notably the Chicago Federal Center, which includes the Dirksen and Kluczynski Federal Buildings and Post Office (1959) and the IBM Plaza in Chicago; the Westmount Square in Montreal, and the Toronto-Dominion Centre in 1967. Each project applies the prototype rectangular form on stilts and ever-more refined enclosure wall systems, but each creates a unique set of exterior spaces that are an essential aspect of his creative efforts.

During 19511952, Mies' designed the steel, glass, and brick McCormick House, located in Elmhurst, Illinois (15 miles west of the Chicago Loop), for real-estate developer Robert Hall McCormick, Jr. A one-story adaptation of the exterior curtain wall of his famous 860880 Lake Shore Drive towers, it served as a prototype for an unbuilt series of speculative houses to be constructed in Melrose Park, Illinois. The house has been moved and reconfigured as a part of the public Elmhurst Art Museum. He also built a residence for John M. van Beuren on a family estate near Morristown, New Jersey.

===Museum of Fine Arts, Houston===
Caroline Weiss Law Building in Houston, Texas
Mies designed two buildings for the Museum of Fine Arts, Houston (MFAH) as additions to the Caroline Weiss Law Building. In 1953, the MFAH commissioned Mies van der Rohe to create a master plan for the institution. He designed two additions to the buildingCullinan Hall, completed in 1958, and the Brown Pavilion, completed in 1974. A renowned example of the International Style, these portions of the Caroline Wiess Law Building comprise one of only two Mies-designed museums in the world. 

===National Gallery, Berlin===
Mies's last work was the Neue Nationalgalerie art museum, the New National Gallery for the Berlin National Gallery. Considered one of the most perfect statements of his architectural approach, the upper pavilion is a precise composition of monumental steel columns and a cantilevered (overhanging) roof plane with a glass enclosure. The simple square glass pavilion is a powerful expression of his ideas about flexible interior space, defined by transparent walls and supported by an external structural frame.

The glass pavilion is a relatively small portion of the overall building, serving as a symbolic architectural entry point and monumental gallery for temporary exhibits. A large podium building below the pavilion accommodates most of the museum's total built area in windowless spaces for galleries and support functions.

==Furniture==
Mies designed modern furniture pieces using new industrial technologies that have become popular classics, such as the Barcelona chair and table, the Brno chair, and the Tugendhat chair. His furniture is known for fine craftsmanship, a mix of traditional luxurious fabrics like leather combined with modern chrome frames, and a distinct separation of the supporting structure and the supported surfaces, often employing cantilevers to enhance the feeling of lightness created by delicate structural frames. During this period, he collaborated closely with interior designer and companion Lilly Reich.

==Educator==
Mies served as the last director of Berlin's Bauhaus, and then headed the department of architecture, Illinois Institute of Technology in Chicago, where he developed the Second Chicago School. He played a significant role as an educator, believing his architectural language could be learned, then applied to design any type of modern building. He set up a new education at the department of architecture of the Illinois Institute of Technology in Chicago replacing the traditional Ecole des Beaux-Art curriculum by a three-step-education beginning with crafts of drawing and construction leading to planning skills and finishing with theory of architecture (compare Vitruvius: firmitas, utilitas, venustas). He worked personally and intensively on prototype solutions, and then allowed his students, both in school and his office, to develop derivative solutions for specific projects under his guidance.

Some of Mies' curriculum is still put in practice in the first and second year programs at IIT, including the precise drafting of brick construction details so unpopular with aspiring student architects. When none was able to match the quality of his own work, he agonized about where his educational method had gone wrong. Nevertheless his achievements in creating a teachable architecture language that can be used to express the modern technological era survives until today.

Mies placed great importance on education of architects who could carry on his design principles. He devoted a great deal of time and effort leading the architecture program at IIT. Mies served on the initial Advisory Board of the Graham Foundation in Chicago. His own practice was based on intensive personal involvement in design efforts to create prototype solutions for building types (860 Lake Shore Drive, the Farnsworth House, Seagram Building, S. R. Crown Hall, The New National Gallery), then allowing his studio designers to develop derivative buildings under his supervision.

Mies's grandson Dirk Lohan and two partners led the firm after he died in 1969. Lohan, who had collaborated with Mies on the New National Gallery, continued with existing projects but soon led the firm on his own independent path. Other disciples continued Mies's architectural language for years, notably Gene Summers, David Haid, Myron Goldsmith, Y.C. Wong, Jacques Brownson, and other architects at the firms of C.F. Murphy and Skidmore, Owings & Merrill.

But while Mies' work had enormous influence and critical recognition, his approach failed to sustain a creative force as a style after his death and was eclipsed by the new wave of Post Modernism by the 1980s. Proponents of the Post Modern style attacked the Modernism with clever statements such as "less is a bore" and with captivating images such as Crown Hall sinking in Lake Michigan. Mies had hoped his architecture would serve as a universal model that could be easily imitated, but the aesthetic power of his best buildings proved impossible to match, instead resulting mostly in drab and uninspired structures rejected by the general public. The failure of his followers to meet his high standard may have contributed to demise of Modernism and the rise of new competing design theories following his death.

Mies van der Rohe's grave marker in Graceland Cemetery
German commemorative stamp marking 100 years since Mies's birth

==Death==
Over the last twenty years of his life, Mies developed and built his vision of a monumental "skin and bones" architecture that reflected his goal to provide the individual a place to fulfill himself in the modern era. Mies sought to create free and open spaces, enclosed within a structural order with minimal presence. Mies van der Rohe died on August 17, 1969. After cremation, his ashes were buried near Chicago's other famous architects in Chicago's Graceland Cemetery. His grave is marked by a simple black slab of granite and a large Honey locust tree. 

==Archives==
The Ludwig Mies van der Rohe Archive, an administratively independent section of the Museum of Modern Art's department of architecture and design, was established in 1968 by the museum's trustees. It was founded in response to the architect's desire to bequeath his entire work to the museum. The archive consists of about nineteen thousand drawings and prints, one thousand of which are by the designer and architect Lilly Reich (18851947), Mies van der Rohe's close collaborator from 1927 to 1937; of written documents (primarily, the business correspondence) covering nearly the entire career of the architect; of photographs of buildings, models, and furniture; and of audiotapes, books, and periodicals.

Archival materials are also held by the Ryerson & Burnham Libraries at the Art Institute of Chicago. The Ludwig Mies van der Rohe Collection, 19291969 (bulk 19481960) includes correspondence, articles, and materials related to his association with the Illinois Institute of Technology. The Ludwig Mies van der Rohe Metropolitan Structures Collection, 19611969, includes scrapbooks and photographs documenting Chicago projects.

Other archives are held at the University of Illinois at Chicago (personal book collection), the Canadian Center for Architecture (drawings and photos) in Montreal, the Newberry Library in Chicago (personal correspondence), and at the Library of Congress in Washington D.C. (professional correspondence).

==Gallery==

File:MLK Library.jpg|Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial Library, Washington
File:Berlin Neue Nationalgalerie June 2002.jpg|Interior of Neue Nationalgalerie museum in Berlin, Germany
File:Mies van der Rohe Residential District.jpg|Lafayette Park, Detroit is on the U.S. National Register of Historic Places
File:Lafayette Pavillion Apartments.jpg|Lafayette Towers Apartments East, Detroit
File:Toronto Dominion Centre logo.png|Toronto-Dominion Centre logo includes the font text created by Mies
File:King and Bay.jpg|TD Centre pavilion, Toronto, used as a branch for TD Canada Trust bank
File:Crown Hall 060514.jpg|S.R. Crown Hall on the campus of the Illinois Institute of Technology is a National Historic Landmark
File:HighfieldHouse 2008.jpg|Highfield House, Baltimore
File:CHICAGOSSA.jpg|University of Chicago School of Social Service Administration
File:201Corot.jpg|201 Corot, Montral

==List of works==

A memorial to the Spartacist leaders Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg, commissioned by Eduard Fuchs, president of the German Communist Party in Germany designed by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, built by Wilhelm Pieck, and inaugurated on 13 June 1926, later destroyed by the Nazis

; Early career in Berlin (1907-1938)
* 1907 Riehl House  Residential Home, Potsdam, Germany
* 1911 Perl House  Residential Home, Zehlendorf 
* 1913 Werner House  Residential Home, Zehlendorf 
* 1917 Urbig House  Residential Home, Potsdam
* 1922 Kempner House  Residential Home, Charlottenburg 
* 1922 Eichstaedt House  Residential Home, Wannsee 
* 1922 Feldmann House  Residential Home, Wilmersdorf 
* 1923 Ryder House - Residential Home, Wiesbaden
* 1926 Mosler House  Residential Home, Babelsberg 
* 1927 Afrikanischestrasse Apartments  Multi-Family Residential, Berlin, Germany 
* 1927 Weissenhof Estate  Housing Exhibition coordinated by Mies and with a contribution by him, Stuttgart 
* 1928 Haus Lange and Haus Esters  Residential Home and an art museum, Krefeld 
* 1929 Barcelona Pavilion  World's Fair Pavilion, Barcelona, Spain
* 1930 Villa Tugendhat  Residential Home, Brno, Czech Republic, designated a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 2001
* 1930 Verseidag Factory Dyeing and HE Silk Mill Building Krefeld, Germany Mies In Krefeld. Projekt Mik. Retrieved on 2013-12-23. 
* 1932 Lemke House  Residential Home, Weissensee

; Buildings after emigration to the United States (1939-1960)
* 1939-1958  Illinois Institute of Technology Campus Master Plan, Academic Campus & Buildings, Chicago, Illinois
* 1949 The Promontory Apartments  Residential Apartment Complex, Chicago, Illinois
* 1951 Sheridan-Oakdale Apartments (2933 N Sheridan Rd )  Residential Apartment Complex, Chicago, Illinois
* 1951 Lake Shore Drive Apartments  Residential Apartment Towers, Chicago
* 1951 Algonquin Apartments  Residential Apartments, Chicago, Illinois
* 1951 Farnsworth House  Vacation Home, Plano, Illinois
* 1952 Arts Club of Chicago Interior Renovation  Art Gallery, demolished in 1997, Chicago, Illinois
* 1952 Robert H. McCormick House - Residential Home, relocated to the Elmhurst Art Museum, Elmhurst, Illinois
* 1954 Cullinan Hall  Museum of Fine Arts, Houston
* 1956 Crown Hall, Illinois Institute of Technology College of Architecture Academic Building, Chicago, Illinois Blaser, Werner. Mies Van der Rohe IIT Campus. Basel, Boston Berlin: Birkauser Publishers for Architecture. 2002. Print 
* 1956 Esplanade Apartment Buildings (900-910 Lake Shore Dr)  Residential Apartment Complex, Chicago, Illinois 
* 1957 Commonwealth Promenade Apartments (330- 330 W Diversey Parkway)  Residential Apartment Complex, Chicago (1957) 
* 1958 Seagram Building  Office Tower, New York City, New York
* 1958 Caroline Weiss Law Building, Museum of Fine Art, Houston
* 1959 Home Federal Savings and Loan Association Building Office Building, Des Moines, Iowa
* 1959 Lafayette Park  Residential Development, Detroit, Michigan. Vitullo-Martin, Julio.The Biggest Mies Collection: His Lafayette Park residential development thrives in Detroit.The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved on April 21, 2007. 
* 1960 Pavilion and Colonnade Apartments Residential complex, Newark, New Jersey

; Late career Worldwide (196169)
* 1961 Bacardi Office Building  Office Building, Mexico City
* 1962 Highfield House Apartments  Office Building, Baltimore, Maryland
* 1962 Tourelle-Sur-Rive  Residential apartment complex of three towers, Nuns' Island, Montreal, Canada
* 1962 One Charles Center  Office Tower, Baltimore, Maryland
* 1963 2400 North Lakeview Apartments  Residential Apartment Complex, Chicago, Illinois 
* 1963 Morris Greenwald House  Vacation Home, Weston, Connecticut
* 1964 Chicago Federal Center - Civic Complex, Chicago, Illinois
** 1960-64 Dirksen Federal Building  Office Tower, Chicago
** Kluczynski Federal Building  Office Tower, Chicago
** United States Post Office Loop Station  General Post Office, Chicago
* 1964 Highfield House Condominium, 4000 North Charles  Condominium Apartments, Baltimore, Maryland
* 1965 University of Chicago School of Social Service Administration  Academic Building Chicago, Illinois
* 1965 Richard King Mellon Hall  Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, PA
* 1965 Meredith Hall  College of Journalism and Mass Communication, Drake University, Des Moines, IA
* 1967 Westmount Square  Office & Residential Tower Complex, Westmount, Montreal, Canada
* 1968 Neue Nationalgalerie  Modern Art Museum, Berlin, Germany
* 1965-68 Brown Pavilion, Museum of Fine Art, Houston
* 1967-69 Toronto-Dominion Centre  Office Tower Complex, Toronto, Canada
* 1969 Filling station  Nuns' Island, Montreal, Canada (closed)
* 1970 One Illinois Center  Office Tower, Chicago, Illinois (completed post-mortem)
* 1972 Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial Library  District of Columbia Public Library, Washington, D.C. (completed post-mortem)
* 1973 American Life Building  Louisville, Kentucky (completed after Mies's death by Bruno Conterato)
* 1973 IBM Plaza  Office Tower, Chicago (completed post-mortem)

; Buildings on the Illinois Institute of Technology Campus (1939-1958)
* 1943 Minerals & Metals Research Building  Research 
* 1945 Engineering Research Building  Research 
* 1946 Alumni Memorial Hall  Classroom 
* 1946 Wishnick Hall  Classroom 
* 1946 Perlstein Hall  Classroom 
* 1950 I.I.T. Boiler Plant  Academic 
* 1950 Institute of Gas Technology Building  Research 
* 1950 American Association of Railroads Administration Building (now the College of Music Building)  Administration 
* 1952 Mechanical Engineering Research Building I  Research 
* 1952 Carr Memorial Chapel  Religious 
* 1953 American Association of Railroads Mechanical Engineering Building  Research 
* 1953 Carmen Hall  Dormitory 
* 1955 Cunningham Hall  Dormitory 
* 1955 Bailey Hall  Dormitory 
* 1955 I.I.T. Commons Building  Academicname="autogenerated2002"/>
* 1956 Crown Hall  Academic, College of Architecture 
* 1957 Physics & Electrical Engineering Research Building  Research 
* 1957 Siegel Hall  Classroom 
* 1953 American Association of Railroads Laboratory Building  Research 
* 1958 Metals Technology Building Extension  Research 

==See also==
* International Style
* Barcelona chair
*

==References==

==Further reading==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* Mies van der Rohe Society
* Mies van der Rohe Foundation
* 
* Mies in Berlin-Mies in America
* Great Buildings Architects
* Elmhurst Art Museum, featuring McCormick House
* Richard King Mellon Hall, Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, PA
* Mies, IIT, and the Second Chicago School
* Mies in America exhibition
* Travel guide to Mies Buildings
* Construction underway to transform famed Nuns Island gas station



[[Laundering]]

Laundering may refer to:

* Laundry, washing clothes
* Child laundering, the illegal acquisition of children through monetary transactions, etc.
* Money laundering, disguising the origin of illegally gained wealth
* Policy laundering, disguising the origin of legislation



[[Le Corbusier]]

Charles-douard Jeanneret-Gris, better known as Le Corbusier (; October 6, 1887  August 27, 1965), was a Swiss-French architect, designer, painter, urban planner, writer, and one of the pioneers of what is now called modern architecture. He was born in Switzerland and became a French citizen in 1930. His career spanned five decades, with his buildings constructed throughout Europe, India, and America.

Dedicated to providing better living conditions for the residents of crowded cities, Le Corbusier was influential in urban planning, and was a founding member of the Congrs International d'Architecture Moderne (CIAM).

==Early life and education, 18871914==

He was born as Charles-douard Jeanneret-Gris in La Chaux-de-Fonds, a small city in Neuchtel canton in north-western Switzerland, in the Jura mountains, just 5 km across the border from France. He attended a kindergarten that used Frbelian methods.

Young Jeanneret was attracted to the visual arts and studied at the La-Chaux-de-Fonds Art School under Charles L'Eplattenier, who had studied in Budapest and Paris. His architecture teacher in the Art School was the architect Ren Chapallaz, who had a large influence on Le Corbusier's earliest house designs.

In his early years he would frequently escape the somewhat provincial atmosphere of his hometown by traveling around Europe. In 1906 he made his first trip outside of Switzerland, going to Italy. At around 1907, he travelled to Paris, where he found work in the office of Auguste Perret, the French pioneer of reinforced concrete. It was both his trip to Italy and his employment at Perret's office that began to form his own ideas about architecture. In 1908, he studied architecture in Vienna with Josef Hoffmann. Between October 1910 and March 1911, he worked near Berlin for the renowned architect Peter Behrens, where he may have met Ludwig Mies van der Rohe and Walter Gropius. He became fluent in German. More than anything during this period, it was his visit to the Charterhouse of the Valley of Ema that influenced his architectural philosophy profoundly for the rest of his life. He believed that all people should have the opportunity to live as beautifully and peacefully as the monks he witnessed in the sanctuaries at the charterhouse.

Later in 1911, he journeyed to the Balkans and visited Bulgaria, Greece, and Turkey, filling nearly 80 sketchbooks with renderings of what he sawincluding many sketches of the Parthenon, whose forms he would later praise in his work Vers une architecture (1923) ("Towards an Architecture", but usually translated into English as "Towards a New Architecture").

==Early career: The villas, 191420==

Le Corbusier taught at his old school in La-Chaux-de-Fonds during World War I, not returning to Paris until the war was over. During these four years in Switzerland, he worked on theoretical architectural studies using modern techniques. Among these was his project for the Domino House (19141915). This model proposed an open floor plan consisting of concrete slabs supported by a minimal number of thin, reinforced concrete columns around the edges, with a stairway providing access to each level on one side of the floor plan.

This design became the foundation for most of his architecture over the next ten years. Soon he began his own architectural practice with his cousin, Pierre Jeanneret (18961967), a partnership that would last until the 1950s, with an interruption in the World War II years, due to Le Corbusier's ambivalent position towards the Vichy regime.

In 1918, Le Corbusier met the Cubist painter Amde Ozenfant, in whom he recognised a kindred spirit. Ozenfant encouraged him to paint, and the two began a period of collaboration. Rejecting Cubism as irrational and "romantic", the pair jointly published their manifesto, Aprs le cubisme, and established a new artistic movement, Purism. Ozenfant and Le Corbusier established the Purist journal L'Esprit nouveau. He was good friends with the Cubist artist Fernand Lger.

==Pseudonym adopted, 1920==
In the first issue of the journal, in 1920, Charles-Edouard Jeanneret adopted Le Corbusier (an altered form of his maternal grandfather's name, Lecorbsier) as a pseudonym, reflecting his belief that anyone could reinvent himself. Adopting a single name to identify oneself was in vogue by artists in many fields during that era, especially in Paris.

Between 1918 and 1922, Le Corbusier did not build anything, concentrating his efforts on Purist theory and painting. In 1922, he and his cousin Pierre Jeanneret opened a studio in Paris at 35 rue de Svres. 

His theoretical studies soon advanced into several different single-family house models. Among these was the Maison "Citrohan", a pun on the name of the French Citron automaker, for the modern industrial methods and materials Le Corbusier advocated using for the house. Here, Le Corbusier proposed a three-floor structure, with a double-height living room, bedrooms on the second floor, and a kitchen on the third floor. The roof would be occupied by a sun terrace. On the exterior Le Corbusier installed a stairway to provide second-floor access from ground level. Here, as in other projects from this period, he also designed the facades to include large uninterrupted banks of windows. The house used a rectangular plan, with exterior walls that were not filled by windows but left as white, stuccoed spaces. Le Corbusier and Jeanneret left the interior aesthetically spare, with any movable furniture made of tubular metal frames. Light fixtures usually comprised single, bare bulbs. Interior walls also were left white. Between 1922 and 1927, Le Corbusier and Pierre Jeanneret designed many of these private houses for clients around Paris. In Boulogne-sur-Seine and the 16th arrondissement of Paris, Le Corbusier and Jeanneret designed and built the Villa Lipschitz, Maison Cook, Maison Planeix, and the Maison La Roche/Albert Jeanneret, which now houses the Fondation Le Corbusier.

==Personal life==

While returning in 1929 from South America to Europe, Le Corbusier met entertainer and actress Josephine Baker on board the ocean liner Luttia. Le Corbusier made several nude sketches of Baker. Soon after his return to France, Le Corbusier married Yvonne Gallis, a dressmaker and fashion model. She died in 1957. Le Corbusier also had a long extramarital affair with Swedish-American heiress Marguerite Tjader Harris.

Le Corbusier took French citizenship in 1930. 

Portrait on Swiss ten franc banknote 

==Urbanism==

For a number of years, French officials had been unsuccessful in dealing with the squalor of the growing Parisian slums, and Le Corbusier sought efficient ways to house large numbers of people in response to the urban housing crisis. He believed that his new, modern architectural forms would provide an organizational solution that would raise the quality of life for the lower classes. His Immeubles Villas (1922) was such a project, calling for large blocks of cell-like individual apartments stacked one on top of one another, with plans that included a living room, bedrooms, and kitchen, as well as a garden terrace.

Not merely content with designs for a few housing blocks, Le Corbusier soon moved into studies for entire cities. In 1922 he presented his scheme for a "Contemporary City" for three million inhabitants (Ville Contemporaine). The centerpiece of this plan was the group of sixty-story cruciform skyscrapers, steel-framed office buildings encased in huge curtain walls of glass. These skyscrapers were set within large, rectangular, park-like green spaces. At the center was a huge transportation hub that on different levels included depots for buses and trains, as well as highway intersections, and at the top, an airport. Le Corbusier had the fanciful notion that commercial airliners would land between the huge skyscrapers. He segregated pedestrian circulation paths from the roadways and glorified the automobile as a means of transportation. As one moved out from the central skyscrapers, smaller low-story, zig-zag apartment blocks (set far back from the street amid green space) housed the inhabitants. Le Corbusier hoped that politically minded industrialists in France would lead the way with their efficient Taylorist and Fordist strategies adopted from American industrial models to reorganize society. As Norma Evenson has put it, "the proposed city appeared to some an audacious and compelling vision of a brave new world, and to others a frigid megalomaniacally scaled negation of the familiar urban ambient." 

In this new industrial spirit, Le Corbusier contributed to a new journal called L'Esprit Nouveau that advocated the use of modern industrial techniques and strategies to transform society into a more efficient environment with a higher standard of living on all socioeconomic levels. He forcefully argued that this transformation was necessary to avoid the spectre of revolution that would otherwise shake society. His dictum "Architecture or Revolution", developed in his articles in this journal, became his rallying cry for the book Vers une architecture (Toward an Architecture, previously mistranslated into English as Towards a New Architecture), which comprised selected articles he contributed to L'Esprit Nouveau between 1920 and 1923. In this book, Le Corbusier followed the influence of Walter Gropius and reprinted several photographs of North American factories and grain elevators. 

Theoretical urban schemes continued to occupy Le Corbusier. He exhibited his "Plan Voisin", sponsored by an automobile manufacturer, in 1925. In it, he proposed to bulldoze most of central Paris north of the Seine and replace it with his sixty-story cruciform towers from the Contemporary City, placed within an orthogonal street grid and park-like green space. His scheme was met with criticism and scorn from French politicians and industrialists, although they were favorable to the ideas of Taylorism and Fordism underlying his designs. Nonetheless, it did provoke discussion concerning how to deal with the cramped, dirty conditions that enveloped much of the city.

In the 1930s, Le Corbusier expanded and reformulated his ideas on urbanism, eventually publishing them in La Ville radieuse (The Radiant City) in 1935. Perhaps the most significant difference between the Contemporary City and the Radiant City is that the latter abandoned the class-based stratification of the former; housing was now assigned according to family size, not economic position. Some have read dark overtones into The Radiant City: from the "astonishingly beautiful assemblage of buildings" that was Stockholm, for example, Le Corbusier saw only "frightening chaos and saddening monotony." He dreamed of "cleaning and purging" the city, bringing "a calm and powerful architecture"referring to steel, plate glass, and reinforced concrete. Although Le Corbusier's designs for Stockholm did not succeed, later architects took his ideas and partly "destroyed" the city with them. 

High Court in Chandigarh, India
La Ville radieuse also marks Le Corbusier's increasing dissatisfaction with capitalism and his turn to the right-wing syndicalism of Hubert Lagardelle. During the Vichy regime, Le Corbusier received a position on a planning committee and made designs for Algiers and other cities. The central government ultimately rejected his plans, and after 1942 Le Corbusier withdrew from political activity.

After World War II, Le Corbusier attempted to realize his urban planning schemes on a small scale by constructing a series of "units" (the housing block unit of the Radiant City) around France. The most famous of these was the Unit d'Habitation of Marseilles (194652). In the 1950s, a unique opportunity to translate the Radiant City on a grand scale presented itself in the construction of the Union Territory Chandigarh, the new capital for the Indian states of Punjab and Haryana and India's first planned city. Le Corbusier designed many administration buildings, including a courthouse, parliament building, and a university. He also designed the general layout of the city, dividing it into sectors. Le Corbusier was brought on to develop the plan of Albert Mayer.

==Death==
The cabin where he spent his last years in Roquebrune-Cap-Martin

Against his doctor's orders, on August 27, 1965, Le Corbusier went for a swim in the Mediterranean Sea at Roquebrune-Cap-Martin, France. His body was found by bathers and he was pronounced dead at 11 a.m. It was assumed that he may have suffered a heart attack. His funeral place in the courtyard of the Louvre Palace on September 1, 1965, under the direction of writer and thinker Andr Malraux, who was at the time France's Minister of Culture. He was buried alongside his wife in the grave he had designated at Roquebrune.

Le Corbusier's death had a strong impact on the cultural and political world. Tributes poured-in from around the world, even from some of Le Corbusier's strongest artistic critics. Painter Salvador Dal recognised his importance and sent a floral tribute. United States President Lyndon B. Johnson said, "His influence was universal and his works are invested with a permanent quality possessed by those of very few artists in our history". The Soviet Union added, "Modern architecture has lost its greatest master". While his funeral occurred in Paris, Japanese TV channels broadcast his Museum in Tokyo in what was at the time a unique media homage.

His grave is in the cemetery above Roquebrune-Cap-Martin, between Menton and Monaco in southern France.

The Fondation Le Corbusier (FLC) functions as his official estate. The U.S. copyright representative for the Fondation Le Corbusier is the Artists Rights Society. 

==Ideas==

===Five points of architecture===

Villa Savoye

It was Le Corbusier's Villa Savoye (192931) that most succinctly summed up the five points of architecture that he had elucidated in L'Esprit Nouveau and the book Vers une architecture, which he had been developing throughout the 1920s. First, Le Corbusier lifted the bulk of the structure off the ground, supporting it by pilotis, reinforced concrete stilts. These pilotis, in providing the structural support for the house, allowed him to elucidate his next two points: a free facade, meaning non-supporting walls that could be designed as the architect wished, and an open floor plan, meaning that the floor space was free to be configured into rooms without concern for supporting walls. The second floor of the Villa Savoye includes long strips of ribbon windows that allow unencumbered views of the large surrounding yard, and which constitute the fourth point of his system. The fifth point was the roof garden to compensate for the green area consumed by the building and replacing it on the roof. A ramp rising from ground level to the third-floor roof terrace allows for an architectural promenade through the structure. The white tubular railing recalls the industrial "ocean-liner" aesthetic that Le Corbusier much admired. As if to put an exclamation mark after Le Corbusier's homage to modern industry, the driveway around the ground floor, with its semicircular path, measures the exact turning radius of a 1927 Citron automobile.

===Modulor===

Le Corbusier explicitly used the golden ratio in his Modulor system for the scale of architectural proportion. He saw this system as a continuation of the long tradition of Vitruvius, Leonardo da Vinci's "Vitruvian Man", the work of Leon Battista Alberti, and others who used the proportions of the human body to improve the appearance and function of architecture. In addition to the golden ratio, Le Corbusier based the system on human measurements, Fibonacci numbers, and the double unit.

He took Leonardo's suggestion of the golden ratio in human proportions to an extreme: he sectioned his model human body's height at the navel with the two sections in golden ratio, then subdivided those sections in golden ratio at the knees and throat; he used these golden ratio proportions in the Modulor system.

Le Corbusier's 1927 Villa Stein in Garches exemplified the Modulor system's application. The villa's rectangular ground plan, elevation, and inner structure closely approximate golden rectangles. 

Le Corbusier placed systems of harmony and proportion at the centre of his design philosophy, and his faith in the mathematical order of the universe was closely bound to the golden section and the Fibonacci series, which he described as "rhythms apparent to the eye and clear in their relations with one another. And these rhythms are at the very root of human activities. They resound in Man by an organic inevitability, the same fine inevitability which causes the tracing out of the Golden Section by children, old men, savages, and the learned."

===Open Hand===
The Open Hand Monument in Chandigarh, India

The Open Hand (La Main Ouverte) is a recurring motif in Le Corbusier's architecture, a sign for him of "peace and reconciliation. It is open to give and open to receive." The largest of the many Open Hand sculptures that Le Corbusier created is a 26 meter high version in Chandigarh, India known as Open Hand Monument.

===Furniture===

Corbusier said: "Chairs are architecture, sofas are bourgeois".

Le Corbusier began experimenting with furniture design in 1928 after inviting the architect, Charlotte Perriand, to join his studio. His cousin, Pierre Jeanneret, also collaborated on many of the designs. Before the arrival of Perriand, Le Corbusier relied on ready-made furniture to furnish his projects, such as the simple pieces manufactured by Thonet, the company that manufactured his designs in the 1930s.

In 1928, Le Corbusier and Perriand began to put the expectations for furniture Le Corbusier outlined in his 1925 book L'Art Dcoratif d'aujourd'hui into practice. In the book he defined three different furniture types: type-needs, type-furniture, and human-limb objects. He defined human-limb objects as: "Extensions of our limbs and adapted to human functions that are type-needs and type-functions, therefore type-objects and type-furniture. The human-limb object is a docile servant. A good servant is discreet and self-effacing in order to leave his master free. Certainly, works of art are tools, beautiful tools. And long live the good taste manifested by choice, subtlety, proportion, and harmony".

The first results of the collaboration were three chrome-plated tubular steel chairs designed for two of his projects, The Maison la Roche in Paris and a pavilion for Barbara and Henry Church. The line of furniture was expanded for Le Corbusier's 1929 Salon d'Automne installation, 'Equipment for the Home'.

These chairs included the LC-1, LC-2, LC-3, and LC-4, originally entitled "Basculant" (LC-1), "Fauteuil grand confort, petit modle" (LC-2, "great comfort sofa, small model"), "Fauteuil grand confort, grand modle" (LC-3, "great comfort sofa, large model"), and "Chaise longue" (LC-4, "Long chair"). The LC-2 and LC-3 are more colloquially referred to as the and (abbreviation of full title, and due to respective sizes). The LC-2 (and similar LC-3) have been featured in a variety of media, notably the Maxell "blown away" advertisement. 

In the year 1964, while Le Corbusier was still alive, Cassina S.p.A. of Milan acquired the exclusive worldwide rights to manufacture his furniture designs. Today many copies exist, but Cassina is still the only manufacturer authorized by the Fondation Le Corbusier; see US page. Today, some productions of the original furniture designs are considered very valuable to art collectors and are often sold in major auction houses.

===Politics===

In the 1930s, Le Corbusier associated with Georges Valois and Hubert Lagardelle and briefly edited the syndicalist journals Plans and Prlude. In 1934, he lectured in Rome on architecture, by invitation of Benito Mussolini. He sought out a position in urban planning in the Vichy regime and received an appointment on a committee studying urbanism. He drew up plans for the redesign of Algiers in which he criticized the perceived differences in living standards between Europeans and Africans in the city, describing a situation in which "the civilised live like rats in holes" yet "the barbarians live in solitude, in well-being." These and plans for the redesign of other cities were ultimately ignored. After this defeat, Le Corbusier largely eschewed politics.

Although the politics of Lagardelle and Valois included elements of fascism, anti-semitism, and ultra-nationalism, Le Corbusier's own affiliation with these movements remains uncertain. In La Ville radieuse, he conceives an essentially apolitical society, in which the bureaucracy of economic administration effectively replaces the state.

Le Corbusier was heavily indebted to the thought of the 19th-century French utopians Saint-Simon and Charles Fourier. There is a noteworthy resemblance between the concept of the unit and Fourier's phalanstery. From Fourier, Le Corbusier adopted at least in part his notion of administrative, rather than political, government.

==Criticism==

Since his death, Le Corbusier's contribution has been hotly contested, as the architecture values and its accompanying aspects within modern architecture vary, both between different schools of thought and among practicing architects. At the level of building, his later works expressed a complex understanding of modernity's impact, yet his urban designs have drawn scorn from critics.

Technological historian and architecture critic Lewis Mumford wrote in Yesterday's City of Tomorrow that the extravagant heights of Le Corbusier's skyscrapers had no reason for existence apart from the fact that they had become technological possibilities. The open spaces in his central areas had no reason for existence either, Mumford wrote, since on the scale he imagined there was no motive during the business day for pedestrian circulation in the office quarter. By "mating utilitarian and financial image of the skyscraper city to the romantic image of the organic environment, Le Corbusier had, in fact, produced a sterile hybrid."

The public housing projects influenced by his ideas are seen by some as having had the effect of isolating poor communities in monolithic high-rises and breaking the social ties integral to a community's development. One of his most influential detractors has been Jane Jacobs, who delivered a scathing critique of Le Corbusier's urban design theories in her seminal work The Death and Life of Great American Cities.

===Influence===
Gustavo Capanema Palace, Rio de Janeiro (Brazil)

Le Corbusier was at his most influential in the sphere of urban planning, and was a founding member of the Congrs International d'Architecture Moderne (CIAM). One of the first to realize how the automobile would change human agglomerations, Le Corbusier described the city of the future as consisting of large apartment buildings isolated in a park-like setting on pilotis. Le Corbusier's theories were adopted by the builders of public housing in Europe and the United States. For the design of the buildings themselves, Le Corbusier criticized any effort at ornamentation. The large spartan structures in cities, but not 'of' cities, have been widely criticized for being boring and unfriendly to pedestrians.

Throughout the years, many architects worked for Le Corbusier in his studio, and a number of them became notable in their own right, including painter-architect Nadir Afonso, who absorbed Le Corbusier's ideas into his own aesthetics theory. Lcio Costa's city plan of Braslia and the industrial city of Zln planned by Frantiek Lydie Gahura in the Czech Republic are notable plans based on his ideas, while the architect himself produced the plan for Chandigarh in India. Le Corbusier's thinking also had profound effects on the philosophy of city planning and architecture in the Soviet Union, particularly in the Constructivist era.

Le Corbusier was heavily influenced by problems he saw in industrial cities at the turn of the 20th century. He thought that industrial housing techniques led to crowding, dirtiness, and a lack of a moral landscape. He was a leader of the modernist movement to create better living conditions and a better society through housing concepts. Ebenezer Howard's Garden Cities of Tomorrow heavily influenced Le Corbusier and his contemporaries.

Le Corbusier also harmonized and lent credence to the idea of space as a set of destinations which mankind moved between, more or less continuously. He was therefore able to give credence and credibility to the automobile (as a transporter); and most importantly to freeways in urban spaces. His philosophies were useful to urban real estate development interests in the American Post World War II period because they justified and lent architectural and intellectual support to the desire to destroy traditional urban space for high density high profit urban concentration, both commercial and residential. Le Corbusier's ideas also sanctioned further destruction of traditional urban spaces to build freeways that connected this new urbanism to low density, low cost (and highly profitable), suburban and rural locales which were free to be developed as middle class single-family (dormitory) housing.

Notably missing from this scheme of movement were connectivity between isolated urban villages created for lower-middle and working classes and other destination points in Le Corbusier's plan: suburban and rural areas, and urban commercial centers. This was because as designed, the freeways traveled over, at, or beneath grade levels of the living spaces of the urban poor (one modern example: the CabriniGreen housing project in Chicago). Such projects and their areas, having no freeway exit ramps, cut-off by freeway rights-of-way, became isolated from jobs and services concentrated at Le Corbusier's nodal transportation end points. As jobs increasingly moved to the suburban end points of the freeways, urban village dwellers found themselves without convenient freeway access points in their communities and without public mass transit connectivity that could economically reach suburban job centers. Very late in the Post-War period, suburban job centers found this to be such a critical problem (labor shortages) that they, on their own, began sponsoring urban-to-suburban shuttle bus services between urban villages and suburban job centers, to fill working class and lower-middle class jobs which had gone wanting, and which did not normally pay the wages that car ownership required.

Le Corbusier had a great influence on architects and urbanists all the world. In the United States, Shadrach Woods; in Spain, Francisco Javier Senz de Oiza; in Brazil, Oscar Niemeyer; In Mexico, Mario Pani Darqui; in Chile, Roberto Matta; in Argentina, Antoni Bonet i Castellana (a Catalan exile), Juan Kurchan, Jorge Ferrari Hardoy, Amancio Williams, and Clorindo Testa in his first era; in Uruguay, the professors Justino Serralta and Carlos Gmez Gavazzo; in Colombia, Germn Samper Gnecco, Rogelio Salmona, and Dicken Castro; in Peru, Abel Hurtado and Jos Carlos Ortecho.

===Fondation Le Corbusier===

The Fondation Le Corbusier is a private foundation and archive honoring the work of architect Le Corbusier (18871965). It operates Maison La Roche, a museum located in the 16th arrondissement at 810, square du Dr Blanche, Paris, France, which is open daily except Sunday. As of June 2008, the Maison La Roche is temporarily closed for renovation.

The Fondation Le Corbusier was established in 1968. It now owns Maison La Roche and Maison Jeanneret (which form the foundation's headquarters), as well as the apartment occupied by Le Corbusier from 1933 to 1965 at rue Nungesser et Coli in Paris 16e, and the "Small House" he built for his parents in Corseaux on the shores of Lac Leman (1924).

Maison La Roche and Maison Jeanneret (192324), also known as the La Roche-Jeanneret house, is a pair of semi-detached houses that was Corbusier's third commission in Paris. They are laid out at right angles to each other, with iron, concrete, and blank, white facades setting off a curved two-story gallery space. Maison La Roche is now a museum containing about 8,000 original drawings, studies and plans by Le Corbusier (in collaboration with Pierre Jeanneret from 1922 to 1940), as well as about 450 of his paintings, about 30 enamels, about 200 other works on paper, and a sizable collection of written and photographic archives. It describes itself as the world's largest collection of Le Corbusier drawings, studies, and plans. 

===Awards===

He received the Frank P. Brown Medal and AIA Gold Medal in 1961. The University of Cambridge awarded Le Corbusier an honorary degree in June 1959. 

===Memorials===

Le Corbusier's portrait was featured on the 10 Swiss francs banknote, pictured with his distinctive eyeglasses.

The following place-names carry his name:
* Place Le Corbusier, Paris, near the site of his atelier on the Rue de Svres.
* Le Corbusier Boulevard, Laval, Quebec, Canada.
* Place Le Corbusier in his hometown of La Chaux-de-Fonds, Switzerland.
* Le Corbusier Street in the partido of Malvinas Argentinas, Buenos Aires Province, Argentina.
* Le Corbusier Street in Le Village Parisien of Brossard, Quebec, Canada.
* Le Corbusier Promenade, a promenade along the water at Roquebrune-Cap-Martin.
* Le Corbusier Museum, Sector- 8 Chandigarh, India.
* Le Corbusier Museum in Stuttgart am Weissenhof

==Works==

Assembly building, Chandigarh, India
Secretariat building, Chandigarh, India
Church of Saint-Pierre, Firminy, France
* 1923: Villa La Roche, Paris
* 1925: Villa Jeanneret, Paris
* 1928: Villa Savoye, Poissy-sur-Seine, France
* 1929: Cit du Refuge, Arme du Salut, Paris, France
* 1931: Palace of the Soviets, Moscow, USSR (project)
* 1931: Immeuble Clart, Geneva, Switzerland
* 1933: Tsentrosoyuz, Moscow, USSR
* 19471952: Unit d'Habitation, Marseille, France
* 19491952: United Nations headquarters, New York City (Consultant)
* 19491953: Curutchet House, La Plata, Argentina (project manager: Amancio Williams )
* 19501954: Chapelle Notre Dame du Haut, Ronchamp, France
* 1951: Maisons Jaoul, Neuilly-sur-Seine, France
* 1951: Buildings in Ahmedabad, India
** 1951: Sanskar Kendra Museum, Ahmedabad
** 1951: ATMA House
** 1951: Villa Sarabhai, Ahmedabad
** 1951: Villa Shodhan, Ahmedabad
* 1952: Unit d'Habitation of Nantes-Rez, Nantes, France
* 19521959: Buildings in Chandigarh, India
** 1952: Palace of Justice
** 1952: Museum and Gallery of Art
** 1953: Secretariat Building
** 1953: Governor's Palace
** 1955: Palace of Assembly
** 1959: Government College of Art (GCA) and the Chandigarh College of Architecture(CCA)
* 1957: Maison du Brsil, Cit Universitaire, Paris
* 19571960: Sainte Marie de La Tourette, near Lyon, France (with Iannis Xenakis)
* 1957: Unit d'Habitation of Berlin-Charlottenburg, Flatowallee 16, Berlin
* 19641969: Firminy-Vert
** 1964: Unit d'Habitation of Firminy, France
** 1965: Maison de la culture de Firminy-Vert
* 1967: Heidi Weber Museum (Centre Le Corbusier), Zurich, Switzerland

==Bibliography==

* 1918: Aprs le cubisme (After Cubism), with Amde Ozenfant
* 1923: Vers une architecture (Towards an Architecture) (frequently mistranslated as "Towards a New Architecture")
* 1925: Urbanisme (Urbanism)
* 1925: La Peinture moderne (Modern Painting), with Amde Ozenfant
* 1925: L'Art dcoratif d'aujourd'hui (The Decorative Arts of Today)
* 1931: Premier clavier de couleurs (First Color Keyboard)
* 1935: Aircraft
* 1935: La Ville radieuse (The Radiant City)
* 1942: Charte d'Athnes (Athens Charter)
* 1943: Entretien avec les tudiants des coles d'architecture (A Conversation with Architecture Students)
* 1945: Les Trois tablissements Humains (The Three Human Establishments)
* 1948: Le Modulor (The Modulor)
* 1953: Le Poeme de l'Angle Droit (The Poem of the Right Angle)
* 1955: Le Modulor 2 (The Modulor 2)
* 1959: Deuxime clavier de couleurs (Second Colour Keyboard)
* 1966: Le Voyage d'Orient (The Voyage to the East)

==See also==

*Le Corbusier in the USSR

==Notes==

==References==
* Sarbjit Bahga, Surinder Bahga (2014) Le Corbusier and Pierre Jeanneret: The Indian Architecture, CreateSpace, ISBN 978-1495906251
* Behrens, Roy R. (2005). Cook Book: Gertrude Stein, William Cook and Le Corbusier. Dysart, Iowa: Bobolink Books. ISBN 0-9713244-1-7.
* Brooks, H. Allen (1999) Le Corbusier's Formative Years: Charles-Edouard Jeanneret at La Chaux-de-Fonds, Paperback Edition, University of Chicago Press, ISBN 0-226-07582-6
* Eliel, Carol S. (2002). L'Esprit Nouveau: Purism in Paris, 1918  1925. New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc. ISBN 0-8109-6727-8
* Curtis, William J.R. (1994) Le Corbusier: Ideas and Forms, Phaidon, ISBN 978-0-7148-2790-2
* Frampton, Kenneth. (2001). Le Corbusier, London, Thames and Hudson.
* Jencks, Charles (2000) Le Corbusier and the Continual Revolution in Architecture, The Monacelli Press, ISBN 978-1-58093-077-2
* Jornod, Nama and Jornod, Jean-Pierre (2005) Le Corbusier (Charles Edouard Jeanneret), catalogue raisonn de l'oeuvre peint, Skira, ISBN 88-7624-203-1
* Von Moos, Stanislaus (2009) Le Corbusier: Elements of A Synthesis, Rotterdam, 010 Publishers.
* Weber, Nicholas Fox (2008) Le Corbusier: A Life, Alfred A. Knopf, ISBN 0-375-41043-0

==Further reading==

* Rajagopal, Avinash. 'The Little Prince' and Le Corbusier in Point of View, the Metropolis blog, Metropolis, January 29, 2014. Retrieved online at MetropolisMag.com January 29, 2014.

==External links==

* Fondation Le Corbusier  Official site
* Ben Flatman: "Proportional Systems in the architecture of Le Corbusier"
* Corbusier's Working Lifestyle: 'Working with Corbusier'
* Le Corbusier in Artfacts.Net
* Plummer, Henry. Cosmos of Light: The Sacred Architecture of Le Corbusier. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2013.
*

*



[[Ludovico Ariosto]]

Ludovico Ariosto ( or ; 8 September 1474 &ndash; 6 July 1533) was an Italian poet. He is best known as the author of the romance epic Orlando Furioso (1516). The poem, a continuation of Matteo Maria Boiardo's Orlando Innamorato, describes the adventures of Charlemagne, Orlando, and the Franks as they battle against the Saracens with diversions into many sideplots. Ariosto composed the poem in the ottava rima rhyme scheme and introduced narrative commentary throughout the work.

==Birth and early life==
Access to the villa where Ariosto was born
Ariosto was born in Reggio nellEmilia, where his father Niccol Ariosto was commander of the citadel. He was the oldest of 10 children and was seen as the successor to the patriarchal position of his family. From his earliest years, Ludovico was very interested in poetry, but he was obliged by his father to study law.

After five years of law, Ariosto was allowed to read classics under Gregorio da Spoleto. Ariosto's studies of Greek and Latin literature were cut short by Spoleto's move to France to tutor Francesco Sforza. Shortly after this, Ariosto's father died.

==Education and patronage==
Memorial statue and park, Ferrara.
After the death of his father, Ludovico Ariosto was compelled to forgo his literary occupations and take care of his family, whose affairs were in disarray. Despite his family obligations, Ariosto managed to write some comedies in prose as well as lyrical pieces. Some of these attracted the notice of Cardinal Ippolito d'Este, who took the young poet under his patronage and appointed him one of the gentlemen of his household. Este compensated Ariosto poorly for his efforts; the only reward he gave the poet for Orlando Furioso, dedicated to him, was the question, "Where did you find so many stories, Master Ludovico?" Ariosto later said that the cardinal was ungrateful, that he deplored the time which he spent under his yoke, and that if he received some small pension, it was not to reward him for his poetry &mdash; which the prelate despised &mdash; but for acting as a messenger.

The cardinal went to Hungary in 1518, and wished Ariosto to accompany him. The poet excused himself, pleading ill health, his love of study, and the need to care for his elderly mother. His excuses were not well-received, and he was denied even an interview. Ariosto and d'Este got into a heated argument, and Ariosto was promptly dismissed from service.

==New patronage and diplomatic career==
Titian, A Man with a Quilted Sleeve, long believed to be Ludovico Ariosto
Ariosto's play was first published in verse form in 1551.

The cardinal's brother, Alfonso, duke of Ferrara, now took Ariosto under his patronage. By then, Ariosto had already distinguished himself as a diplomat, chiefly on the occasion of two visits to Rome as ambassador to Pope Julius II. The fatigue of one of these journeys brought on an illness from which he never recovered, and on his second mission he was nearly killed by order of the Pope, who happened at the time to be in conflict with Alfonso.

On account of the war, his salary of 84 crowns a year was suspended, and it was withdrawn altogether after the peace. Because of this, Ariosto asked the duke either to provide for him, or to allow him to seek employment elsewhere. He was appointed to the province of Garfagnana, then without a governor, situated on the Apennines, an appointment he held for three years. The province was distracted by factions and bandits, the governor had not the requisite means to enforce his authority and the duke did little to support his minister. Ariosto's government satisfied both the sovereign and the people given over to his care, however; indeed, there is a story about a time when he was walking alone and fell into the company of a group of bandits, the chief of which, on discovering that his captive was the author of Orlando Furioso, apologized for not having immediately shown him the respect due his rank.

In 1508 Ariosto's play Cassaria appeared, and the next year was first acted in Ferrara and ten years later in the Vatican. A prose edition was published in Rome in 1524, and the first verse edition was published at Venice in 1551. The play was translated by George Gascoigne and acted at Grays Inn in London in 1566 and published in 1573, which was later used by Shakespeare as a source for The Taming of the Shrew.

In 1516, the first version of the Orlando Furioso in 40 cantos, was published at Ferrara.

The third and final version of the Orlando Furioso, in 46 cantos, appeared on September 8, 1532.

==Poetic style==
Statue of the poet in Reggio Emilia

Throughout Ariosto's writing are narratorial comments dubbed by Dr. Daniel Javitch as "Cantus Interruptus". Javitch's term refers to Ariosto's narrative technique to break off one plot line in the middle of a canto, only to pick it up again in another, often much later, canto. Javitch argues that while many critics have assumed Ariosto does this so as to build narrative tension and keep the reader turning pages, the poet in reality diffuses narrative tension because so much time separates the interruption and the resumption. By the time the reader gets to the continuation of the story, he or she has often forgotten or ceased to care about the plot and is usually wrapped up in another plot. Ariosto does this, Javitch argues, to undermine "man's foolish but persistent desire for continuity and completion". Ariosto uses it throughout his works. Daniel Javitch, Cantus interruptus in the 'Orlando Furioso', Modern language notes, 95 (1980) 

For example, in Canto II, stanza 30, of Orlando Furioso, the narrator says: 
:But I, who still pursue a varying tale,
:Must leave awhile the Paladin, who wages
:A weary warfare with the wind and flood;
:To follow a fair virgin of his blood.

Some have attributed this piece of metafiction as one component of the "Sorriso ariostesco" or Ariosto's smile, the wry sense of humor that Ariosto adds to the text.

In explaining this humor, Thomas Greene, in Descent from Heaven, says:

==References==

* Greene, Thomas. The Descent from Heaven, a Study in Epic Continuity. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1963.
* Robert Durling, The figure of the poet in Renaissance epic, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1965.
* Charles P. Brand, Ludovico Ariosto : a preface to the 'Orlando furioso, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1974.
* Daniel Javitch, Cantus interruptus in the 'Orlando Furioso, Modern language notes, 95 (1980), 66-80.
* Albert R. Ascoli, Ariosto's bitter harmony : crisis and evasion in the Italian renaissance, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1987.
* Daniel Javitch, 'The Poetics of Variatio in Orlando Furioso, Modern Language Quarterly, 2005, 66(1): 1-20.
* Giuseppe Sangirardi, Ludovico Ariosto, Firenze: Le Monnier, 2006.
* Giulio Ferroni, Ludovico Ariosto, Roma: Salerno Editrice, 2008.
* , Ariosto, Bologna: il Mulino, 2009.

==External links==

*
* Ludovico Ariosto's works: text, concordances and frequency lists
* LitWeb: Ludovico Ariosto
* Daniel Javitch, The Poetics of Variatio in Orlando Furioso.pdf
* The Online medieval & Classical Library (OMACL): Orlando Furioso: Canto 1 & Canto 2
*E-books by Ludovico Ariosto TXT, HTML, EPUB, MOBI



[[Leonhard Euler]]

Leonhard Euler ( ; The pronunciation is incorrect. "Euler", Oxford English Dictionary, second edition, Oxford University Press, 1989 "Euler", MerriamWebster's Online Dictionary, 2009. "Euler, Leonhard", The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, fifth edition, Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston, 2011. , ;
15 April 170718 September 1783) was a pioneering Swiss mathematician and physicist. He made important discoveries in fields as diverse as infinitesimal calculus and graph theory. He also introduced much of the modern mathematical terminology and notation, particularly for mathematical analysis, such as the notion of a mathematical function. He is also renowned for his work in mechanics, fluid dynamics, optics, astronomy, and music theory. Tentamen novae theoriae musicae ex certissimis harmoniae principiis dilucide expositae, Saint Petersburg, 1739 . 

Euler is considered to be the pre-eminent mathematician of the 18th century and one of the greatest mathematicians to have ever lived. He is also one of the most prolific mathematicians; his collected works fill 6080 quarto volumes. He spent most of his adult life in St. Petersburg, Russia, and in Berlin, Prussia.

A statement attributed to Pierre-Simon Laplace expresses Euler's influence on mathematics: "Read Euler, read Euler, he is the master of us all." "Lisez Euler, lisez Euler, c'est notre matre  tous." The quote appeared in Gugliemo Libri's review of a recently published collection of correspondence among eighteenth-century mathematicians: Gugliemo Libri (January 1846), Book review: "Correspondance mathmatique et physique de quelques clbres gomtres du XVIIIe sicle,  " (Mathematical and physical correspondence of some famous geometers of the eighteenth century,  ), Journal des Savants, page 51. From page 51: "  nous rappellerions que Laplace lui mme,  ne cessait de rpter aux jeunes mathmaticiens ces paroles mmorables que nous avons entendues de sa propre bouche : 'Lisez Euler, lisez Euler, c'est notre matre  tous.' " (  we would recall that Laplace himself,  never ceased to repeat to young mathematicians these memorable words that we heard from his own mouth: 'Read Euler, read Euler, he is our master in everything.) 

==Life==
===Early years===
Old Swiss 10 Franc banknote honoring Euler
Euler was born on 15 April 1707, in Basel to Paul Euler, a pastor of the Reformed Church, and Marguerite Brucker, a pastor's daughter. He had two younger sisters named Anna Maria and Maria Magdalena. Soon after the birth of Leonhard, the Eulers moved from Basel to the town of Riehen, where Euler spent most of his childhood. Paul Euler was a friend of the Bernoulli familyJohann Bernoulli, who was then regarded as Europe's foremost mathematician, would eventually be the most important influence on young Leonhard. Euler's early formal education started in Basel, where he was sent to live with his maternal grandmother. At the age of thirteen he enrolled at the University of Basel, and in 1723, received his Master of Philosophy with a dissertation that compared the philosophies of Descartes and Newton. At this time, he was receiving Saturday afternoon lessons from Johann Bernoulli, who quickly discovered his new pupil's incredible talent for mathematics. Euler was at this point studying theology, Greek, and Hebrew at his father's urging, in order to become a pastor, but Bernoulli convinced Paul Euler that Leonhard was destined to become a great mathematician. In 1726, Euler completed a dissertation on the propagation of sound with the title De Sono. Euler's Dissertation De Sono : E002. Translated & Annotated by Ian Bruce. (PDF) . 17centurymaths.com. Retrieved on 14 September 2011. At that time, he was pursuing an (ultimately unsuccessful) attempt to obtain a position at the University of Basel. In 1727, he first entered the Paris Academy Prize Problem competition; the problem that year was to find the best way to place the masts on a ship. Pierre Bouguer, a man who became known as "the father of naval architecture" won, and Euler took second place. Euler later won this annual prize twelve times. 

===St. Petersburg===
Around this time Johann Bernoulli's two sons, Daniel and Nicolas, were working at the Imperial Russian Academy of Sciences in St Petersburg. On 10 July 1726, Nicolas died of appendicitis after spending a year in Russia, and when Daniel assumed his brother's position in the mathematics/physics division, he recommended that the post in physiology that he had vacated be filled by his friend Euler. In November 1726 Euler eagerly accepted the offer, but delayed making the trip to St Petersburg while he unsuccessfully applied for a physics professorship at the University of Basel. 

1957 Soviet Union stamp commemorating the 250th birthday of Euler. The text says: 250 years from the birth of the great mathematician, academician Leonhard Euler.
Euler arrived in the Russian capital on 17 May 1727. He was promoted from his junior post in the medical department of the academy to a position in the mathematics department. He lodged with Daniel Bernoulli with whom he often worked in close collaboration. Euler mastered Russian and settled into life in St Petersburg. He also took on an additional job as a medic in the Russian Navy. 

The Academy at St. Petersburg, established by Peter the Great, was intended to improve education in Russia and to close the scientific gap with Western Europe. As a result, it was made especially attractive to foreign scholars like Euler. The academy possessed ample financial resources and a comprehensive library drawn from the private libraries of Peter himself and of the nobility. Very few students were enrolled in the academy in order to lessen the faculty's teaching burden, and the academy emphasized research and offered to its faculty both the time and the freedom to pursue scientific questions. 

The Academy's benefactress, Catherine I, who had continued the progressive policies of her late husband, died on the day of Euler's arrival. The Russian nobility then gained power upon the ascension of the twelve-year-old Peter II. The nobility were suspicious of the academy's foreign scientists, and thus cut funding and caused other difficulties for Euler and his colleagues.

Conditions improved slightly upon the death of Peter II, and Euler swiftly rose through the ranks in the academy and was made professor of physics in 1731. Two years later, Daniel Bernoulli, who was fed up with the censorship and hostility he faced at St. Petersburg, left for Basel. Euler succeeded him as the head of the mathematics department. 

On 7 January 1734, he married Katharina Gsell (17071773), a daughter of Georg Gsell, a painter from the Academy Gymnasium. The young couple bought a house by the Neva River. Of their thirteen children, only five survived childhood. 

===Berlin===
Stamp of the former German Democratic Republic honoring Euler on the 200th anniversary of his death. Across the centre it shows his polyhedral formula, nowadays written as v  e + f = 2.

Concerned about the continuing turmoil in Russia, Euler left St. Petersburg on 19 June 1741 to take up a post at the Berlin Academy, which he had been offered by Frederick the Great of Prussia. He lived for twenty-five years in Berlin, where he wrote over 380 articles. In Berlin, he published the two works for which he would become most renowned: The Introductio in analysin infinitorum, a text on functions published in 1748, and the Institutiones calculi differentialis, published in 1755 on differential calculus. In 1755, he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.

In addition, Euler was asked to tutor Friederike Charlotte of Brandenburg-Schwedt, the Princess of Anhalt-Dessau and Frederick's niece. Euler wrote over 200 letters to her in the early 1760s, which were later compiled into a best-selling volume entitled Letters of Euler on different Subjects in Natural Philosophy Addressed to a German Princess. This work contained Euler's exposition on various subjects pertaining to physics and mathematics, as well as offering valuable insights into Euler's personality and religious beliefs. This book became more widely read than any of his mathematical works, and was published across Europe and in the United States. The popularity of the 'Letters' testifies to Euler's ability to communicate scientific matters effectively to a lay audience, a rare ability for a dedicated research scientist. 

Despite Euler's immense contribution to the Academy's prestige, he was eventually forced to leave Berlin. This was partly because of a conflict of personality with Frederick, who came to regard Euler as unsophisticated, especially in comparison to the circle of philosophers the German king brought to the Academy. Voltaire was among those in Frederick's employ, and the Frenchman enjoyed a prominent position within the king's social circle. Euler, a simple religious man and a hard worker, was very conventional in his beliefs and tastes. He was in many ways the antithesis of Voltaire. Euler had limited training in rhetoric, and tended to debate matters that he knew little about, making him a frequent target of Voltaire's wit. Frederick also expressed disappointment with Euler's practical engineering abilities:

A 1753 portrait by Emanuel Handmann. This portrayal suggests problems of the right eyelid, and possible strabismus. The left eye, which here appears healthy, was later affected by a cataract. 

===Eyesight deterioration===
Euler's eyesight worsened throughout his mathematical career. Three years after suffering a near-fatal fever in 1735, he became almost blind in his right eye, but Euler rather blamed the painstaking work on cartography he performed for the St. Petersburg Academy for his condition. Euler's vision in that eye worsened throughout his stay in Germany, to the extent that Frederick referred to him as "Cyclops". Euler later developed a cataract in his left eye, rendering him almost totally blind a few weeks after its discovery in 1766. However, his condition appeared to have little effect on his productivity, as he compensated for it with his mental calculation skills and exquisite memory. For example, Euler could repeat the Aeneid of Virgil from beginning to end without hesitation, and for every page in the edition he could indicate which line was the first and which the last. With the aid of his scribes, Euler's productivity on many areas of study actually increased. He produced on average, one mathematical paper every week in the year 1775. 

===Return to Russia===
The situation in Russia had improved greatly since the accession to the throne of Catherine the Great, and in 1766 Euler accepted an invitation to return to the St. Petersburg Academy and spent the rest of his life in Russia. However, his second stay in the country was marred by tragedy. A fire in St. Petersburg in 1771 cost him his home, and almost his life. In 1773, he lost his wife Katharina after 40 years of marriage. Three years after his wife's death, Euler married her half-sister, Salome Abigail Gsell (17231794). This marriage lasted until his death.

In St. Petersburg on 18 September 1783, after a lunch with his family, during a conversation with a fellow academician Anders Johan Lexell, about the newly discovered planet Uranus and its orbit, Euler suffered a brain hemorrhage and died a few hours later. A short obituary for the Russian Academy of Sciences was written by Jacob von Staehlin-Storcksburg and a more detailed eulogy was written and delivered at a memorial meeting by Russian mathematician Nicolas Fuss, one of Euler's disciples. In the eulogy written for the French Academy by the French mathematician and philosopher Marquis de Condorcet, he commented,

He was buried next to Katharina at the Smolensk Lutheran Cemetery on Vasilievsky Island. In 1785, the Russian Academy of Sciences put a marble bust of Leonhard Euler on a pedestal next to the Director's seat and, in 1837, placed a headstone on Euler's grave. To commemorate the 250th anniversary of Euler's birth, the headstone was moved in 1956, together with his remains, to the 18th-century necropolis at the Alexander Nevsky Monastery. 

Euler's grave at the Alexander Nevsky Monastery

==Contributions to mathematics and physics==

Euler worked in almost all areas of mathematics, such as geometry, infinitesimal calculus, trigonometry, algebra, and number theory, as well as continuum physics, lunar theory and other areas of physics. He is a seminal figure in the history of mathematics; if printed, his works, many of which are of fundamental interest, would occupy between 60 and 80 quarto volumes. Euler's name is associated with a large number of topics.

Euler is the only mathematician to have two numbers named after him: the important Euler's Number in calculus, e, approximately equal to 2.71828, and the Euler-Mascheroni Constant  (gamma) sometimes referred to as just "Euler's constant", approximately equal to 0.57721. It is not known whether  is rational or irrational. 

===Mathematical notation===
Euler introduced and popularized several notational conventions through his numerous and widely circulated textbooks. Most notably, he introduced the concept of a function and was the first to write f(x) to denote the function f applied to the argument x. He also introduced the modern notation for the trigonometric functions, the letter e for the base of the natural logarithm (now also known as Euler's number), the Greek letter  for summations and the letter i to denote the imaginary unit. The use of the Greek letter  to denote the ratio of a circle's circumference to its diameter was also popularized by Euler, although it did not originate with him. 

===Analysis===
The development of infinitesimal calculus was at the forefront of 18th Century mathematical research, and the Bernoullisfamily friends of Eulerwere responsible for much of the early progress in the field. Thanks to their influence, studying calculus became the major focus of Euler's work. While some of Euler's proofs are not acceptable by modern standards of mathematical rigour (in particular his reliance on the principle of the generality of algebra), his ideas led to many great advances.
Euler is well known in analysis for his frequent use and development of power series, the expression of functions as sums of infinitely many terms, such as

:

Notably, Euler directly proved the power series expansions for e and the inverse tangent function. (Indirect proof via the inverse power series technique was given by Newton and Leibniz between 1670 and 1680.) His daring use of power series enabled him to solve the famous Basel problem in 1735 (he provided a more elaborate argument in 1741): 

:

A geometric interpretation of Euler's formula

Euler introduced the use of the exponential function and logarithms in analytic proofs. He discovered ways to express various logarithmic functions using power series, and he successfully defined logarithms for negative and complex numbers, thus greatly expanding the scope of mathematical applications of logarithms. He also defined the exponential function for complex numbers, and discovered its relation to the trigonometric functions. For any real number  (taken to be radians), Euler's formula states that the complex exponential function satisfies

:

A special case of the above formula is known as Euler's identity,
:
called "the most remarkable formula in mathematics" by Richard P. Feynman, for its single uses of the notions of addition, multiplication, exponentiation, and equality, and the single uses of the important constants 0, 1, e, i and . 
 In 1988, readers of the Mathematical Intelligencer voted it "the Most Beautiful Mathematical Formula Ever". In total, Euler was responsible for three of the top five formulae in that poll. See also: 

De Moivre's formula is a direct consequence of Euler's formula.

In addition, Euler elaborated the theory of higher transcendental functions by introducing the gamma function and introduced a new method for solving quartic equations. He also found a way to calculate integrals with complex limits, foreshadowing the development of modern complex analysis. He also invented the calculus of variations including its best-known result, the EulerLagrange equation.

Euler also pioneered the use of analytic methods to solve number theory problems. In doing so, he united two disparate branches of mathematics and introduced a new field of study, analytic number theory. In breaking ground for this new field, Euler created the theory of hypergeometric series, q-series, hyperbolic trigonometric functions and the analytic theory of continued fractions. For example, he proved the infinitude of primes using the divergence of the harmonic series, and he used analytic methods to gain some understanding of the way prime numbers are distributed. Euler's work in this area led to the development of the prime number theorem. 

===Number theory===
Euler's interest in number theory can be traced to the influence of Christian Goldbach, his friend in the St. Petersburg Academy. A lot of Euler's early work on number theory was based on the works of Pierre de Fermat. Euler developed some of Fermat's ideas, and disproved some of his conjectures.

Euler linked the nature of prime distribution with ideas in analysis. He proved that the sum of the reciprocals of the primes diverges. In doing so, he discovered the connection between the Riemann zeta function and the prime numbers; this is known as the Euler product formula for the Riemann zeta function.

Euler proved Newton's identities, Fermat's little theorem, Fermat's theorem on sums of two squares, and he made distinct contributions to Lagrange's four-square theorem. He also invented the totient function (n), the number of positive integers less than or equal to the integer n that are coprime to n. Using properties of this function, he generalized Fermat's little theorem to what is now known as Euler's theorem. He contributed significantly to the theory of perfect numbers, which had fascinated mathematicians since Euclid. Euler also conjectured the law of quadratic reciprocity. The concept is regarded as a fundamental theorem of number theory, and his ideas paved the way for the work of Carl Friedrich Gauss. 

By 1772 Euler had proved that 231  1 = 2,147,483,647 is a Mersenne prime. It may have remained the largest known prime until 1867. Caldwell, Chris. The largest known prime by year 

===Graph theory===
Map of Knigsberg in Euler's time showing the actual layout of the seven bridges, highlighting the river Pregel and the bridges.
In 1735, Euler presented a solution to the problem known as the Seven Bridges of Knigsberg. The city of Knigsberg, Prussia was set on the Pregel River, and included two large islands that were connected to each other and the mainland by seven bridges. The problem is to decide whether it is possible to follow a path that crosses each bridge exactly once and returns to the starting point. It is not possible: there is no Eulerian circuit. This solution is considered to be the first theorem of graph theory, specifically of planar graph theory. 

Euler also discovered the formula V  E + F = 2 relating the number of vertices, edges and faces of a convex polyhedron, and hence of a planar graph. The constant in this formula is now known as the Euler characteristic for the graph (or other mathematical object), and is related to the genus of the object. The study and generalization of this formula, specifically by Cauchy and L'Huillier, is at the origin of topology.

===Applied mathematics===
Some of Euler's greatest successes were in solving real-world problems analytically, and in describing numerous applications of the Bernoulli numbers, Fourier series, Venn diagrams, Euler numbers, the constants e and [[pi|]], continued fractions and integrals. He integrated Leibniz's differential calculus with Newton's Method of Fluxions, and developed tools that made it easier to apply calculus to physical problems. He made great strides in improving the numerical approximation of integrals, inventing what are now known as the Euler approximations. The most notable of these approximations are Euler's method and the EulerMaclaurin formula. He also facilitated the use of differential equations, in particular introducing the EulerMascheroni constant:

:

One of Euler's more unusual interests was the application of mathematical ideas in music. In 1739 he wrote the Tentamen novae theoriae musicae, hoping to eventually incorporate musical theory as part of mathematics. This part of his work, however, did not receive wide attention and was once described as too mathematical for musicians and too musical for mathematicians. 

===Physics and astronomy===

Euler helped develop the EulerBernoulli beam equation, which became a cornerstone of engineering. Aside from successfully applying his analytic tools to problems in classical mechanics, Euler also applied these techniques to celestial problems. His work in astronomy was recognized by a number of Paris Academy Prizes over the course of his career. His accomplishments include determining with great accuracy the orbits of comets and other celestial bodies, understanding the nature of comets, and calculating the parallax of the sun. His calculations also contributed to the development of accurate longitude tables. Youschkevitch, A P; Biography in Dictionary of Scientific Biography (New York 19701990). 

In addition, Euler made important contributions in optics. He disagreed with Newton's corpuscular theory of light in the Opticks, which was then the prevailing theory. His 1740s papers on optics helped ensure that the wave theory of light proposed by Christiaan Huygens would become the dominant mode of thought, at least until the development of the quantum theory of light. 

In 1757 he published an important set of equations for inviscid flow, that are now known as the Euler equations. In differential form, the equations are:
:

where
*  is the fluid mass density,
* u is the fluid velocity vector, with components u, v, and w,
* E =  e +   ( u2 + v2 + w2 ) is the total energy per unit volume, with e being the internal energy per unit mass for the fluid,
* p is the pressure,
* ' denotes the tensor product, and
* 0 being the zero vector.

Euler is also well known in structural engineering for his formula giving the critical buckling load of an ideal strut, which depends only on its length and flexural stiffness: 
:

where
: = maximum or critical force (vertical load on column),
: = modulus of elasticity,
: = area moment of inertia,
: = unsupported length of column,
: = column effective length factor, whose value depends on the conditions of end support of the column, as follows.
::For both ends pinned (hinged, free to rotate), = 1.0.
::For both ends fixed, = 0.50.
::For one end fixed and the other end pinned, = 0.699....
::For one end fixed and the other end free to move laterally, = 2.0.
: is the effective length of the column.

===Logic===
Euler is also credited with using closed curves to illustrate syllogistic reasoning (1768). These diagrams have become known as Euler diagrams. 
Euler's Diagram

An Euler diagram is a diagrammatic means of representing sets and their relationships. Euler diagrams consist of simple closed curves (usually circles) in the plane that depict sets. Each Euler curve divides the plane into two regions or "zones": the interior, which symbolically represents the elements of the set, and the exterior, which represents all elements that are not members of the set. The sizes or shapes of the curves are not important: the significance of the diagram is in how they overlap. The spatial relationships between the regions bounded by each curve (overlap, containment or neither) corresponds to set-theoretic relationships (intersection, subset and disjointness). Curves whose interior zones do not intersect represent disjoint sets. Two curves whose interior zones intersect represent sets that have common elements; the zone inside both curves represents the set of elements common to both sets (the intersection of the sets). A curve that is contained completely within the interior zone of another represents a subset of it. Euler diagrams were incorporated as part of instruction in set theory as part of the new math movement in the 1960s. Since then, they have also been adopted by other curriculum fields such as reading. Strategies for Reading Comprehension Venn Diagrams 

==Personal philosophy and religious beliefs==
Euler and his friend Daniel Bernoulli were opponents of Leibniz's monadism and the philosophy of Christian Wolff. Euler insisted that knowledge is founded in part on the basis of precise quantitative laws, something that monadism and Wolffian science were unable to provide. Euler's religious leanings might also have had a bearing on his dislike of the doctrine; he went so far as to label Wolff's ideas as "heathen and atheistic". 

Much of what is known of Euler's religious beliefs can be deduced from his Letters to a German Princess and an earlier work, Rettung der Gttlichen Offenbahrung Gegen die Einwrfe der Freygeister (Defense of the Divine Revelation against the Objections of the Freethinkers). These works show that Euler was a devout Christian who believed the Bible to be inspired; the Rettung was primarily an argument for the divine inspiration of scripture. 

There is a famous legend ; inspired by Euler's arguments with secular philosophers over religion, which is set during Euler's second stint at the St. Petersburg academy. The French philosopher Denis Diderot was visiting Russia on Catherine the Great's invitation. However, the Empress was alarmed that the philosopher's arguments for atheism were influencing members of her court, and so Euler was asked to confront the Frenchman. Diderot was informed that a learned mathematician had produced a proof of the existence of God: he agreed to view the proof as it was presented in court. Euler appeared, advanced toward Diderot, and in a tone of perfect conviction announced this non-sequitur: "Sir, , hence God existsreply!"
Diderot, to whom (says the story) all mathematics was gibberish, stood dumbstruck as peals of laughter erupted from the court. Embarrassed, he asked to leave Russia, a request that was graciously granted by the Empress. However amusing the anecdote may be, it is apocryphal, given that Diderot himself did research in mathematics. 
The legend was apparently first told by
Dieudonn Thibault with significant embellishment by Augustus De Morgan. 

==Commemorations==
Euler was featured on the sixth series of the Swiss 10-franc banknote and on numerous Swiss, German, and Russian postage stamps. The asteroid 2002 Euler was named in his honor. He is also commemorated by the Lutheran Church on their Calendar of Saints on 24 Mayhe was a devout Christian (and believer in biblical inerrancy) who wrote apologetics and argued forcefully against the prominent atheists of his time. 

On 15 April 2013, Euler's 306th birthday was celebrated with a Google Doodle. 

==Selected bibliography==
The title page of Euler's Methodus inveniendi lineas curvas.
Euler has an extensive bibliography. His best-known books include:
* Elements of Algebra. This elementary algebra text starts with a discussion of the nature of numbers and gives a comprehensive introduction to algebra, including formulae for solutions of polynomial equations.
* Introductio in analysin infinitorum (1748). English translation Introduction to Analysis of the Infinite by John Blanton (Book I, ISBN 0-387-96824-5, Springer-Verlag 1988; Book II, ISBN 0-387-97132-7, Springer-Verlag 1989).
* Two influential textbooks on calculus: Institutiones calculi differentialis (1755) and Institutionum calculi integralis (17681770).
* Letters to a German Princess (17681772).
* Methodus inveniendi lineas curvas maximi minimive proprietate gaudentes, sive solutio problematis isoperimetrici latissimo sensu accepti (1744). The Latin title translates as a method for finding curved lines enjoying properties of maximum or minimum, or solution of isoperimetric problems in the broadest accepted sense. E65  Methodus... entry at Euler Archives. Math.dartmouth.edu. Retrieved on 14 September 2011. 

A definitive collection of Euler's works, entitled Opera Omnia, has been published since 1911 by the Euler Commission of the Swiss Academy of Sciences. A complete chronological list of Euler's works is available at the following page: The Enestrm Index (PDF).

==See also==
* List of things named after Leonhard Euler

==References and notes==

==Further reading==

* Lexikon der Naturwissenschaftler, (2000), Heidelberg: Spektrum Akademischer Verlag.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* In 
* Special Issue on Leonhard Paul Euler's: Mathematical Topics and Applications (M. T. A.).
* 
* Heimpell, Hermann, Theodor Heuss, Benno Reifenberg (editors). 1956. Die groen Deutschen, volume 2, Berlin: Ullstein Verlag.
* 
* 
* 
* In 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* LeonhardEuler.com
* 
* Encyclopdia Britannica article
* 
* How Euler did it contains columns explaining how Euler solved various problems
* Euler Archive
* Leonhard Euler  uvres compltes Gallica-Math
* Euler Committee of the Swiss Academy of Sciences
* References for Leonhard Euler
* Euler Tercentenary 2007
* The Euler Society
* Euler Family Tree
* Euler's Correspondence with Frederick the Great, King of Prussia
* "Euler  300th anniversary lecture", given by Robin Wilson at Gresham College, 9 May 2007 (can download as video or audio files)
* 
* Euler Quartic Conjecture

 



[[Linear regression]]

In statistics, linear regression is an approach for modeling the relationship between a scalar dependent variable y and one or more explanatory variables denoted X. The case of one explanatory variable is called simple linear regression. For more than one explanatory variable, the process is called multiple linear regression. (This term should be distinguished from multivariate linear regression, where multiple correlated dependent variables are predicted, rather than a single scalar variable.)

In linear regression, data are modeled using linear predictor functions, and unknown model parameters are estimated from the data. Such models are called linear models. Most commonly, linear regression refers to a model in which the conditional mean of y given the value of X is an affine function of X. Less commonly, linear regression could refer to a model in which the median, or some other quantile of the conditional distribution of y given X is expressed as a linear function of X. Like all forms of regression analysis, linear regression focuses on the conditional probability distribution of y given X, rather than on the joint probability distribution of y and X, which is the domain of multivariate analysis.

Linear regression was the first type of regression analysis to be studied rigorously, and to be used extensively in practical applications. This is because models which depend linearly on their unknown parameters are easier to fit than models which are non-linearly related to their parameters and because the statistical properties of the resulting estimators are easier to determine.

Linear regression has many practical uses. Most applications fall into one of the following two broad categories:
* If the goal is prediction, or forecasting, or reduction, linear regression can be used to fit a predictive model to an observed data set of y and X values. After developing such a model, if an additional value of X is then given without its accompanying value of y, the fitted model can be used to make a prediction of the value of y.
* Given a variable y and a number of variables X1, ..., X'p that may be related to y, linear regression analysis can be applied to quantify the strength of the relationship between y and the X'j, to assess which X'j may have no relationship with y at all, and to identify which subsets of the X'j contain redundant information about y.

Linear regression models are often fitted using the least squares approach, but they may also be fitted in other ways, such as by minimizing the "lack of fit" in some other norm (as with least absolute deviations regression), or by minimizing a penalized version of the least squares loss function as in ridge regression. Conversely, the least squares approach can be used to fit models that are not linear models. Thus, although the terms "least squares" and "linear model" are closely linked, they are not synonymous.

==Introduction to linear regression==
Example of simple linear regression, which has one independent variable
Given a data set of n statistical units, a linear regression model assumes that the relationship between the dependent variable yi and the p-vector of regressors xi is linear. This relationship is modelled through a disturbance term or error variable i  an unobserved random variable that adds noise to the linear relationship between the dependent variable and regressors. Thus the model takes the form
: 
where T denotes the transpose, so that xiT is the inner product between vectors xi and .

Often these n equations are stacked together and written in vector form as
: 
where
: 
Some remarks on terminology and general use:
* is called the regressand, endogenous variable, response variable, measured variable, criterion variable, or dependent variable (see dependent and independent variables.) The decision as to which variable in a data set is modeled as the dependent variable and which are modeled as the independent variables may be based on a presumption that the value of one of the variables is caused by, or directly influenced by the other variables. Alternatively, there may be an operational reason to model one of the variables in terms of the others, in which case there need be no presumption of causality.
* are called regressors, exogenous variables, explanatory variables, covariates, input variables, predictor variables, or independent variables (see dependent and independent variables, but not to be confused with independent random variables). The matrix is sometimes called the design matrix.
** Usually a constant is included as one of the regressors. For example we can take x'i1 = 1 for i = 1, ..., n. The corresponding element of  is called the intercept. Many statistical inference procedures for linear models require an intercept to be present, so it is often included even if theoretical considerations suggest that its value should be zero.
** Sometimes one of the regressors can be a non-linear function of another regressor or of the data, as in polynomial regression and segmented regression. The model remains linear as long as it is linear in the parameter vector .
** The regressors x'ij may be viewed either as random variables, which we simply observe, or they can be considered as predetermined fixed values which we can choose. Both interpretations may be appropriate in different cases, and they generally lead to the same estimation procedures; however different approaches to asymptotic analysis are used in these two situations.
* is a p-dimensional parameter vector. Its elements are also called effects, or regression coefficients. Statistical estimation and inference in linear regression focuses on .
* is called the error term, disturbance term, or noise. This variable captures all other factors which influence the dependent variable y'i other than the regressors x'i. The relationship between the error term and the regressors, for example whether they are correlated, is a crucial step in formulating a linear regression model, as it will determine the method to use for estimation.

Example. Consider a situation where a small ball is being tossed up in the air and then we measure its heights of ascent hi at various moments in time ti. Physics tells us that, ignoring the drag, the relationship can be modelled as
: 
where 1 determines the initial velocity of the ball, 2 is proportional to the standard gravity, and 'i is due to measurement errors. Linear regression can be used to estimate the values of 1 and 2 from the measured data. This model is non-linear in the time variable, but it is linear in the parameters 1 and 2; if we take regressors x'i = (x'i1, x'i2) = (t'i, t'i2), the model takes on the standard form
: 

===Assumptions===
Standard linear regression models with standard estimation techniques make a number of assumptions about the predictor variables, the response variables and their relationship. Numerous extensions have been developed that allow each of these assumptions to be relaxed (i.e. reduced to a weaker form), and in some cases eliminated entirely. Some methods are general enough that they can relax multiple assumptions at once, and in other cases this can be achieved by combining different extensions. Generally these extensions make the estimation procedure more complex and time-consuming, and may also require more data in order to produce an equally precise model.

The following are the major assumptions made by standard linear regression models with standard estimation techniques (e.g. ordinary least squares):
*Weak exogeneity. This essentially means that the predictor variables x can be treated as fixed values, rather than random variables. This means, for example, that the predictor variables are assumed to be error-freethat is, not contaminated with measurement errors. Although this assumption is not realistic in many settings, dropping it leads to significantly more difficult errors-in-variables models.

*Linearity. This means that the mean of the response variable is a linear combination of the parameters (regression coefficients) and the predictor variables. Note that this assumption is much less restrictive than it may at first seem. Because the predictor variables are treated as fixed values (see above), linearity is really only a restriction on the parameters. The predictor variables themselves can be arbitrarily transformed, and in fact multiple copies of the same underlying predictor variable can be added, each one transformed differently. This trick is used, for example, in polynomial regression, which uses linear regression to fit the response variable as an arbitrary polynomial function (up to a given rank) of a predictor variable. This makes linear regression an extremely powerful inference method. In fact, models such as polynomial regression are often "too powerful", in that they tend to overfit the data. As a result, some kind of regularization must typically be used to prevent unreasonable solutions coming out of the estimation process. Common examples are ridge regression and lasso regression. Bayesian linear regression can also be used, which by its nature is more or less immune to the problem of overfitting. (In fact, ridge regression and lasso regression can both be viewed as special cases of Bayesian linear regression, with particular types of prior distributions placed on the regression coefficients.)

*Constant variance (aka homoscedasticity). This means that different response variables have the same variance in their errors, regardless of the values of the predictor variables. In practice this assumption is invalid (i.e. the errors are heteroscedastic) if the response variables can vary over a wide scale. In order to determine for heterogeneous error variance, or when a pattern of residuals violates model assumptions of homoscedasticity (error is equally variable around the 'best-fitting line' for all points of x), it is prudent to look for a "fanning effect" between residual error and predicted values. This is to say there will be a systematic change in the absolute or squared residuals when plotted against the predicting outcome. Error will not be evenly distributed across the regression line. Heteroscedasticity will result in the averaging over of distinguishable variances around the points to get a single variance that is inaccurately representing all the variances of the line. In effect, residuals appear clustered and spread apart on their predicted plots for larger and smaller values for points along the linear regression line, and the mean squared error for the model will be wrong. Typically, for example, a response variable whose mean is large will have a greater variance than one whose mean is small. For example, a given person whose income is predicted to be $100,000 may easily have an actual income of $80,000 or $120,000 (a standard deviation of around $20,000), while another person with a predicted income of $10,000 is unlikely to have the same $20,000 standard deviation, which would imply their actual income would vary anywhere between -$10,000 and $30,000. (In fact, as this shows, in many casesoften the same cases where the assumption of normally distributed errors failsthe variance or standard deviation should be predicted to be proportional to the mean, rather than constant.) Simple linear regression estimation methods give less precise parameter estimates and misleading inferential quantities such as standard errors when substantial heteroscedasticity is present. However, various estimation techniques (e.g. weighted least squares and heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors) can handle heteroscedasticity in a quite general way. Bayesian linear regression techniques can also be used when the variance is assumed to be a function of the mean. It is also possible in some cases to fix the problem by applying a transformation to the response variable (e.g. fit the logarithm of the response variable using a linear regression model, which implies that the response variable has a log-normal distribution rather than a normal distribution).

*Independence of errors. This assumes that the errors of the response variables are uncorrelated with each other. (Actual statistical independence is a stronger condition than mere lack of correlation and is often not needed, although it can be exploited if it is known to hold.) Some methods (e.g. generalized least squares) are capable of handling correlated errors, although they typically require significantly more data unless some sort of regularization is used to bias the model towards assuming uncorrelated errors. Bayesian linear regression is a general way of handling this issue.
*Lack of multicollinearity in the predictors. For standard least squares estimation methods, the design matrix X must have full column rank p,; otherwise, we have a condition known as multicollinearity in the predictor variables. This can be triggered by having two or more perfectly correlated predictor variables (e.g. if the same predictor variable is mistakenly given twice, either without transforming one of the copies or by transforming one of the copies linearly). It can also happen if there is too little data available compared to the number of parameters to be estimated (e.g. fewer data points than regression coefficients). In the case of multicollinearity, the parameter vector  will be non-identifiableit has no unique solution. At most we will be able to identify some of the parameters, i.e. narrow down its value to some linear subspace of Rp. See partial least squares regression. Methods for fitting linear models with multicollinearity have been developed; some require additional assumptions such as "effect sparsity"that a large fraction of the effects are exactly zero. Note that the more computationally expensive iterated algorithms for parameter estimation, such as those used in generalized linear models, do not suffer from this problemand in fact it's quite normal to when handling categorically valued predictors to introduce a separate indicator variable predictor for each possible category, which inevitably introduces multicollinearity.

Beyond these assumptions, several other statistical properties of the data strongly influence the performance of different estimation methods:
* The statistical relationship between the error terms and the regressors plays an important role in determining whether an estimation procedure has desirable sampling properties such as being unbiased and consistent.
* The arrangement, or probability distribution of the predictor variables x has a major influence on the precision of estimates of . Sampling and design of experiments are highly developed subfields of statistics that provide guidance for collecting data in such a way to achieve a precise estimate of .

===Interpretation===
The sets in the Anscombe's quartet have the same linear regression line but are themselves very different.
A fitted linear regression model can be used to identify the relationship between a single predictor variable x'j and the response variable y when all the other predictor variables in the model are "held fixed". Specifically, the interpretation of 'j is the expected change in y for a one-unit change in x'j when the other covariates are held fixedthat is, the expected value of the partial derivative of y with respect to x'j. This is sometimes called the unique effect of x'j on y. In contrast, the marginal effect of x'j on y can be assessed using a correlation coefficient or simple linear regression model relating x'j to y; this effect is the total derivative of y with respect to x'j.

Care must be taken when interpreting regression results, as some of the regressors may not allow for marginal changes (such as dummy variables, or the intercept term), while others cannot be held fixed (recall the example from the introduction: it would be impossible to "hold ti fixed" and at the same time change the value of ti2).

It is possible that the unique effect can be nearly zero even when the marginal effect is large. This may imply that some other covariate captures all the information in x'j, so that once that variable is in the model, there is no contribution of x'j to the variation in y. Conversely, the unique effect of x'j can be large while its marginal effect is nearly zero. This would happen if the other covariates explained a great deal of the variation of y, but they mainly explain variation in a way that is complementary to what is captured by x'j. In this case, including the other variables in the model reduces the part of the variability of y that is unrelated to x'j, thereby strengthening the apparent relationship with x'j.

The meaning of the expression "held fixed" may depend on how the values of the predictor variables arise. If the experimenter directly sets the values of the predictor variables according to a study design, the comparisons of interest may literally correspond to comparisons among units whose predictor variables have been "held fixed" by the experimenter. Alternatively, the expression "held fixed" can refer to a selection that takes place in the context of data analysis. In this case, we "hold a variable fixed" by restricting our attention to the subsets of the data that happen to have a common value for the given predictor variable. This is the only interpretation of "held fixed" that can be used in an observational study.

The notion of a "unique effect" is appealing when studying a complex system where multiple interrelated components influence the response variable. In some cases, it can literally be interpreted as the causal effect of an intervention that is linked to the value of a predictor variable. However, it has been argued that in many cases multiple regression analysis fails to clarify the relationships between the predictor variables and the response variable when the predictors are correlated with each other and are not assigned following a study design. A commonality analysis may be helpful in disentangling the shared and unique impacts of correlated independent variables. Warne, R. T. (2011). Beyond multiple regression: Using commonality analysis to better understand R2 results. Gifted Child Quarterly, 55, 313-318. doi:10.1177/0016986211422217 

==Extensions==
Numerous extensions of linear regression have been developed, which allow some or all of the assumptions underlying the basic model to be relaxed.

===Simple and multiple regression===
The very simplest case of a single scalar predictor variable x and a single scalar response variable y is known as simple linear regression. The extension to multiple and/or vector-valued predictor variables (denoted with a capital X) is known as multiple linear regression. Nearly all real-world regression models involve multiple predictors, and basic descriptions of linear regression are often phrased in terms of the multiple regression model. Note, however, that in these cases the response variable y is still a scalar.

===General linear models===
The general linear model considers the situation when the response variable Y is not a scalar but a vector. Conditional linearity of E(y|x) = Bx is still assumed, with a matrix B replacing the vector  of the classical linear regression model. Multivariate analogues of OLS and GLS have been developed.

===Heteroscedastic models===
Various models have been created that allow for heteroscedasticity, i.e. the errors for different response variables may have different variances. For example, weighted least squares is a method for estimating linear regression models when the response variables may have different error variances, possibly with correlated errors. (See also Linear least squares (mathematics)#Weighted linear least squares, and generalized least squares.) Heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors is an improved method for use with uncorrelated but potentially heteroscedastic errors.

===Generalized linear models===
Generalized linear models (GLMs) are a framework for modeling a response variable y that is bounded or discrete. This is used, for example:
*when modeling positive quantities (e.g. prices or populations) that vary over a large scalewhich are better described using a skewed distribution such as the log-normal distribution or Poisson distribution (although GLMs are not used for log-normal data, instead the response variable is simply transformed using the logarithm function);
*when modeling categorical data, such as the choice of a given candidate in an election (which is better described using a Bernoulli distribution/binomial distribution for binary choices, or a categorical distribution/multinomial distribution for multi-way choices), where there are a fixed number of choices that cannot be meaningfully ordered;
*when modeling ordinal data, e.g. ratings on a scale from 0 to 5, where the different outcomes can be ordered but where the quantity itself may not have any absolute meaning (e.g. a rating of 4 may not be "twice as good" in any objective sense as a rating of 2, but simply indicates that it is better than 2 or 3 but not as good as 5).
Generalized linear models allow for an arbitrary link function g that relates the mean of the response variable to the predictors, i.e. E(y) = g(x). The link function is often related to the distribution of the response, and in particular it typically has the effect of transforming between the range of the linear predictor and the range of the response variable.

Some common examples of GLMs are:
*Poisson regression for count data.
*Logistic regression and probit regression for binary data.
*Multinomial logistic regression and multinomial probit regression for categorical data.
*Ordered probit regression for ordinal data.

Single index models allow some degree of nonlinearity in the relationship between x and y, while preserving the central role of the linear predictor x as in the classical linear regression model. Under certain conditions, simply applying OLS to data from a single-index model will consistently estimate  up to a proportionality constant. 

===Hierarchical linear models===
Hierarchical linear models (or multilevel regression) organizes the data into a hierarchy of regressions, for example where A is regressed on B, and B is regressed on C. It is often used where the data have a natural hierarchical structure such as in educational statistics, where students are nested in classrooms, classrooms are nested in schools, and schools are nested in some administrative grouping, such as a school district. The response variable might be a measure of student achievement such as a test score, and different covariates would be collected at the classroom, school, and school district levels.

===Errors-in-variables===
Errors-in-variables models (or "measurement error models") extend the traditional linear regression model to allow the predictor variables X to be observed with error. This error causes standard estimators of  to become biased. Generally, the form of bias is an attenuation, meaning that the effects are biased toward zero.

===Others===
* In DempsterShafer theory, or a linear belief function in particular, a linear regression model may be represented as a partially swept matrix, which can be combined with similar matrices representing observations and other assumed normal distributions and state equations. The combination of swept or unswept matrices provides an alternative method for estimating linear regression models.

==Estimation methods==
Comparison of the TheilSen estimator (black) and simple linear regression (blue) for a set of points with outliers.
A large number of procedures have been developed for parameter estimation and inference in linear regression. These methods differ in computational simplicity of algorithms, presence of a closed-form solution, robustness with respect to heavy-tailed distributions, and theoretical assumptions needed to validate desirable statistical properties such as consistency and asymptotic efficiency.

Some of the more common estimation techniques for linear regression are summarized below.

===Least-squares estimation and related techniques===

===Maximum-likelihood estimation and related techniques===

* Maximum likelihood estimation can be performed when the distribution of the error terms is known to belong to a certain parametric family  of probability distributions. When f is a normal distribution with zero mean and variance , the resulting estimate is identical to the OLS estimate. GLS estimates are maximum likelihood estimates when  follows a multivariate normal distribution with a known covariance matrix.
* Ridge regression, and other forms of penalized estimation such as Lasso regression, deliberately introduce bias into the estimation of  in order to reduce the variability of the estimate. The resulting estimators generally have lower mean squared error than the OLS estimates, particularly when multicollinearity is present. They are generally used when the goal is to predict the value of the response variable y for values of the predictors x that have not yet been observed. These methods are not as commonly used when the goal is inference, since it is difficult to account for the bias.
* Least absolute deviation (LAD) regression is a robust estimation technique in that it is less sensitive to the presence of outliers than OLS (but is less efficient than OLS when no outliers are present). It is equivalent to maximum likelihood estimation under a Laplace distribution model for . 
* Adaptive estimation. If we assume that error terms are independent from the regressors , the optimal estimator is the 2-step MLE, where the first step is used to non-parametrically estimate the distribution of the error term. 

===Other estimation techniques===
* Bayesian linear regression applies the framework of Bayesian statistics to linear regression. (See also Bayesian multivariate linear regression.) In particular, the regression coefficients  are assumed to be random variables with a specified prior distribution. The prior distribution can bias the solutions for the regression coefficients, in a way similar to (but more general than) ridge regression or lasso regression. In addition, the Bayesian estimation process produces not a single point estimate for the "best" values of the regression coefficients but an entire posterior distribution, completely describing the uncertainty surrounding the quantity. This can be used to estimate the "best" coefficients using the mean, mode, median, any quantile (see quantile regression), or any other function of the posterior distribution.
* Quantile regression focuses on the conditional quantiles of y given X rather than the conditional mean of y given X. Linear quantile regression models a particular conditional quantile, for example the conditional median, as a linear function Tx of the predictors.
* Mixed models are widely used to analyze linear regression relationships involving dependent data when the dependencies have a known structure. Common applications of mixed models include analysis of data involving repeated measurements, such as longitudinal data, or data obtained from cluster sampling. They are generally fit as parametric models, using maximum likelihood or Bayesian estimation. In the case where the errors are modeled as normal random variables, there is a close connection between mixed models and generalized least squares. Fixed effects estimation is an alternative approach to analyzing this type of data.
* Principal component regression (PCR) is used when the number of predictor variables is large, or when strong correlations exist among the predictor variables. This two-stage procedure first reduces the predictor variables using principal component analysis then uses the reduced variables in an OLS regression fit. While it often works well in practice, there is no general theoretical reason that the most informative linear function of the predictor variables should lie among the dominant principal components of the multivariate distribution of the predictor variables. The partial least squares regression is the extension of the PCR method which does not suffer from the mentioned deficiency.
* Least-angle regression is an estimation procedure for linear regression models that was developed to handle high-dimensional covariate vectors, potentially with more covariates than observations.
*The TheilSen estimator is a simple robust estimation technique that chooses the slope of the fit line to be the median of the slopes of the lines through pairs of sample points. It has similar statistical efficiency properties to simple linear regression but is much less sensitive to outliers. ; . 
* Other robust estimation techniques, including the -trimmed mean approach, and L-, M-, S-, and R-estimators have been introduced.

===Further discussion===
In statistics and numerical analysis, the problem of numerical methods for linear least squares is an important one because linear regression models are one of the most important types of model, both as formal statistical models and for exploration of data sets. The majority of statistical computer packages contain facilities for regression analysis that make use of linear least squares computations. Hence it is appropriate that considerable effort has been devoted to the task of ensuring that these computations are undertaken efficiently and with due regard to numerical precision.

Individual statistical analyses are seldom undertaken in isolation, but rather are part of a sequence of investigatory steps. Some of the topics involved in considering numerical methods for linear least squares relate to this point. Thus important topics can be
*Computations where a number of similar, and often nested, models are considered for the same data set. That is, where models with the same dependent variable but different sets of independent variables are to be considered, for essentially the same set of data points.
*Computations for analyses that occur in a sequence, as the number of data points increases.
*Special considerations for very extensive data sets.

Fitting of linear models by least squares often, but not always, arises in the context of statistical analysis. It can therefore be important that considerations of computational efficiency for such problems extend to all of the auxiliary quantities required for such analyses, and are not restricted to the formal solution of the linear least squares problem.

Matrix calculations, like any others, are affected by rounding errors. An early summary of these effects, regarding the choice of computational methods for matrix inversion, was provided by Wilkinson. Wilkinson, J.H. (1963) "Chapter 3: Matrix Computations", Rounding Errors in Algebraic Processes, London: Her Majesty's Stationery Office (National Physical Laboratory, Notes in Applied Science, No.32) 

==Applications of linear regression==
Linear regression is widely used in biological, behavioral and social sciences to describe possible relationships between variables. It ranks as one of the most important tools used in these disciplines.

===Trend line===

A trend line represents a trend, the long-term movement in time series data after other components have been accounted for. It tells whether a particular data set (say GDP, oil prices or stock prices) have increased or decreased over the period of time. A trend line could simply be drawn by eye through a set of data points, but more properly their position and slope is calculated using statistical techniques like linear regression. Trend lines typically are straight lines, although some variations use higher degree polynomials depending on the degree of curvature desired in the line.

Trend lines are sometimes used in business analytics to show changes in data over time. This has the advantage of being simple. Trend lines are often used to argue that a particular action or event (such as training, or an advertising campaign) caused observed changes at a point in time. This is a simple technique, and does not require a control group, experimental design, or a sophisticated analysis technique. However, it suffers from a lack of scientific validity in cases where other potential changes can affect the data.

===Epidemiology===
Early evidence relating tobacco smoking to mortality and morbidity came from observational studies employing regression analysis. In order to reduce spurious correlations when analyzing observational data, researchers usually include several variables in their regression models in addition to the variable of primary interest. For example, suppose we have a regression model in which cigarette smoking is the independent variable of interest, and the dependent variable is lifespan measured in years. Researchers might include socio-economic status as an additional independent variable, to ensure that any observed effect of smoking on lifespan is not due to some effect of education or income. However, it is never possible to include all possible confounding variables in an empirical analysis. For example, a hypothetical gene might increase mortality and also cause people to smoke more. For this reason, randomized controlled trials are often able to generate more compelling evidence of causal relationships than can be obtained using regression analyses of observational data. When controlled experiments are not feasible, variants of regression analysis such as instrumental variables regression may be used to attempt to estimate causal relationships from observational data.

===Finance===
The capital asset pricing model uses linear regression as well as the concept of beta for analyzing and quantifying the systematic risk of an investment. This comes directly from the beta coefficient of the linear regression model that relates the return on the investment to the return on all risky assets.

===Economics===

Linear regression is the predominant empirical tool in economics. For example, it is used to predict consumption spending, fixed investment spending, inventory investment, purchases of a country's exports, spending on imports, the demand to hold liquid assets, labor demand, and labor supply. 

===Environmental science===

Linear regression finds application in a wide range of environmental science applications. In Canada, the Environmental Effects Monitoring Program uses statistical analyses on fish and benthic surveys to measure the effects of pulp mill or metal mine effluent on the aquatic ecosystem. EEMP webpage 

==See also==

* Analysis of variance
* Censored regression model
* Cross-sectional regression
* Curve fitting
* Empirical Bayes methods
* Lack-of-fit sum of squares
* Logistic regression
* M-estimator
* MLPACK contains a C++ implementation of linear regression
* Multivariate adaptive regression splines
* Nonlinear regression
* Nonparametric regression
* Normal equations
* Projection pursuit regression
* Segmented linear regression
* Stepwise regression
* Truncated regression model

==Notes==

==References==
* Cohen, J., Cohen P., West, S.G., & Aiken, L.S. (2003). Applied multiple regression/correlation analysis for the behavioral sciences. (2nd ed.) Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
* Charles Darwin. The Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication. (1868) (Chapter XIII describes what was known about reversion in Galton's time. Darwin uses the term "reversion".)
* 
* Francis Galton. "Regression Towards Mediocrity in Hereditary Stature," Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 15:246-263 (1886). (Facsimile at: )
* Robert S. Pindyck and Daniel L. Rubinfeld (1998, 4h ed.). Econometric Models and Economic Forecasts, ch. 1 (Intro, incl. appendices on  operators & derivation of parameter est.) & Appendix 4.3 (mult. regression in matrix form).

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* Online Linear Regression Calculator & Trend Line Graphing Tool
* Using gradient descent in C++, Boost, Ublas for linear regression



[[Linear model]]

In statistics, the term linear model is used in different ways according to the context. The most common occurrence is in connection with regression models and the term is often taken as synonymous with linear regression model. However, the term is also used in time series analysis with a different meaning. In each case, the designation "linear" is used to identify a subclass of models for which substantial reduction in the complexity of the related statistical theory is possible.

==Linear regression models==

For the regression case, the statistical model is as follows. Given a (random) sample the relation between the observations Yi and the independent variables Xij is formulated as 

:

where may be nonlinear functions. In the above, the quantities i are random variables representing errors in the relationship. The "linear" part of the designation relates to the appearance of the regression coefficients, j in a linear way in the above relationship. Alternatively, one may say that the predicted values corresponding to the above model, namely
:
are linear functions of the j.

Given that estimation is undertaken on the basis of a least squares analysis, estimates of the unknown parameters j are determined by minimising a sum of squares function
:
From this, it can readily be seen that the "linear" aspect of the model means the following:
:*the function to be minimised is a quadratic function of the j for which minimisation is a relatively simple problem;
:*the derivatives of the function are linear functions of the j making it easy to find the minimising values;
:*the minimising values j are linear functions of the observations Yi;
:*the minimising values j are linear functions of the random errors i which makes it relatively easy to determine the statistical properties of the estimated values of j.

==Time series models==

An example of a linear time series model is an autoregressive moving average model. Here the model for values {Xt} in a time series can be written in the form

:

where again the quantities t are random variables representing innovations which are new random effects that appear at a certain time but also affect values of X at later times. In this instance the use of the term "linear model" refers to the structure of the above relationship in representing Xt as a linear function of past values of the same time series and of current and past values of the innovations. Priestley, M.B. (1988) Non-linear and Non-stationary time series analysis, Academic Press. ISBN 0-12-564911-8 This particular aspect of the structure means that it is relative simple to derive relations for the mean and covariance properties of the time series. Note that here the "linear" part of the term "linear model" is not referring to the coefficients i and i, as it would be in the case of a regression model, which looks structurally similar.

==Other uses in statistics==

There are some other instances where "nonlinear model" is used to contrast with a linearly structured model, although the term "linear model" is not usually applied. One example of this is nonlinear dimensionality reduction. 

==See also==
* General linear model
* Generalized linear model
* Linear system
* Statistical model

==References==
 



[[Likelihood principle]]

In statistics,
the likelihood principle is a controversial principle of statistical inference which asserts that all of the information in a sample is contained in the likelihood function.

A likelihood function arises from a conditional probability distribution considered as a function of its distributional parameterization argument, conditioned on the data argument. For example, consider a model which gives the probability density function of observable random variable X as a function of a parameter .
Then for a specific value x of X, the function L( | x) = P(X=x | ) is a likelihood function of : it gives a measure of how "likely" any particular value of  is, if we know that X has the value x. Two likelihood functions are equivalent if one is a scalar multiple of the other. The likelihood principle states that all information from the data relevant to inferences about the value of  is found in the equivalence class. The strong likelihood principle applies this same criterion to cases such as sequential experiments where the sample of data that is available results from applying a stopping rule to the observations earlier in the experiment. Dodge, Y. (2003) The Oxford Dictionary of Statistical Terms. OUP. ISBN 0-19-920613-9 

==Example==

Suppose

*X is the number of successes in twelve independent Bernoulli trials with probability  of success on each trial, and
*Y is the number of independent Bernoulli trials needed to get three successes, again with probability  (= 1/2 for a coin-toss) of success on each trial.

Then the observation that X = 3 induces the likelihood function

:,

while the observation that Y = 12 induces the likelihood function

:

The likelihood principle says that as the data is the same in both cases the inferences drawn about the value of  should also be the same. In addition, all the inferential content in the data about the value of  is contained in the two likelihoods, and is the same if they are proportional to one another. This is the case in the above example, reflecting the fact that the difference between observing X = 3 and observing Y = 12 lies not in the actual data, but merely in the design of the experiment. Specifically, in one case, one has decided in advance to try twelve times; in the other, to keep trying until three successes are observed. The inference about  should be the same, and this is reflected in the fact that the two likelihoods are proportional to each other. 

This is not always the case, howevever. The use of frequentist methods involving p-values leads to different inferences for the two cases above , showing that the outcome of frequentist methods depends on the experimental procedure, and thus violates the likelihood principle.

==The law of likelihood==

A related concept is the law of likelihood, the notion that the extent to which the evidence supports one parameter value or hypothesis against another is equal to the ratio of their likelihoods.
That is, 
:
is the degree to which the observation x supports parameter value or hypothesis a against b.
If this ratio is 1, the evidence is indifferent,
and if greater or less than 1, the evidence supports a against b or vice versa. The use of Bayes factors can extend this by taking account of the complexity of different hypotheses.

Combining the likelihood principle with the law of likelihood yields the consequence that the parameter value which maximizes the likelihood function is the value which is most strongly supported by the evidence.
This is the basis for the widely used method of maximum likelihood.

== Historical remarks ==

The likelihood principle was first identified by that name in print in 1962
(Barnard et al., Birnbaum, and Savage et al.),
but arguments for the same principle, unnamed, and the use of the principle in applications goes back to the works of R.A. Fisher in the 1920s. 
The law of likelihood was identified by that name by I. Hacking (1965).
More recently the likelihood principle as a general principle of inference has been championed by A. W. F. Edwards.
The likelihood principle has been applied to the philosophy of science by R. Royall.

Birnbaum proved that the likelihood principle follows from two more primitive and seemingly reasonable principles, the conditionality principle and the sufficiency principle. The conditionality principle says that if an experiment is chosen by a random process independent of the states of nature , then only the experiment actually performed is relevant to inferences about . The sufficiency principle says that if is a sufficient statistic for , and if in two experiments with data and we have , then the evidence about given by the two experiments is the same.

== Arguments for and against the likelihood principle ==
Some widely used methods of conventional statistics, for example many significance tests, are not consistent with the likelihood principle.

Let us briefly consider some of the arguments for and against the likelihood principle.

===The original Birnbaum argument===

Birnbaum's proof of the likelihood principle is not widely accepted among statisticians, and has been disputed by philosophers of science like Deborah Mayo Mayo, B. (2010) "An Error in the Argument from Conditionality and Sufficiency to the Likelihood Principle" in Error and Inference: Recent Exchanges on Experimental Reasoning, Reliability and the Objectivity and Rationality of Science (D Mayo and A. Spanos eds.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press: 305-14. Mayo, Deborah (2013) On the Birnbaum Argument for the Strong Likelihood Principle and statisticians like Michael Evans. Evans, Michael (2013) What does the proof of Birnbaum's theorem prove? 

===Experimental design arguments on the likelihood principle===
Unrealized events do play a role in some common statistical methods.
For example, the result of a significance test depends on the p-value, the probability of a result as extreme or more extreme than the observation, and that probability may depend on the design of the experiment. Thus, to the extent that such methods are accepted, the likelihood principle is denied.

Some classical significance tests are not based on the likelihood. 
A commonly cited example is the optional stopping problem.
Suppose I tell you that I tossed a coin 12 times and in the process observed 3 heads. 
You might make some inference about the probability of heads and whether the coin was fair. 
Suppose now I tell that I tossed the coin until I observed 3 heads, and I tossed it 12 times. Will you now make some different inference?

The likelihood function is the same in both cases: it is proportional to
:.

According to the likelihood principle, the inference should be the same in either case.

Suppose a number of scientists are assessing the probability of a certain outcome (which we shall call 'success') in experimental trials. Conventional wisdom suggests that if there is no bias towards success or failure then the success probability would be one half. Adam, a scientist, conducted 12 trials and obtains 3 successes and 9 failures. Then he left the lab.

Bill, a colleague in the same lab, continued Adam's work and published Adam's results, along with a significance test. He tested the null hypothesis that p, the success probability, is equal to a half, versus p < 0.5. The probability of the observed result that out of 12 trials 3 or something fewer (i.e. more extreme) were successes, if H0 is true, is
:
which is 299/4096 = 7.3%. Thus the null hypothesis is not rejected at the 5% significance level.

Charlotte, another scientist, reads Bill's paper and writes a letter, saying that it is possible that Adam kept trying until he obtained 3 successes, in which case the probability of needing to conduct 12 or more experiments is given by 
:
which is 134/4096 = 3.27%. Now the result is statistically significant at the 5% level. Note that there is no contradiction among these two results; both computations are correct.

To these scientists, whether a result is significant or not depends on the design of the experiment, not on the likelihood (in the sense of the likelihood function) of the parameter value being 1/2.

Results of this kind are considered by some as arguments against the likelihood principle. For others it exemplifies the value of the likelihood principle and is an argument against significance tests.

Similar themes appear when comparing Fisher's exact test with Pearson's chi-squared test.

===The voltmeter story===

An argument in favor of the likelihood principle is given by Edwards in his book Likelihood. He cites the following story from J.W. Pratt, slightly condensed here. Note that the likelihood function depends only on what actually happened, and not on what could have happened.

: An engineer draws a random sample of electron tubes and measures their voltage. The measurements range from 75 to 99 volts. A statistician computes the sample mean and a confidence interval for the true mean. Later the statistician discovers that the voltmeter reads only as far as 100, so the population appears to be 'censored'. This necessitates a new analysis, if the statistician is orthodox. However, the engineer says he has another meter reading to 1000 volts, which he would have used if any voltage had been over 100. This is a relief to the statistician, because it means the population was effectively uncensored after all. But, the next day the engineer informs the statistician that this second meter was not working at the time of the measuring. The statistician ascertains that the engineer would not have held up the measurements until the meter was fixed, and informs him that new measurements are required. The engineer is astounded. "Next you'll be asking about my oscilloscope".

One might proceed with this story, and consider the fact that in general the actual situation could have been different. For instance, high range voltmeters don't break at predictable moments in time, but rather at unpredictable moments. So it could have been broken, with some probability. The likelihood theory claims that the distribution of the voltage measurements depends on the probability that an instrument not used in this experiment was broken at the time.

This story can be translated to Adam's stopping rule above, as follows. Adam stopped immediately after 3 successes, because his boss Bill had instructed him to do so. Adam did not die. After the publication of the statistical analysis by Bill, Adam discovers that he has missed a second instruction from Bill to conduct 12 trials instead, and that Bill's paper is based on this second instruction. Adam is very glad that he got his 3 successes after exactly 12 trials, and explains to his friend Charlotte that by coincidence he executed the second instruction. Later, he is astonished to hear about Charlotte's letter explaining that now the result is significant.

== See also ==
* Likelihood-ratio test
* Conditionality principle

==Notes==

== References ==
* 
* 
* (With discussion.)
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* .
* 
* 

== External links ==

* Anthony W.F. Edwards. "Likelihood". http://www.cimat.mx/reportes/enlinea/D-99-10.html
* Jeff Miller. Earliest Known Uses of Some of the Words of Mathematics (L)
* John Aldrich. Likelihood and Probability in R. A. Fishers Statistical Methods for Research Workers



[[Led Zeppelin]]

Led Zeppelin were an English rock band formed in London in 1968. The band consisted of guitarist Jimmy Page, singer Robert Plant, bassist and keyboardist John Paul Jones, and drummer John Bonham. The group's heavy, guitar-driven sound, rooted in blues on their early albums, has drawn them recognition as one of the progenitors of heavy metal, though their unique style drew from a wide variety of influences, including folk music.

After changing their name from the New Yardbirds, Led Zeppelin signed a deal with Atlantic Records that afforded them considerable artistic freedom. Although the group was initially unpopular with critics, they achieved significant commercial success with albums such as Led Zeppelin (1969), Led Zeppelin II (1969), Led Zeppelin III (1970), their untitled fourth album (1971), Houses of the Holy (1973), and Physical Graffiti (1975). Their fourth album, which features the track "Stairway to Heaven", is among the most popular and influential works in rock music, and it helped to cement the popularity of the group.

Page wrote most of the music in Led Zeppelin's early career, while Plant generally supplied the songs' lyrics. Jones' keyboard-based compositions later became central to the group's music, and their later albums featured greater experimentation. The latter half of the band's career saw a series of record-breaking tours that earned them a reputation for excess and debauchery. Although they remained commercially and critically successful, their output and touring schedule were limited in the late 1970s, and the group disbanded following Bonham's death from alcohol-related asphyxia in 1980. In the decades since, the surviving members have sporadically collaborated and participated in one-off Led Zeppelin reunions. The most successful of these was at the 2007 Ahmet Ertegun Tribute Concert in London, with Jason Bonham taking his late father's place behind the drums.

Led Zeppelin are widely considered one of the most successful, innovative and influential rock groups in history. They are one of the best-selling music artists in the history of audio recording; various sources estimate the group's record sales at 200 to 300 million units worldwide. With 111.5 million RIAA-certified units, they are the second-best-selling band in the United States. Each of their nine studio albums placed on the Billboard Top 10 and six reached the number-one spot. Rolling Stone magazine described them as "the heaviest band of all time", "the biggest band of the '70s" and "unquestionably one of the most enduring bands in rock history". They were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1995; the museum's biography of the band states that they were "as influential in that decade 1970s as the Beatles were in the prior one".

==History==

===Formation===
alt=The name Led Zeppelin in irregular capitals in black and white

In 1966, London-based session guitarist Jimmy Page joined the blues-influenced rock band The Yardbirds to replace bassist Paul Samwell-Smith. Page soon switched from bass to lead guitar, creating a dual lead guitar line-up with Jeff Beck. Following Beck's departure in October 1966, the Yardbirds, tired from constant touring and recording, began to wind down. Page wanted to form a supergroup with him and Beck on guitars, and the Who's Keith Moon and John Entwistle on drums and bass. Vocalists Steve Winwood and Steve Marriott were also considered for the project. The group never formed, although Page, Beck and Moon did record a song together in 1966, "Beck's Bolero", in a session that also included bassist-keyboardist John Paul Jones.

The Yardbirds played their final gig in July 1968 at Luton College of Technology in Bedfordshire. They were still committed to several concerts in Scandinavia, so drummer Jim McCarty and vocalist Keith Relf authorised Page and bassist Chris Dreja to use "the Yardbirds" name to fulfill the band's obligations. Page and Dreja began putting a new line-up together. Page's first choice for the lead singer was Terry Reid, but Reid declined the offer and suggested Robert Plant, a singer for the Band of Joy and Hobbstweedle. Plant eventually accepted the position, recommending former Band of Joy drummer John Bonham. Jones inquired about the vacant position at the suggestion of his wife after Dreja dropped out of the project to become a photographer. He would later take the photograph that appeared on the back of Led Zeppelin's debut album. Page had known Jones since they were both session musicians and agreed to let him join as the final member.

alt=A black and white photograph of an airship near a mooring mast exploding at its stern.
The four played together for the first time in a room below a record store on Gerrard Street in London. Page suggested that they attempt "Train Kept A-Rollin'", originally a jump blues song popularised in a rockabilly version by Johnny Burnette, which had been covered by the Yardbirds. "As soon as I heard John Bonham play", Jones recalled, "I knew this was going to be great ... We locked together as a team immediately". Before leaving for Scandinavia, the group took part in a recording session for the P.J. Proby album, Three Week Hero. The album's track "Jim's Blues", with Plant on harmonica, was the first studio track to feature all four future members of Led Zeppelin.

The band completed the Scandinavian tour as the New Yardbirds, playing together for the first time in front of a live audience at Gladsaxe Teen Clubs in Gladsaxe, Denmark, on 7 September 1968. Later that month, they began recording their first album, which was based on their live set. The album was recorded and mixed in nine days, and Page himself covered the costs. After the album's completion, the band were forced to change their name after Dreja issued a cease and desist letter, stating that Page was only allowed to use the New Yardbirds moniker for the Scandinavian dates. One account of how the new band's name was chosen held that Moon and Entwistle had suggested that a supergroup with Page and Beck would go down like a "lead balloon", an idiom for disastrous results. The group dropped the 'a' in lead at the suggestion of their manager, Peter Grant, so that those unfamiliar with the term would not pronounce it "leed". The word "balloon" was swapped for "zeppelin", a word which, according to music journalist Keith Shadwick, brought "the perfect combination of heavy and light, combustibility and grace" to Page's mind.

Grant secured a $143,000 advance contract from Atlantic Records in November 1968, which was then the biggest deal of its kind for a new band. Atlantic were a label with a catalogue of mainly blues, soul and jazz artists, but in the late 1960s they began to take an interest in British progressive rock acts. Record executives signed Led Zeppelin without having ever seen them. Under the terms of their contract, the band had autonomy in deciding when they would release albums and tour, and had the final say over the contents and design of each album. They would also decide how to promote each release and which tracks to release as singles. They formed their own company, Superhype, to handle all publishing rights.

===Early years: 196870===
The band began their first tour of the UK on 4 October 1968, still billed as the New Yardbirds, and played their first show as Led Zeppelin at the University of Surrey in Battersea on 25 October. Tour manager Richard Cole, who would become a major figure in the touring life of the group, organised their first North American tour at the end of the year. The first show was in Denver on 26 December 1968, followed by other West Coast dates before the band travelled to California to play Los Angeles and San Francisco. Their debut album, Led Zeppelin, was released in the US during the tour on 12 January 1969, and peaked at number 10 on the Billboard chart; it was released in the UK, where it peaked at number 6, on 31 March. According to Steve Erlewine, the album's memorable guitar riffs, lumbering rhythms, psychedelic blues, groovy, bluesy shuffles and hints of English folk, made it "a significant turning point in the evolution of hard rock and heavy metal".

alt=A colour photograph of a stone cottage on a hill
In their first year, Led Zeppelin completed four US and four UK concert tours, and also released their second album, Led Zeppelin II. Recorded almost entirely on the road at various North American studios, it was an even greater commercial success than their first album, and reached the number one chart position in the US and the UK. The album further developed the mostly blues-rock musical style established on their debut release, creating a work with a sound that was "heavy and hard, brutal and direct", and which would be highly influential and frequently imitated. Steve Waksman has suggested that Led Zeppelin II was "the musical starting point for heavy metal".

The band saw their albums as indivisible, complete listening experiences, disliking the re-editing of existing tracks for release as singles. Grant maintained an aggressive pro-album stance, particularly in the UK, where there were few radio and TV outlets for rock music. Without the band's consent, however, some songs were released as singles, particularly in the US. In 1969 an edited version of "Whole Lotta Love", a track from their second album, was released as a single in the US. It reached number four in the Billboard chart in January 1970, selling over one million copies and helping to cement the band's popularity. The group also increasingly shunned television appearances, citing their preference that their fans hear and see them in live concerts.

Following the second album's release, Led Zeppelin completed several more US tours. They played initially in clubs and ballrooms, and then in larger auditoriums as their popularity grew. Some early Led Zeppelin concerts lasted more than four hours, with expanded and improvised live versions of their repertoire. Many of these shows have been preserved as bootleg recordings. It was during this period of intensive concert touring that the band developed a reputation for off-stage excess. One alleged example of such extravagance was the shark episode said to have taken place at the Edgewater Inn in Seattle on 28 July 1969.

In 1970 Page and Plant retired to Bron-Yr-Aur, a remote cottage in Wales, to commence work on their third album, Led Zeppelin III. The result was a more acoustic style that was strongly influenced by folk and Celtic music, and showcased the band's versatility. The album's rich acoustic sound initially received mixed reactions, with critics and fans surprised at the turn from the primarily electric arrangements of the first two albums, further fuelling the band's hostility to the musical press. It reached number one in the UK and US charts, but its stay would be the shortest of their first five albums. The album's opening track, "Immigrant Song", was released as a US single in November 1970 against the band's wishes, reaching the top twenty on the Billboard chart.

==="The Biggest Band in the World": 197175===
alt=Four symbols representing the four members of Led Zeppelin in a horizontal row
In the 1970s Led Zeppelin reached new heights of commercial and critical success that made them one of the most influential groups of the era, dwarfing their earlier achievements. The band's image also changed as the members began to wear elaborate, flamboyant clothing. Led Zeppelin began travelling in a private jet airliner, a Boeing 720, (nicknamed the Starship), rented out entire sections of hotels (including the Continental Hyatt House in Los Angeles, known colloquially as the "Riot House"), and became the subject of frequently repeated stories of debauchery. One involved John Bonham riding a motorcycle through a rented floor of the Riot House, while another involved the destruction of a room in the Tokyo Hilton, leading to the group being banned from that establishment for life. Although Led Zeppelin developed a reputation for trashing their hotel suites and throwing television sets out of the windows, some suggest that these tales have been exaggerated. Music journalist Chris Welch argues that "Zeppelin's travels spawned many stories, but it was a myth that were constantly engaged in acts of wanton destruction and lewd behaviour".

alt=A black and white photograph of Robert Plant with a tambourine and Jimmy Page with an acoustic guitar seated and performing

Led Zeppelin released their fourth album on 8 November 1971. In response to the treatment the band had received from critics, particularly after Led Zeppelin III, the band decided to release the fourth album with no title, though it is variously referred to as Led Zeppelin IV, Untitled, IV, or, due to the four symbols appearing on the record label, as Four Symbols, Zoso or Runes. In addition to lacking a title, the original cover featured no band name, as the group wished to be anonymous and to avoid easy pigeonholing by the press. With 37 million copies sold, Led Zeppelin IV is one of the best-selling albums in history, and its massive popularity cemented Led Zeppelin's status as superstars in the 1970s. By 2006, it had sold 23 million copies in the United States alone. The track "Stairway to Heaven", never released as a single, is sometimes quoted as being the most requested and most played album-orientated rock (AOR) FM radio song. The group followed up the album's release with tours of the UK, Australasia, North America, Japan, and the UK again from late 1971 through early 1973.

Led Zeppelin's next album, Houses of the Holy, was released in March 1973. It featured further experimentation by the band, who expanded their use of synthesisers and mellotron orchestration. The predominately orange album cover, designed by the London-based design group Hipgnosis, depicts images of nude children climbing the Giant's Causeway in Northern Ireland. Although the children are not shown from the front, the cover was controversial at the time of the album's release. As with the band's fourth album, neither their name nor the album title was printed on the sleeve.

Houses of the Holy topped charts worldwide, and the band's subsequent concert tour of North America in 1973 broke records for attendance, as they consistently filled large auditoriums and stadiums. At Tampa Stadium in Florida, they played to 56,800 fans, breaking the record set by the Beatles' 1965 Shea Stadium concert and grossing $309,000. Three sold-out shows at Madison Square Garden in New York City were filmed for a motion picture, but the theatrical release of this project (The Song Remains the Same) was delayed until 1976. Before the final night's performance, $180,000 of the band's money from gate receipts was stolen from a safe deposit box at the Drake Hotel.

alt=A colour photograph of the four members of Led Zeppelin performing onstage, with some other figures visible in the background

In 1974, Led Zeppelin took a break from touring and launched their own record label, Swan Song, named after an unreleased song. The record label's logo, based on a drawing called Evening: Fall of Day (1869) by William Rimmer, features a picture of Apollo. The logo can be found on Led Zeppelin memorabilia, especially t-shirts. In addition to using Swan Song as a vehicle to promote their own albums, the band expanded the label's roster, signing artists such as Bad Company, the Pretty Things and Maggie Bell. The label was successful while Led Zeppelin existed, but folded less than three years after they disbanded.

In 1975, Led Zeppelin's double album Physical Graffiti was their first release on the Swan Song label. It consisted of fifteen songs, of which eight had been recorded at Headley Grange in 1974 and seven had been recorded earlier. A review in Rolling Stone magazine referred to Physical Graffiti as Led Zeppelin's "bid for artistic respectability", adding that the only bands Led Zeppelin had to compete with for the title "The World's Best Rock Band" were the Rolling Stones and the Who. The album was a massive fiscal and critical success. Shortly after the release of Physical Graffiti, all previous Led Zeppelin albums simultaneously re-entered the top-200 album chart, and the band embarked on another North American tour, now employing sophisticated sound and lighting systems. In May 1975, Led Zeppelin played five sold-out nights at the Earls Court Arena in London, at the time the largest arena in Britain.

===Hiatus from touring and return: 197577===
Following their triumphant Earls Court appearances, Led Zeppelin took a holiday and planned an autumn tour in America, scheduled to open with two outdoor dates in San Francisco. In August 1975, however, Plant and his wife Maureen were involved in a serious car crash while on holiday in Rhodes, Greece. Plant suffered a broken ankle and Maureen was badly injured; a blood transfusion saved her life. Unable to tour, he headed to the Channel Island of Jersey to spend August and September recuperating, with Bonham and Page in tow. The band then reconvened in Malibu, California. During this forced hiatus much of the material for their next album, Presence, was written.

alt=A colour photograph of Robert Plant with microphone and Jimmy Page with a double necked guitar performing on stage.

By this time, Led Zeppelin were the world's number one rock attraction, having outsold most bands of the time, including the Rolling Stones. Presence, released in March 1976, marked a change in the Led Zeppelin sound towards more straightforward, guitar-based jams, departing from the acoustic ballads and intricate arrangements featured on their previous albums. Though it was a platinum seller, Presence received a mixed reaction among fans and the music press, with some critics suggesting that the band's excesses may have caught up with them. Page had begun using heroin during recording sessions for the album, a habit which may have affected the band's later live shows and studio recordings the band, although this has been denied by Page.

Because of Plant's injuries, Led Zeppelin did not tour in 1976. Instead, the band completed the concert film The Song Remains the Same and the accompanying soundtrack album. The film premiered in New York City on 20 October 1976, but was given a lukewarm reception by critics and fans. The film was particularly unsuccessful in the UK, where, unwilling to tour since 1975 because of their tax exile status, Led Zeppelin faced an uphill battle to recapture the public's affection.

In 1977, Led Zeppelin embarked on another major concert tour of North America. The band set another attendance record, with an audience of 76,229 at their Silverdome concert on 30 April. It was, according to the Guinness Book of Records, the largest attendance to that date for a single act show. Although the tour was financially profitable, it was beset by off-stage problems. On 19 April, over 70 people were arrested as about 1,000 fans tried to gatecrash Cincinnati Riverfront Coliseum for two sold-out concerts, while others tried to gain entry by throwing rocks and bottles through glass doors. On 3 June, a concert at Tampa Stadium was cut short because of a severe thunderstorm, despite tickets indicating "Rain or Shine". A riot broke out, resulting in arrests and injuries.

After the 23 July show at the Days on the Green festival at the Oakland Coliseum in Oakland, California, Bonham and members of the band's support staff were arrested after a member of promoter Bill Graham's staff was badly beaten during the band's performance. The following day's second Oakland concert was the band's final live appearance in the United States. Two days later, as the band checked in at a French Quarter hotel for their 30 July performance at the Louisiana Superdome, Plant received news that his five-year-old son, Karac, had died from a stomach virus. The rest of the tour was immediately cancelled, prompting widespread speculation about the band's future.

===Bonham's death and break-up: 197880===
alt=A black and white photograph of John Bonham playing drums

In November 1978 the group recorded at Polar Studios in Stockholm, Sweden. The resulting album, In Through the Out Door, featured sonic experimentation that again drew mixed reactions from critics. Nevertheless, the album reached number one in the UK and the US in just its second week of release. With this album's release, Led Zeppelin's entire catalogue returned to the Billboard Top 200 in the weeks of 27 October and 3 November 1979.

In August 1979, after two warm-up shows in Copenhagen, Led Zeppelin headlined two concerts at the Knebworth Music Festival, playing to a crowd of approximately 104,000 on the first night. A brief, low-key European tour was undertaken in June and July 1980, featuring a stripped-down set without the usual lengthy jams and solos. On 27 June, at a show in Nuremberg, Germany, the concert came to an abrupt halt in the middle of the third song, when Bonham collapsed onstage and was rushed to hospital. Speculation in the press suggested that his collapse had been the result of excessive alcohol and drug use, but the band claimed that he had simply overeaten.

A North American tour, the band's first since 1977, was scheduled to commence on 17 October 1980. On 24 September, Bonham was picked up by Led Zeppelin assistant Rex King to attend rehearsals at Bray Studios. During the journey, Bonham asked to stop for breakfast, where he downed four quadruple vodkas (450 ml/15 oz.), with a ham roll. After taking a bite of the ham roll he said to his assistant, "breakfast". He continued to drink heavily after arriving at the studio. The rehearsals were halted late that evening and the band retired to Page's housethe Old Mill House in Clewer, Windsor. After midnight, Bonham, who had fallen asleep, was taken to bed and placed on his side. At 1:45 pm the next day, Benji LeFevre (Led Zeppelin's new tour manager) and John Paul Jones found Bonham dead. The cause of death was asphyxiation from vomit; an autopsy found no other drugs in his body. Bonham was cremated on 10 October 1980, and his ashes were buried at Rushock Parish Church in Droitwich, Worcestershire. A verdict of accidental death was returned at an inquest held on 27 October.

The planned North American tour was cancelled, and despite rumours that Cozy Powell, Carmine Appice, Barriemore Barlow, Simon Kirke or Bev Bevan would join the group as his replacement, the remaining members decided to disband. A 4 December 1980 press statement stated that, "We wish it to be known that the loss of our dear friend, and the deep sense of undivided harmony felt by ourselves and our manager, have led us to decide that we could not continue as we were". The statement was signed simply "Led Zeppelin".

===Post-breakup===

====1980s====
alt=A colour photograph of Jimmy Page performing on stage with a double-necked guitar

Following the dissolution of Led Zeppelin, the first significant project for the band members was the Honeydrippers, which Plant formed in 1981. The group featured Page on lead guitar, along with studio musicians and friends of Plant and Page, including Jeff Beck, Paul Shaffer, and Nile Rodgers. Plant focused the band in a different direction from Led Zeppelin, playing standards and in a more R&B style, highlighted by their cover of "Sea of Love", which peaked at number three on the Billboard charts in early 1985.

1982 saw the release of Coda, a collection of outtakes and unused tracks from the band's career. It included two tracks taken from the band's performance at the Royal Albert Hall in 1970, one each from the Led Zeppelin III and Houses of the Holy sessions, and three from the In Through the Out Door sessions. It also featured a 1976 Bonham drum instrumental with electronic effects added by Page, called "Bonzo's Montreux".

On 13 July 1985, Page, Plant and Jones reunited for the Live Aid concert at JFK Stadium, Philadelphia, playing a short set featuring drummers Tony Thompson and Phil Collins and bassist Paul Martinez. Collins had contributed to Plant's first two solo albums while Martinez was a member of Plant's group Band of Joy. The performance was marred by the lack of rehearsal with the two drummers, Page's struggles with an out-of-tune guitar, poorly functioning monitors, and by Plant's hoarse voice. Page described the performance as "pretty shambolic", while Plant characterised it as an "atrocity".

The three members reunited again on 14 May 1988, for the Atlantic Records 40th Anniversary concert, with Bonham's son, Jason Bonham, on drums. The result was another disjointed performance, after Plant and Page had argued immediately prior to coming on stage about whether to play "Stairway to Heaven", and with the complete loss of Jones' keyboards on the live television feed. Page described the performance as "one big disappointment", and Plant said that "the gig was foul".

====1990s====
alt=A colour photograph of Jason Bonham playing drums
The first Led Zeppelin box set, featuring tracks remastered under Page's supervision, was released in 1990 and bolstered the band's reputation, leading to abortive discussions among members about a reunion. This set included four previously unreleased tracks, including a version of Robert Johnson's "Travelling Riverside Blues". The song peaked at number seven on the Billboard Album Rock Tracks chart. 1992 saw the release of the "Immigrant Song"/"Hey Hey What Can I Do" (the original B-side) as a CD single in the US. Led Zeppelin Boxed Set 2 was released in 1993; the two box sets together containing all known studio recordings, as well as some rare live tracks.

In 1994, Page and Plant reunited for a 90-minute "UnLedded" MTV project. They later released an album called , which featured some reworked Led Zeppelin songs, and embarked on a world tour the following year. This is said to be the beginning of a rift between the band members, as Jones was not even told of the reunion.

In 1995, Led Zeppelin were inducted into the United States Rock and Roll Hall of Fame by Steven Tyler and Joe Perry of Aerosmith. Jason and Zo Bonham also attended, representing their late father. At the induction ceremony, the band's inner rift became apparent when Jones joked upon accepting his award, "Thank you, my friends, for finally remembering my phone number", causing consternation and awkward looks from Page and Plant. Afterwards, they played one brief set with Tyler and Perry, with Jason Bonham on drums, and then a second with Neil Young, this time with Michael Lee playing the drums.

In 1997, Atlantic released a single edit of "Whole Lotta Love" in the US and the UK, the only single the band released in their homeland, where it peaked at number 21. November 1997 saw the release of Led Zeppelin BBC Sessions, a two-disc set largely recorded in 1969 and 1971. Page and Plant released another album called Walking into Clarksdale in 1998, featuring all new material, but after disappointing sales the partnership dissolved before a planned Australian tour.

====2000s and beyond====
alt=A colour photograph of John Paul Jones, Robert Plant and Jimmy Page performing on stage, with Jason Bonham partially visible on drums in the background
2003 saw the release of the triple live album How the West Was Won, and Led Zeppelin DVD, a six-hour chronological set of live footage that became the best-selling music DVD in history. In July 2007 Atlantic/Rhino and Warner Home Video announced three new Led Zeppelin titles to be released that November. First was Mothership, a 24-track best-of spanning the band's career, followed by a reissue of the soundtrack The Song Remains the Same, which included previously unreleased material, and a new DVD. Led Zeppelin also made their catalogue legally available for digital download, becoming one of the last major rock bands to do so.

On 10 December 2007 Led Zeppelin reunited for the Ahmet Ertegun Tribute Concert at the O2 Arena in London, with Jason Bonham again taking his late father's place on drums. According to Guinness World Records 2009, Led Zeppelin set the world record for the "Highest Demand for Tickets for One Music Concert" as 20 million requests for the reunion show were rendered online. Music critics praised the band's performance and there was widespread speculation about a full reunion. Page, Jones and Jason Bonham were reported to be willing to tour, and to be working on material for a new Led Zeppelin project. Plant continued his touring commitments with Alison Krauss, stating in September 2008 that he would not be recording or touring with the band. Jones, Page and Bonham reportedly looked for a replacement for Plant, considering singers including Steven Tyler, and Myles Kennedy of Alter Bridge, but in January 2009 it was confirmed that the project had been abandoned. A film of the O2 performance, Celebration Day, premiered on 17 October 2012 and was released on home video on 19 November. The film grossed $2 million in one night, and the live album peaked at number 4 and 9 in the UK and US, respectively. Following the film's premiere, Page revealed that he had been remastering the band's discography with the first three albums re-released on 2 June 2014. 

==Musical style==
alt=A black and white photograph of John Bonham wearing a headband and behind the cymbals of a drum kit
Led Zeppelin's music was rooted in the blues. The influence of American blues artists such as Muddy Waters and Skip James was particularly apparent on their first two albums, as was the distinct country blues style of Howlin' Wolf. Tracks were structured around the twelve-bar blues on every studio album except for one, and the blues directly and indirectly influenced other songs both musically and lyrically. The band were also strongly influenced by the music of the British, Celtic and American folk revivals. Scottish folk guitarist Bert Jansch helped inspire Page, and from him he adapted open tunings and aggressive strokes into his playing. The band also drew on a wide variety of genres, including world music, and elements of early rock and roll, jazz, country, funk, soul and reggae, particularly on Houses of the Holy and the albums that followed.

The material on the first two albums was largely constructed out of extended jams of blues standards and folk songs. This method led to the mixing of musical and lyrical elements of different songs and versions, as well as improvised passages, to create new material, but would lead to later accusations of plagiarism and some legal disputes over copyright. Usually the music was developed first, sometimes with improvised lyrics that might then be rewritten for the final version of the song. From the visit to Bron-Yr-Aur in 1970, the songwriting partnership between Page and Plant became predominant, with Page supplying the music, largely via his acoustic guitar, and Plant emerging as the band's chief lyricist. Jones and Bonham then added to the material, in rehearsal or in the studio, as a song was developed. In the later stages of the band's career, Page took a back seat in composition and Jones became increasingly important in producing music, often composed on the keyboard. Plant would then add lyrics before Page and Bonham developed their parts.

alt=A black and white photograph of Jimmy Page playing a double-necked guitar
Early lyrics drew on the band's blues and folk roots, often mixing lyrical fragments from different songs. Many of the band's songs dealt with themes of romance, unrequited love and sexual conquest, which were common in rock, pop and blues music. Some of their lyrics, especially those derived from the blues, have been interpreted as misogynistic. Particularly on Led Zeppelin III, they incorporated elements of mythology and mysticism into their music, which largely grew out of Plant's interest in legends and history. These elements were often taken to reflect Page's interest in the occult, which resulted in accusations that the recordings contained subliminal satanic messages, some of which were said to be contained in backmasking; these claims were generally dismissed by the band and music critics. Susan Fast argues that as Plant emerged as the band's main lyricist, the songs more obviously reflected his alignment with the West Coast counterculture of the 1960s. In the later part of the band's career Plant's lyrics became more autobiographical, and less optimistic, drawing on his own experiences and circumstances.

According to musicologist Robert Walser, "Led Zeppelin's sound was marked by speed and power, unusual rhythmic patterns, contrasting terraced dynamics, singer Robert Plant's wailing vocals, and guitarist Jimmy Page's heavily distorted crunch". These elements mean that they are often cited as one of the progenitors of hard rock and heavy metal and they have been described as the "definitive heavy metal band", although the band members have often eschewed the label. Part of this reputation depends on the band's use of distorted guitar riffs on songs like "Whole Lotta Love" and "The Wanton Song". Often riffs were not doubled by guitar, bass and drums exactly, but instead there were melodic or rhythmic variations; as in "Black Dog", where three different time signatures are used. Page's guitar playing incorporated elements of the blues scale with those of eastern music. Plant's use of high-pitched shrieks has been compared to Janis Joplin's vocal technique. Bonham's drumming was noted for its power, his rapid rolls and his fast beats on a single bass drum. Jones' basslines have been described as melodic and his keyboard playing added a classical touch to the band's sound.

Page stated that he wanted Led Zeppelin to produce music that had "light and shade". This began to be more clearly realised beginning with Led Zeppelin III, which made greater use of acoustic instruments. This approach has been seen as exemplified in the fourth album, particularly on "Stairway to Heaven", which begins with acoustic guitar and recorder and ends with drums and heavy electric sounds. Towards the end of their recording career, they moved to a more mellow and progressive sound, dominated by Jones' keyboard motifs. They also increasingly made use of various layering and production techniques, including multi-tracking and overdubbed guitar parts. Their emphasis on the sense of dynamics and ensemble arrangement has been seen as producing an individualistic style that transcends any single music genre. Ian Peddie argues that they were "... loud, powerful and often heavy, but their music was also humorous, self-reflective and extremely subtle".

==Legacy==
alt=A black and white photograph showing a headshot of Robert Plant with a microphone in hand
Led Zeppelin are widely considered to be one of the most successful, innovative and influential rock bands in the history of music. Rock critic Mikal Gilmore said, "Led Zeppelintalented, complex, grasping, beautiful and dangerousmade one of the most enduring bodies of composition and performance in twentieth-century music, despite everything they had to overpower, including themselves".

Led Zeppelin have influenced hard rock and heavy metal bands such as Deep Purple, Black Sabbath, Rush, Queen, and Megadeth as well as progressive metal bands like Tool and Dream Theater. They influenced some early punk and post-punk bands, among them the Ramones and the Cult. They were also an important influence on the development of alternative rock, as bands adapted elements from the "Zeppelin sound" of the mid-1970s, including the Smashing Pumpkins, Nirvana, Pearl Jam and Soundgarden. Bands and artists from diverse genres have acknowledged the influence of Led Zeppelin, such as Madonna, Shakira, Lady Gaga, and Katie Melua.

alt=A red tinged photograph of John Paul Jones playing a bass guitar
Led Zeppelin have been credited with a major impact on the nature of the music business, particularly in the development of album-orientated rock (AOR) and stadium rock. In 1988 John Kalodner, then-A&R executive of Geffen Records, remarked that "In my opinion, next to the Beatles they're the most influential band in history. They influence the way music is on records, AOR radio, concerts. They set the standards for the AOR-radio format with 'Stairway to Heaven,' having AOR hits without necessarily having Top 40 hits. They're the ones who did the first real big arena concert shows, consistently selling out and playing stadiums without support. People can do as well as them, but nobody surpasses them". Andrew Loog Oldham, the former producer and manager of the Rolling Stones, commented on how Led Zeppelin had a major influence on the record business, and the way rock concerts were managed and presented to huge audiences.

The band have sold over 200 million albums worldwide according to some sources, while other sources state that they have sold in excess of 300 million records, including 111.5 million certified units in the United States. According to the Recording Industry Association of America, Led Zeppelin are the second-highest-selling band, the fourth highest selling music act in the US and one of only three acts to earn four or more Diamond albums. Led Zeppelin remain one of the most bootlegged artists in the history of rock music.

Led Zeppelin also had a significant cultural impact. Jim Miller, editor of Rolling Stone Illustrated History of Rock & Roll, argues that "On one level, Led Zeppelin represents the final flowering of the sixties' psychedelic ethic, which casts rock as passive sensory involvement". Led Zeppelin have also been described as "the quintessential purveyors" of masculine and aggressive "cock rock", although this assertion has been challenged. The band's fashion-sense has been seminal; Simeon Lipman, head of pop culture at Christie's auction house, has commented that "Led Zeppelin have had a big influence on fashion because the whole aura surrounding them is so cool, and people want a piece of that". Led Zeppelin laid the foundation for the big hair of 1980s glam metal bands such as Mtley Cre and Skid Row. Other musicians have also adapted elements from Led Zeppelin's attitude to clothes, jewellery and hair, such as the hipster flares and tight band t-shirts of Kings of Leon, shaggy hair, clingy t-shirts and bluesman hair of Jack White of the White Stripes, and Kasabian guitarist Sergio Pizzorno's silk scarves, trilbies and side-laced tight jeans.

==Awards and accolades==

Led Zeppelin were honoured by US President Barack Obama at the 2012 Kennedy Center Honors
Throughout their career, Led Zeppelin have collected many honours and awards. They were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1995, and the UK Music Hall of Fame in 2006. Among the band's awards are an American Music Award in 2005, and the Polar Music Prize in 2006. Led Zeppelin were the recipient of a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award in 2005, and four of their recordings have been inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame. They have been awarded five Diamond albums, as well as fourteen Multi-Platinum, four Platinum and one Gold album in the United States, while in the UK they have five Multi-Platinum, six Platinum, one Gold and four Silver albums. In addition to listing five of their albums among "The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time", Rolling Stone named Led Zeppelin the 14th-greatest artist of all time in 2004.

Page was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire in recognition of his charity work in 2005 and Plant was honoured as a Commander of the Order of the British Empire for his services to popular music in 2009. The band are ranked number one on VH1's 100 Greatest Artists of Hard Rock and Classic Rocks "50 best live acts of all time". They were awarded an Ivor Novello Award for "Outstanding Contribution to British Music" in 1977, as well as a "Lifetime Achievement Award" at the 42nd Annual Ivor Novello awards ceremony in 1997. The band were honoured at the 2008 MOJO Awards with the "Best Live Act" prize for their one-off reunion, and were described as the "greatest rock and roll band of all time". The three surviving members (Page, Plant, and Jones) were named as 2012 recipients of Kennedy Center Honors.

==Discography==

* Led Zeppelin (1969)
* Led Zeppelin II (1969)
* Led Zeppelin III (1970)
* Led Zeppelin IV (1971)
* Houses of the Holy (1973)
* Physical Graffiti (1975)
* Presence (1976)
* In Through the Out Door (1979)
* Coda (1982)

==Footnotes==

==References==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==

* 
* 

==External links==

* 
* Led Zeppelin at MySpace
* Led Zeppelin at Atlantic Records
* (Official)
* 

 



[[Edward Plunkett, 18th Baron of Dunsany]]

Edward John Moreton Drax Plunkett, 18th Baron of Dunsany (24 July 1878  25 October 1957) was an Irish writer and dramatist, notable for his work, mostly in fantasy, published under the name Lord Dunsany. More than eighty books of his work were published, and his oeuvre includes many hundreds of published short stories, as well as successful plays, novels and essays.

Born to the second-oldest title (created 1439) in the Irish peerage, Dunsany lived much of his life at what may be Ireland's longest-inhabited house, Dunsany Castle near Tara, worked with W. B. Yeats and Lady Gregory, received an honorary doctorate from Trinity College, Dublin, was chess and pistol-shooting champion of Ireland, and travelled and hunted extensively. He died in Dublin after an attack of appendicitis.

==Biography==
Edward Plunkett (Dunsany) was the first son of John William Plunkett, 17th Baron of Dunsany (18531899) and his wife, Ernle Elizabeth Louisa Maria Grosvenor Ernle-Erle-Drax, ne Ernle Elizabeth Louisa Maria Grosvenor Burton (18551916).

From an historically wealthy and famous family, Dunsany was related to many other well-known Irish figures. He was a kinsman of the Catholic Saint Oliver Plunkett, the martyred Archbishop of Armagh. He was also related to the prominent Anglo-Irish unionist and later nationalist, Home Rule politician the Hon. Sir Horace Curzon Plunkett PC, KCVO, FRS, DL, JP (24 October 1854  26 March 1932) and Count George Noble Plunkett, Papal Count and Republican politician, father of Joseph Mary Plunkett, executed for his part in the 1916 Rising.

His mother was a cousin of Sir Richard Burton, and he inherited from her considerable height, being 6' 4". The Countess of Fingall, wife of Dunsany's cousin, the Earl of Fingall, wrote a best-selling account of the life of the aristocracy in Ireland in the late 19th century and early 20th century, called Seventy Years Young.

Plunkett's only sibling, a younger brother, from whom he was later estranged, was the noted British naval officer, Admiral The Honourable Sir Reginald Aylmer Ranfurly Plunkett-Ernle-Erle-Drax.

===Early life===
Edward Plunkett grew up at the family properties, most notably Dunstall Priory in Shoreham, Kent and Dunsany Castle in County Meath but also family homes such as in London. His schooling was at Cheam, Eton and finally the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, which he entered in 1896.

Lady Dunsany, Beatrice Child Villiers
The title passed to him at his father's death at a fairly young age, in 1899, and Dunsany returned to Dunsany Castle after war duty, in 1901.

In 1903, he met Lady Beatrice Child Villiers (18801970), youngest daughter of the 7th Earl of Jersey (head of the Jersey banking family), living at Osterley Park, and they were married in 1904. Their only child, Randal, was born in 1906. Beatrice was supportive, and assisted Dunsany in his writing, typing his manuscripts, selecting work for his 1950s retrospective short story collection, and overseeing his literary heritage after his death.

The Dunsanys were socially active in both Dublin and London, and travelled between their homes in Meath, London and Kent, other than during World Wars I and II, and the Irish War of Independence. Dunsany himself circulated with the literary figures of the time, to many of whom he was first introduced by his uncle, the co-operative pioneer Horace Plunkett, who also helped to manage his estate and investments for a time. He was friendly with, for example, George William Russell, Oliver St. John Gogarty and, for a time, W. B. Yeats.

===Interests===
Dunsany was a keen hunter (for many years hosting the hounds of a local hunt, as well as hunting in parts of Africa) and sportsman, and was at one time the pistol-shooting champion of Ireland.

He enjoyed cricket, provided the local cricket ground situated near Dunsany Crossroads, and later played for and presided at Shoreham Cricket Club.

Dunsany was a keen chess player, set chess puzzles for journals including The Times (of London), played Jos Ral Capablanca to a draw (in a simultaneous exhibition), and also invented Dunsany's chess, an asymmetric chess variant that is notable for not involving any fairy pieces, unlike many variants that require the player to learn unconventional piece movements. He was president of both the Irish Chess Union and the Kent County Chess Association for some years, and of Sevenoaks Chess Club for 54 years.

Dunsany campaigned for animal rights, being known especially for his opposition to the "docking" of dogs' tails, and was president of the West Kent branch of the RSPCA in his later years.

He was a supporter of scouting over many years, serving as President of the Sevenoaks district Boy Scouts Association. He also supported the amateur drama group, the Shoreham Players.

Dunsany provided support for the British Legion in both Ireland and Kent, including grounds in Trim and poetry for the Irish branch's annual memorial service on a number of occasions.

===Military experience===
Dunsany as Captain, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers, in the First World War
Dunsany served as a Second Lieutenant in the Coldstream Guards during the Second Boer War and as a Captain in the Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers in the First World War, when he was wounded, in 1916 during the Easter uprising in Dublin. Having been refused forward positioning in 1916, being listed as valuable as a trainer, in the latter stages of the war he spent time in the trenches, and in the very last period wrote propaganda material for the War Office with MI 7b (1). During the Second World War, Dunsany signed up for the Irish Army Reserve and the British Home Guard, the two countries' local defence forces, and was especially active in Shoreham, Kent, the most-bombed village in England during the Battle of Britain.

===Literary life===
Dunsany's fame arose chiefly from his prolific writings, and he was involved with the Irish Literary Revival. Supporting the Revival, Dunsany was a major donor to the Abbey Theatre, and he moved in Irish literary circles. He was well-acquainted with W. B. Yeats (who rarely acted as editor, but gathered and published a Dunsany selection), Lady Gregory, Percy French, "AE" Russell, Oliver St John Gogarty, Padraic Colum (with whom he jointly wrote a play) and others. He befriended and supported Francis Ledwidge to whom he gave the use of his library. A Dictionary of Irish History since 1800, D. J. Hickey & J. E. Doherty, Gill & MacMillan (1980) 

Lord Dunsany, New York, 1919
Dunsany made his first literary tour to the USA in 1919, and made further such visits right up to the 1950s, notably to California. Dunsany's own work, and contribution to the Irish literary heritage, was recognised through an honorary degree from Trinity College, Dublin.

===Later life===
In the 1930s, Dunsany transferred his Meath estate to his son and heir under a trust, and settled in Shoreham, Kent, at his Kent property, not far from the home of Rudyard Kipling, a friend, and visiting Ireland only occasionally thereafter.

In 1940, Dunsany was appointed Byron Professor of English in Athens University, Greece but had to be evacuated due to wartime disruptions, returning home by a circuitous route, his travels forming a basis for a long poem published in book form. Olivia Manning's character, "Lord Pinkrose", in her novel sequence, the Fortunes of War, was a mocking portrait of Dunsany during this period. 

===Death===
In 1957, Lord Dunsany took ill while eating with the Earl and Countess of Fingall, in what proved to be an attack of appendicitis, and died in hospital in Dublin at the age of 79. He had directed that he be buried in the churchyard of the ancient church of St. Peter and St. Paul, Shoreham, Kent, in memory of shared war times. His funeral was attended by a wide range of family (including Pakenham, Jersey and Fingal) and Shoreham figures, and representatives of his old regiment and various bodies in which he had taken an interest. A memorial service was held at Kilmessan, Meath, with a reading of "Crossing the Bar" which was noted as coinciding with a passing flock of geese.

Lady Beatrice survived Lord Dunsany, living on primarily at Shoreham, overseeing his literary legacy until her death in 1970, while their son, Randal, succeeded him to the Barony, and was in turn succeeded by his grandson, to whom literary rights passed directly.

==Writings==
Dunsany was a prolific writer, penning short stories, novels, plays, poetry, essays and autobiography, and publishing over sixty books, not including individual plays. He began his authorial career in the late 1890s, with a few published verses, such as "Rhymes from a Suburb" and "The Spirit of the Bog", but he made a lasting impression in 1905 when he burst onto the publishing scene with the well-received collection The Gods of Pegna.

Dunsany's most notable fantasy short stories were published in collections from 1905 to 1919. He paid for the publication of the first such collection, The Gods of Pegna, earning a commission on sales. This he never again had to do, the vast majority of his extensive writings selling. L. Sprague de Camp, Literary Swordsmen and Sorcerers: The Makers of Heroic Fantasy, p 53 ISBN 0-87054-076-9. 

The stories in his first two books, and perhaps the beginning of his third, were set within an invented world, Pegna, with its own gods, history and geography. Starting with this book, Dunsany's name is linked to that of Sidney Sime, his chosen artist, who illustrated much of his work, notably until 1922. L. Sprague de Camp, Literary Swordsmen and Sorcerers: The Makers of Heroic Fantasy, p 54-5 ISBN 0-87054-076-9. 

Dunsany's style varied significantly throughout his writing career. Prominent Dunsany scholar S. T. Joshi has described these shifts as Dunsany moving on after he felt he had exhausted the potential of a style or medium. From the nave fantasy of his earliest writings, through his early short story work in 19041908, he turned to the self-conscious fantasy of The Book of Wonder in 1912, in which he almost seems to be parodying his lofty early style.

Each of his collections varies in mood; A Dreamer's Tales varies from the wistfulness of "Blagdaross" to the horrors of "Poor Old Bill" and "Where the Tides Ebb and Flow" to the social satire of "The Day of the Poll."

The opening paragraph of "The Hoard of the Gibbelins" from The Book of Wonder, (1912) gives a good indication of both the tone and tenor of Dunsany's style at the time:

:The Gibbelins eat, as is well known, nothing less good than man. Their evil tower is joined to Terra Cognita, to the lands we know, by a bridge. Their hoard is beyond reason; avarice has no use for it; they have a separate cellar for emeralds and a separate cellar for sapphires; they have filled a hole with gold and dig it up when they need it. And the only use that is known for their ridiculous wealth is to attract to their larder a continual supply of food. In times of famine they have even been known to scatter rubies abroad, a little trail of them to some city of Man, and sure enough their larders would soon be full again.

After The Book of Wonder, Dunsany began to write plays  many of which were even more successful, at the time, than his early story collections  while also continuing to write short stories. He continued to write plays for the theatre into the 1930s, including the famous If, and a number for radio production. Martin Gardner, "Lord Dunsany" in Supernatural Fiction Writers: Fantasy and Horror (1985) edited by E. F. Bleiler.Scribner's,New York. ISBN 0-684-17808-7 (p. 471-78). 

Although many of Dunsany's stage plays were successfully produced within his lifetime, he also wrote a number of "chamber plays" which were only intended to be read privately (as if they were stories) or performed on the radio, rather than staged . Some of Dunsany's chamber or radio plays contain supernatural events  such as a character spontaneously appearing out of thin air, or vanishing in full view of the audience  without any explanation of how the effect is to be staged  a matter of no importance, since Dunsany did not intend these works actually to be performed live and visible.

Following a successful lecture touring in the USA in 19191920, and with his reputation now principally related to his plays, Dunsany temporarily reduced his output of short stories, concentrating on plays, novels, and poetry for a time.

His poetry, now little seen, was for a time so popular that it is recited by the lead character of F. Scott Fitzgerald's This Side of Paradise.

Dunsany's first novel, Don Rodriguez: Chronicles of Shadow Valley, was published in 1922. It is set in "a Romantic Spain that never was," and follows the adventures of a young nobleman, Don Rodriguez, and his servant in their search for a castle for Rodriguez. It has been argued that Dunsany's inexperience with the novel form shows in the episodic nature of Don Rodriguez. In 1924, Dunsany published his second novel, The King of Elfland's Daughter, a return to his early style of writing, which is considered by many to be Dunsany's finest novel and a classic in the realm of the fantasy writing.

In his next novel, The Charwoman's Shadow, Dunsany returned to the Spanish milieu and to the light style of Don Rodriguez, to which it is related.

Though his style and medium shifted frequently, Dunsany's thematic concerns remained essentially the same. Many of Dunsany's later novels had an explicitly Irish theme, from the semi-autobiographical The Curse of the Wise Woman to His Fellow Men.

One of Dunsany's best-known characters was Joseph Jorkens, an obese middle-aged raconteur who frequented the fictional Billiards Club in London, and who would tell fantastic stories if someone would buy him a large whiskey and soda. From his tales, it was obvious that Mr Jorkens had travelled to all seven continents, was extremely resourceful, and well-versed in world cultures, but always came up short on becoming rich and famous. The Jorkens books, which sold well, were among the first of a type which was to become popular in fantasy and science fiction writing: extremely improbable "club tales" told at a gentleman's club or bar.

Dunsany's writing habits were considered peculiar by some. Lady Beatrice said that "He always sat on a crumpled old hat while composing his tales." (The hat was eventually stolen by a visitor to Dunsany Castle.) Dunsany almost never rewrote anything; everything he ever published was a first draft. Darrell Schweitzer,Pathways to Elfland: The Writings of Lord Dunsany (1989) Owlswick Press, 
ISBN 0-913896-16-0 . Much of his work was penned with quill pens, which he made himself; Lady Beatrice was usually the first to see the writings, and would help type them. It has been said that Lord Dunsany would sometimes conceive stories while hunting, and would return to the Castle and draw in his family and servants to re-enact his visions before he set them on paper.

==Dramatizations==
* Most of Dunsany's plays were performed during his lifetime, some of them many times in many locations, including the West End, Broadway and Off-Broadway. At one time, five ran simultaneously in New York, possibly all on Broadway, New York, NY: New York Times, 24 December 1916: Second Thoughts on First Nights: "Speaking of Dunsany ... he has quite come into his own this season ... suddenly seen four produced on Broadway within a single month, and a fifth promised for production before the end of Winter. Everyone is talking about Dunsany now." From a second NY Times ref, three of these were The Golden Doom, The Gods of the Mountain and King Argimines. while on another occasion, he was in performance in four European capitals plus New York.
* Dunsany wrote several plays for radio production, most being broadcast on the BBC and some being collected in Plays for Earth and Air. The BBC has records of the broadcasts, but according to articles on the author none of these recordings are extant.
* A half-hour television dramatization of "A Night at An Inn," with Boris Karloff, adapted from Dunsany's play by Halsted Welles and directed by Robert Stevens, was produced by "Suspense" in 1949. It may be seen in its entirety at http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e2zFmu82Fh8.
* In 1952, "Four Star Playhouse" presented a production of "The Lost Silk Hat," directed by Robert Florey and starring Ronald Colman, who also collaborated with Milton Merlin on the script. A fragment of the episode may be seen at http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=poERmGE-RIU.
* The film Dean Spanley, with a screenplay by Alan Sharp based on the short novel My Talks With Dean Spanley, directed by Toa Fraser and produced by Matthew Metcalfe and Alan Harris, and starring 8-times Oscar nominee Peter O'Toole, Sam Neill, Jeremy Northam and Bryan Brown, completed post production mid-2008, IMDB website and had a gala premiere in September 2008, with general release to follow. 1 November 2007, Auckland: New Zealand Film Commission, Press Release Filming began at Elm Hill (also used by Stardust), Holkham Hall, Peckover House (Cambridgeshire), Elveden Hall (Suffolk) and the Cathedral Cloisters in Norwich in November and December 2007, Norwich, Norfolk: 18 December 2007, Norwich Evening News (Kate Scotter) Wisbech, Cambs: The Fenland Citizen, 21 November 2007: Hollywood Comes to Wisbech and continued in New Zealand. The film is funded by three investor companies plus two film promotion agencies, one from New Zealand and Screen East from England.
* The film It Happened Tomorrow credited a Dunsany short story as one of its sources, and it was said that Sliding Doors also had a Dunsanian link.
* The Pledge, a 20 or 23-minute colour production from the short story "The Highwayman," directed by Digby Rumsey, released by Fantasy Films in 1981 and distributed by Twentieth Century Fox, with music by Michael Nyman. British Film Institute 
* In The Twilight, a 15-minute colour production from the short story of the same name, directed by Digby Rumsey.
* Nature and Time, a 1976 colour production from the short story of the same name, directed by Digby Rumsey and starring Helen York and Paul Goodchild. British Film Institute: http://ftvdb.bfi.org.uk/sift/title/105799 
* Rumours have been reported about film or TV options around a number of other Dunsany works, from early stories to Jorkens to, notably, The King of Elfland's Daughter, which inspired the successful Stardust  but aside from the productions above, the only such option documented publicly was one by George Pal on Dunsany's The Last Revolution.
* The author appeared on early television a number of times, notably on The Brains Trust  no recordings are known to be extant.
* Dunsany is recorded as having read short stories and poetry on air, and for private recording by Hazel Littlefield-Smith and friends in California, and it is believed that one or two of these recordings survive.
* An LP recording of a number of Dunsany's short stories, read by Vincent Price was published in the 1970s.
* He appears as a playable character in the 1999 PlayStation game Koudelka.
* Peter Knight and Bob Johnson, two members of Steeleye Span recorded a concept album based on Dunsany's The King of Elfland's Daughter in 1977, released by Chrysalis Records on LP and later on CD.
* A number of Dunsany short stories have been published as audiobooks in Germany, and played on the German national railway, Deutsche Bahn (DB).
* The radio drama "Fortress of Doom" (2005) in the Radio Tales series is an adaptation of Dunsany's short story "The Fortress Unvanquishable, Save for Sacnoth".

==Memberships, awards and honours==
Lord Dunsany was a Fellow of the Royal Society of Literature and of the Royal Geographical Society, and an honorary member of the Institut Historique et Heraldique de France.

Lord Dunsany played left half back for the 1938 championship winning team for Drumree.

Dunsany was initially an Associate Member of the Irish Academy of Letters, founded by Yeats and others, and later a full member. At one of their banquets, he asked Sean O'Faolain, who was presiding, "Do we not toast the King?" O'Faolain replied that there was only one toast: to the Nation; but after it was given and he'd called for coffee, Dunsany stood quietly among the bustle, raised his glass discreetly, and whispered "God bless him." O'Faolain, Vive Moi!, pp. 350 n, 353 

The Curse of the Wise Woman received the Harmsworth Literary Award in Ireland.

Dunsany also received an honorary doctorate from Trinity College, Dublin.

Dunsany was nominated to the Nobel Prize by Irish PEN, but lost to Bertrand Russell. http://www.nobelprize.org/nomination/literature/nomination.php?action=show&showid=1127 

==Influences==
* Dunsany studied Greek and Latin, particularly Greek drama and Herodotus, the "Father of History". Dunsany wrote in a letter: "When I learned Greek at Cheam and heard of other gods a great pity came on me for those beautiful marble people that had become forsaken and this mood has never quite left me."1
* The King James Bible. In a letter to Frank Harris, Dunsany wrote: "When I went to Cheam School I was given a lot of the Bible to read. This turned my thoughts eastward. For years no style seemed to me natural but that of the Bible and I feared that I never would become a writer when I saw that other people did not use it."
* The wide-ranging collection in the Library of Dunsany Castle, dating back centuries and comprising many classic works, from early encyclopedias through parliamentary records, Greek and Latin works and Victorian illustrated books
* The fairy tales of the Brothers Grimm and Hans Christian Andersen.
* The work of Edgar Allan Poe. S.T. Joshi, Lord Dunsany: Master of the Anglo-Irish imagination
 Greenwood Publishing Group, 1995, (p.2). 
* Irish speech patterns
* The Darling of the Gods, a stage play written by David Belasco and John Luther Long, first performed 19021903. The play presents a fantastical, imaginary version of Japan that powerfully affected Dunsany and may be a key template for his own imaginary kingdoms.
* Algernon Charles Swinburne, who wrote the line "Time and the Gods are at strife" in his 1866 poem "Hymn to Proserpine". Dunsany later realized this was his unconscious influence for the title Time and the Gods.
*The heroic romances of William Morris, set in imaginary lands of the author's creation, such as The Well at the World's End. David Pringle, The Ultimate Encyclopedia of Fantasy, London, Carlton, 1998. (p. 36) 
* Dunsany's 1922 novel Don Rodriguez: Chronicles of Shadow Valley seems to draw openly from Cervantes' Don Quixote de la Mancha (1605, 1615).
*Dunsany named his play The Seventh Symphony (collected in Plays for Earth and Air ) after Beethoven's 7th Symphony, which was one of Dunsany's favourite works of music. Lord Dunsany: Master of the Anglo-Irish Imagination (p. 152) One of the last Jorkens stories returns to this theme, referring to Beethoven's Tenth Symphony.

==Writers associated with Dunsany==
* Francis Ledwidge, who wrote to Dunsany in 1912 asking for help with getting his poetry published. After a delay due to a hunting trip in Africa, Dunsany invited the poet to his home, and they met and corresponded regularly thereafter, and Dunsany was so impressed that he helped with publication, and with introductions to literary society. The two became friendly and Dunsany, trying to discourage Ledwidge from joining the army when the First World War broke out, offered financial support. Ledwidge, however, did join up and found himself for a time in the same unit as Dunsany, who helped with publication of his first collection, Songs of the Fields, which was received with critical success upon its release in 1915. Throughout the war years, Ledwidge kept in contact with Dunsany, sending him poems. Ledwidge was killed at the Battle of Passchendaele two years later, even as his second collection of poetry, also selected by Dunsany, circulated. Dunsany subsequently arranged for the publication of a third collection, and later a first Collected Edition.

* Mary Lavin, who received support and encouragement from Dunsany over many years

* William Butler Yeats, who, although he rarely acted as an editor, selected and edited a collection of Dunsany's work in 1912

* Lady Wentworth, a poet, writing in a classical style, received support from Dunsany

==Writers influenced by Dunsany==
* H. P. Lovecraft was greatly impressed by Dunsany after seeing him on a speaking tour of the United States, and Lovecraft's "Dream Cycle" stories, his dark pseudo-history of how the universe came to be, and his god Azathoth all clearly show Dunsany's influence. Lovecraft once wrote, "There are my 'Poe' pieces and my 'Dunsany' piecesbut alaswhere are my Lovecraft pieces?" Letter to Elizabeth Toldridge, 8 March 1929, quoted in Lovecraft: A Look Behind the Cthulhu Mythos 
* Robert E. Howard included Dunsany in a list of his favourite poets in a 1932 letter to Lovecraft. REH Bookshelf Website. 
* Clark Ashton Smith was familiar with Dunsany's work, and it had some influence on his own fantasy stories. L. Sprague de Camp, Literary Swordsmen and Sorcerers: The Makers of Heroic Fantasy, p 212 ISBN 0-87054-076-9. 
* J.R.R.Tolkien, according to John D. Rateliff's report, http://web.archive.org/web/20050102084819/www.wizards.com/default.asp?x=books/main/classicsdunsany/ presented Clyde S. Kilby with a copy of The Book of Wonder as kind of a preparation to his auxiliary role in the compilation and development of The Silmarillion during the Sixties. "When American Clyde Kilby arrived in Oxford in the summer of 1966 to offer Tolkien "editorial assistance" in finishing The Silmarillion, one of the first things Tolkien did was hand him a copy of Dunsany's The Book of Wonder and tell him to read it before starting work on Tolkien's own story". Tolkien's letters and divulged notes made allusions to two of the stories found in this volume, "Chu-Bu and Sheemish" and "The Distressing Tale of Thangobrind the Jeweller." http://www.conan.com/invboard/index.php?s=22017f3d5eb8ff9a904f5f53d49c1b36&showtopic=1201&st=60&p=66377&#entry66377C Dale J. Nelson has argued persuasively in Tolkien Studies 01 that Tolkien may have been inspired by another of The Book of Wonders tales, "The Hoard of the Gibbelins," while writing one of his poems, "The Mewlips," included in The Adventures of Tom Bombadil. http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/tolkien_studies/v001/1.1nelson.html 
* Filmmaker Guillermo Del Toro has cited Dunsany as an influence.
* Neil Gaiman has expressed admiration for Dunsany and has written an introduction to a collection of his stories. Some commentators have posited links between The King of Elfland's Daughter and Gaiman's Stardust (book and film), a connection seemingly supported by a comment of Gaiman's quoted in The Neil Gaiman Reader.
* Jorge Luis Borges included Dunsany's short story "Idle Days on the Yann" as the twenty-seventh title in The Library of Babel, a series of works Borges selected and provided forewords for (not to be confused with his short story of the same name, "The Library of Babel"). Borges also, in his essay "Kafka and His Precursors," included Dunsany's story "Carcassonne" as one of the texts that presaged, or paralleled, Kafka's themes. "Kafka and His Precursors" 
* Donald Wandrei, in a 7 February 1927 letter to H.P. Lovecraft, listed Dunsany's The King of Elfland's Daughter among his collection of "weird books" that Wandrei had read. S.T. Joshi and David E. Schultz,
Mysteries of Time and Spirit: The Letters of H.P. Lovecraft and Donald Wandrei. Night Shade Books, San Francisco,
ISBN; 1892389495 (p.26). 
* Talbot Mundy greatly admired Dunsany's "plays and fantasy", according to Mundy biographer Brian Taves. Talbot Mundy, Philosopher of Adventure by Brian Taves,McFarland, 2006 (pg. 253). 
* C. M. Kornbluth was an avid reader of Dunsany as a young man, and mentions Dunsany in his short fantasy story "Mr. Packer Goes to Hell" (1941). Mark Rich, C. M. Kornbluth: The Life and Works of a Science Fiction Visionary. Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2010. ISBN 978-0-7864-4393-2 (p. 98 189). 
* Arthur C. Clarke enjoyed Dunsany's work and corresponded with him between 1944 and 1956. Those letters are collected in the book Arthur C. Clarke & Lord Dunsany: A Correspondence. Clarke also edited and allowed the use of an early essay as an introduction to one volume of The Collected Jorkens and that essay acknowledges the link between Jorkens and Tales from the White Hart.
* Manly Wade Wellman esteemed Dunsany's fiction. "I admire and constantly reread M. R. James, Dunsany and 
Hearn...". Wellman interviewed in Jeffrey M. Elliot, Fantasy Voices: Interviews with American Fantasy Writers. Borgo Press, San Bernardino. 1982 ISBN 0-89370-146-7 (p.10) 
* Margaret St. Clair was an admirer of Dunsany's work, and her story "The Man Who Sold Rope to the Gnoles" (1951) is a sequel to Dunsany's "How Nuth Would Have Practised His Art Upon the Gnoles". Darrell Schweitzer, Pathways to Elfland , Owlswick Press, 1989 (p.19). 
* Evangeline Walton stated in an interview that Dunsany inspired her to write fantasy. Kenneth J. Zahorski and Robert H. Boyer, Lloyd Alexander, Evangeline Walton Ensley, Kenneth Morris: A Primary and Secondary Bibliography, G.K Hall, 1981 (p.116). 
* Jack Vance was a keen reader of Dunsany's work as a child. "Jack Vance, Biographical Sketch", (2000) in Jack Vance: Critical Appreciations and a Bibliography, British Library, 2000. 
* Michael Moorcock often cites Dunsany as a strong influence. 
* Peter S. Beagle also cites Dunsany as an influence, and wrote an introduction for one of the recent reprint editions.
* David Eddings once named Lord Dunsany as his personal favourite fantasy writer, and recommended aspiring authors to sample him.
* Gene Wolfe used one of Dunsany's poems to open his bestselling 2004 work The Knight.
* Fletcher Pratt's 1948 novel The Well of the Unicorn was written as a sequel to Dunsany's play King Argimenes and the Unknown Warrior.
* Ursula K. Le Guin, in her essay on style in fantasy "From Elfland to Poughkeepsie", wryly referred to Lord Dunsany as the "First Terrible Fate that Awaiteth Unwary Beginners in Fantasy", alluding to the (at the time) very common practice of young writers attempting to write in Lord Dunsany's style. Ursula K. Le Guin, "From Elfland to Poughkeepsie", pp. 789 The Language of the Night ISBN 0-425-05205-2 
* M. J. Engh has acknowledged Lord Dunsany as an influence on her work. "I acknowledge with gratitude the influence of Dunsany..." M.J. Engh, "My Works", . Retrieved 15 October 2013. 
* Welleran Poltarnees, an author of numerous non-fantasy "blessing books" employing turn-of-the-century artwork, is a pen name based on two of Lord Dunsany's most famous stories.
* Gary Myers's 1975 short story collection The House of the Worm is a double pastiche of Dunsany and Lovecraft. 

==Scholars and archivists==
S. T. Joshi and Darrell Schweitzer were early workers on the Dunsany oeuvre, gathering stories and essays and reference material, and producing both an initial bibliography (together) and scholarly studies of Dunsany's work (separate works). Both are well-known figures in the fields of speculative fiction. In recent years, a PhD researcher, Tania Scott, from Glasgow University, has been working on Dunsany for some time, and has spoken at literary and other conventions.

In the late 1990s a curator, J.W. Doyle, was appointed at Dunsany Castle, locating and organising the author's manuscripts, typescripts and other materials. He discovered both known (but "lost") works, such as the plays "The Ginger Cat" and "The Murderers," some Jorkens stories and the novel The Pleasures of a Futuroscope (subsequently published by Hippocampus Press) and unknown, unpublished works, notably including The Last Book of Jorkens, to the first edition of which he wrote an introduction, and an unnamed 1956 short story collection, not yet published.

==Bibliography==

==Notes==
Dunsany's literary rights passed from the author to a Trust, which still owns them. These rights were first managed by Beatrice, Lady Dunsany, and are currently administered by Curtis Brown of London and partner companies worldwide (some past US deals, for example, have been listed by Locus Magazine as by SCG).

All of Dunsany's work is in copyright in most of the world , the main exception being the early work (published before 1 January 1923), which is in the public domain in the United States. 

Dunsany Castle (1181-), County Meath, Ireland
Dunsany's primary home, over 820 years old, can be visited at certain times of year, and tours usually include the Library, but not the tower room he often liked to work in. His other home, Dunstall Priory, was sold to a fan, Grey Gowrie, later head of the Arts Council of the UK, and thence passed on to other owners; the family still own farm- and down-land in the area, and a Tudor cottage in Shoreham village. The grave of Lord Dunsany and his wife can be seen in the Church of England graveyard in the village (most of the previous barons are buried in the grounds of Dunsany Castle).

Dunsany's original manuscripts are collected in the family archive, including some specially bound volumes of some of his works. As noted, there has been a curator since the late 1990s and scholarly access is possible by application.

==See also==

*List of fantasy authors
*List of horror fiction authors

==Notes==

==References==
*
*
*.
*.
* S.T. Joshi. "Lord Dunsany: The Career of a Fantaisiste" in Darrell Schweitzer (ed). Discovering Classic Fantasy Fiction, Gillette, NJ: Wildside Press, 1996, pp. 748.
*
*.
* Schweitzer, Darrell. "Lord Dunsany: Visions of Wonder". Studies in Weird Fiction 5 (Spring 1989), 2026.
*.

==External links==

*Lord Dunsany: the author's page in the official family site
*e-texts of works by Lord Dunsany
*
*Dunsany Bibliography, including cover images and summaries
*Review of Lord Dunsany's short stories by Jo Walton
*The Book of Wonder LibriVox recording
* 
*Edward Winter, Lord Dunsany and Chess (2006)

 
 

 



[[Ludwig van Beethoven]]

alt=signature written in ink in a flowing script]]
Ludwig van Beethoven (; ; baptised 17 December 1770 Beethoven was baptised on 17 December. His date of birth was often, in the past, given as 16 December, however this is not known with certainty; his family celebrated his birthday on that date, but there is no documentary evidence that his birth was actually on 16 December. 26 March 1827) was a German composer and pianist. A crucial figure in the transition between the Classical and Romantic eras in Western art music, he remains one of the most famous and influential of all composers. His best-known compositions include 9 symphonies, 5 concertos for piano, 32 piano sonatas, and 16 string quartets. He also composed other chamber music, choral works (including the celebrated Missa solemnis), and songs.

Born in Bonn, then the capital of the Electorate of Cologne and part of the Holy Roman Empire, Beethoven displayed his musical talents at an early age and was taught by his father Johann van Beethoven and Christian Gottlob Neefe. During his first 22 years in Bonn, Beethoven intended to study with Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart and befriended Joseph Haydn. Beethoven moved to Vienna in 1792 and began studying with Haydn, quickly gaining a reputation as a virtuoso pianist. He lived in Vienna until his death. In about 1800 his hearing began to deteriorate, and by the last decade of his life he was almost totally deaf. He gave up conducting and performing in public but continued to compose; many of his most admired works come from this period.

==Biography==

===Background and early life===
House of birth, Bonn, Bonngasse 20, now the Beethoven House museum
Beethoven was the grandson of Lodewijk van Beethoven (171273), a musician from Mechelen in present-day Belgium who moved at the age of twenty to Bonn. Lodewijk (Ludwig is the German cognate of Dutch Lodewijk) was employed as a bass singer at the court of the Elector of Cologne, eventually rising to become Kapellmeister (music director). Lodewijk had one son, Johann (17401792), who worked as a tenor in the same musical establishment and gave lessons on piano and violin to supplement his income. Grove Online, section 1 Johann married Maria Magdalena Keverich in 1767; she was the daughter of Johann Heinrich Keverich, who had been the head chef at the court of the Archbishopric of Trier. Thayer, Vol 1, p. 49 

Prince-Elector's Palace (Kurfrstliches Schloss) in Bonn, where the Beethoven family had been active since the 1730s
Beethoven was born of this marriage in Bonn. There is no authentic record of the date of his birth; however, the registry of his baptism, in a Roman Catholic service at the Parish of St. Regius on 17 December 1770, survives. As children of that era were traditionally baptised the day after birth in the Catholic Rhine country, and it is known that Beethoven's family and his teacher Johann Albrechtsberger celebrated his birthday on 16 December, most scholars accept 16 December 1770 as Beethoven's date of birth. Thayer, Vol 1, p. 53 This is discussed in depth in Solomon, chapter 1. Of the seven children born to Johann van Beethoven, only Ludwig, the second-born, and two younger brothers survived infancy. Caspar Anton Carl was born on 8 April 1774, and Nikolaus Johann, the youngest, was born on 2 October 1776. Stanley, p. 7 

Beethoven's first music teacher was his father. Although tradition has it that Johann van Beethoven was a harsh instructor, and that the child Beethoven, "made to stand at the keyboard, was often in tears," the Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians claimed that no solid documentation supported this, and asserted that "speculation and myth-making have both been productive." Beethoven had other local teachers: the court organist Gilles van den Eeden (d. 1782), Tobias Friedrich Pfeiffer (a family friend, who taught Beethoven the piano), and Franz Rovantini (a relative, who instructed him in playing the violin and viola). Beethoven's musical talent was obvious at a young age. Johann, aware of Leopold Mozart's successes in this area (with son Wolfgang and daughter Nannerl), attempted to exploit his son as a child prodigy, claiming that Beethoven was six (he was seven) on the posters for Beethoven's first public performance in March 1778. Thayer, Vol 1, p. 59 

Some time after 1779, Beethoven began his studies with his most important teacher in Bonn, Christian Gottlob Neefe, who was appointed the Court's Organist in that year. Thayer, Vol 1, p. 67 Neefe taught Beethoven composition, and by March 1783 had helped him write his first published composition: a set of keyboard variations (WoO 63). Beethoven soon began working with Neefe as assistant organist, at first unpaid (1781), and then as a paid employee (1784) of the court chapel conducted by the Kapellmeister Andrea Luchesi. His first three piano sonatas, named "Kurfrst" ("Elector") for their dedication to the Elector Maximilian Friedrich (17081784), were published in 1783. Maximilian Frederick noticed Beethoven's talent early, and subsidised and encouraged the young man's musical studies. Thayer, Vol 1, pp. 7174 

A portrait of the 13-year-old Beethoven by an unknown Bonn master (c. 1783)

Maximilian Frederick's successor as the Elector of Bonn was Maximilian Franz, the youngest son of Empress Maria Theresa of Austria, and he brought notable changes to Bonn. Echoing changes made in Vienna by his brother Joseph, he introduced reforms based on Enlightenment philosophy, with increased support for education and the arts. The teenage Beethoven was almost certainly influenced by these changes. He may also have been influenced at this time by ideas prominent in freemasonry, as Neefe and others around Beethoven were members of the local chapter of the Order of the Illuminati. Cooper (2008), p. 15 

In March 1787 Beethoven traveled to Vienna (possibly at another's expense) for the first time, apparently in the hope of studying with Mozart. The details of their relationship are uncertain, including whether or not they actually met. Cooper (2008), p. 23 After just two months Beethoven learned that his mother was severely ill, and returned home. His mother died shortly thereafter, and his father lapsed deeper into alcoholism. As a result, Beethoven became responsible for the care of his two younger brothers, and he spent the next five years in Bonn. Cooper (2008), p. 24 

Beethoven was introduced to several people who became important in his life in these years. Franz Wegeler, a young medical student, introduced him to the von Breuning family (one of whose daughters Wegeler eventually married). Beethoven often visited the von Breuning household, where he taught piano to some of the children. Here he encountered German and classical literature. The von Breuning family environment was less stressful than his own, which was increasingly dominated by his father's decline. Cooper (2008), p. 16 Beethoven also came to the attention of Count Ferdinand von Waldstein, who became a lifelong friend and financial supporter. Thayer, Vol 1, p. 102 

In 1789 Beethoven obtained a legal order by which half of his father's salary was paid directly to him for support of the family. Thayer, Vol 1, p. 104 He also contributed further to the family's income by playing viola in the court orchestra. This familiarised Beethoven with a variety of operas, including three by Mozart that were performed at court in this period. He also befriended Anton Reicha, a flautist and violinist of about his own age who was a nephew of the court orchestra's conductor, Josef Reicha. Thayer, Vol 1, pp. 105109 

===Establishing his career in Vienna===
Beethoven was probably first introduced to Joseph Haydn in late 1790, when the latter was traveling to London and stopped in Bonn around Christmas time. Cooper (2008), p. 35 They met in Bonn on Haydn's return trip from London to Vienna in July 1792, and it is likely that arrangements were made at that time for Beethoven to study with the old master. Cooper (2008), p. 41 With the Elector's help, Beethoven moved to Vienna in 1792. Thayer, Vol 1, p. 124 From 1790 to 1792, Beethoven composed a significant number of works (none were published at the time, and most are now listed as works without opus) that demonstrated his growing range and maturity. Musicologists identified a theme similar to those of his third symphony in a set of variations written in 1791. Cooper (2008), pp. 3541 Beethoven left Bonn for Vienna in November 1792, amid rumors of war spilling out of France, and learned shortly after his arrival that his father had died. Thayer, Vol 1, p. 148 Count Waldstein in his farewell note to Beethoven wrote: "Through uninterrupted diligence you will receive Mozart's spirit through Haydn's hands." Cooper (2008), p. 42 Over the next few years, Beethoven responded to the widespread feeling that he was a successor to the recently deceased Mozart by studying that master's work and writing works with a distinctly Mozartean flavor. Cooper (2008), p. 43 
Portrait of Beethoven as a young man by Carl Traugott Riedel (17691832)

Beethoven did not immediately set out to establish himself as a composer, but rather devoted himself to study and performance. Working under Haydn's direction, Grove Online, section 3 he sought to master counterpoint. He also studied violin under Ignaz Schuppanzigh. Cooper (2008), pp. 47,54 Early in this period, he also began receiving occasional instruction from Antonio Salieri, primarily in Italian vocal composition style; this relationship persisted until at least 1802, and possibly 1809. Thayer, Vol 1, p. 161 With Haydn's departure for England in 1794, Beethoven was expected by the Elector to return home. He chose instead to remain in Vienna, continuing his instruction in counterpoint with Johann Albrechtsberger and other teachers. Although his stipend from the Elector expired, a number of Viennese noblemen had already recognised his ability and offered him financial support, among them Prince Joseph Franz Lobkowitz, Prince Karl Lichnowsky, and Baron Gottfried van Swieten. Cooper (2008), p. 53 

By 1793, Beethoven established a reputation as an improviser in the salons of the nobility, often playing the preludes and fugues of J. S. Bach's Well-Tempered Clavier. Cross (1953), p. 59 His friend Nikolaus Simrock had begun publishing his compositions; the first are believed to be a set of variations (WoO 66). Cooper (2008), p. 46 By 1793, he had established a reputation in Vienna as a piano virtuoso, but he apparently withheld works from publication so that their publication in 1795 would have greater impact. Beethoven's first public performance in Vienna was in March 1795, a concert in which he first performed one of his piano concertos. It is uncertain whether this was the First or Second. Documentary evidence is unclear, and both concertos were in a similar state of near-completion (neither was completed or published for several years). Lockwood (2003), p. 144 Shortly after this performance, he arranged for the publication of the first of his compositions to which he assigned an opus number, the three piano trios, Opus 1. These works were dedicated to his patron Prince Lichnowsky, Cooper (2008), p. 59 and were a financial success; Beethoven's profits were nearly sufficient to cover his living expenses for a year. Cooper (2008), p. 56 

===Musical maturity===
Beethoven composed his first six string quartets (Op. 18) between 1798 and 1800 (commissioned by, and dedicated to, Prince Lobkowitz). They were published in 1801. With premieres of his First and Second Symphonies in 1800 and 1803, Beethoven became regarded as one of the most important of a generation of young composers following Haydn and Mozart. He also continued to write in other forms, turning out widely known piano sonatas like the "Pathtique" sonata (Op. 13), which Cooper describes as "surpass any of his previous compositions, in strength of character, depth of emotion, level of originality, and ingenuity of motivic and tonal manipulation." Cooper (2008), p. 82 He also completed his Septet (Op. 20) in 1799, which was one of his most popular works during his lifetime.
Beethoven in 1803, painted by Christian Horneman 

For the premiere of his First Symphony, Beethoven hired the Burgtheater on 2 April 1800, and staged an extensive program of music, including works by Haydn and Mozart, as well as his Septet, the First Symphony, and one of his piano concertos (the latter three works all then unpublished). The concert, which the Allgemeine musikalische Zeitung described as "the most interesting concert in a long time," was not without difficulties; among the criticisms was that "the players did not bother to pay any attention to the soloist." Cooper (2008), p. 90 

Mozart and Haydn were undeniable influences. For example, Beethoven's quintet for piano and winds is said to bear a strong resemblance to Mozart's work for the same configuration, albeit with his own distinctive touches. Cooper (2008), p. 66 

But Beethoven's melodies, musical development, use of modulation and texture, and characterization of emotion all set him apart from his influences, and heightened the impact some of his early works made when they were first published. Cooper (2008), p. 58 By the end of 1800 Beethoven and his music were already much in demand from patrons and publishers. Cooper (2008), p. 97 

complete painting depicts Beethoven with a lyre-guitar]]

In May 1799, Beethoven taught piano to the daughters of Hungarian Countess Anna Brunsvik. During this time, Beethoven fell in love with the younger daughter Josephine See Beethoven's love letter to Josephine, March/April 1805, in Schmidt-Grg 1957, pp. 1214, where he referred to this time. who has therefore been identified as one of the more likely candidates for the addressee of his letter to the "Immortal Beloved" (in 1812). Shortly after these lessons, Josephine was married to Count Josef Deym. Beethoven was a regular visitor at their house, continuing to teach Josephine, and playing at parties and concerts. Her marriage was by all accounts happy (despite initial financial problems), There were (as mentioned in Goldschmidt 1977, p. 484), over 100 love letters between the newly weds, indicating that a healthy erotic relationship was growing between the spouses. Steblin (2007, p. 155, n. 41) announced a forthcoming publication of these letters. and the couple had four children. Her relationship with Beethoven intensified after Deym died suddenly in 1804. Cooper (2008), p. 80. 

Beethoven had few other students. From 1801 to 1805, he tutored Ferdinand Ries, who went on to become a composer and later wrote Beethoven remembered, a book about their encounters. The young Carl Czerny studied with Beethoven from 1801 to 1803. Czerny went on to become a renowned music teacher himself, instructing Franz Liszt, and gave on 11 February 1812 the Vienna premiere of Beethoven's fifth piano concerto (the "Emperor"). Thayer, Forbes (1970), p. 526.  Prior to this first performance, there were others based in earlier sketches, as early as 22 December 1808, p. 476. 

Beethoven's compositions between 1800 and 1802 were dominated by two large-scale orchestral works, although he continued to produce other important works such as the piano sonata Sonata quasi una fantasia known as the "Moonlight Sonata". In the spring of 1801 he completed The Creatures of Prometheus, a ballet. The work received numerous performances in 1801 and 1802, and Beethoven rushed to publish a piano arrangement to capitalise on its early popularity. Cooper (2008), pp. 98103. In the spring of 1802 he completed the Second Symphony, intended for performance at a concert that was canceled. The symphony received its premiere instead at a subscription concert in April 1803 at the Theater an der Wien, where Beethoven had been appointed composer in residence. In addition to the Second Symphony, the concert also featured the First Symphony, the Third Piano Concerto, and the oratorio Christ on the Mount of Olives. Reviews were mixed, but the concert was a financial success; Beethoven was able to charge three times the cost of a typical concert ticket. Cooper (2008), pp. 112127 

Beethoven's business dealings with publishers also began to improve in 1802 when his brother Carl, who had previously assisted him casually, began to assume a larger role in the management of his affairs. In addition to negotiating higher prices for recently composed works, Carl also began selling some of Beethoven's earlier unpublished works, and encouraged Beethoven (against the latter's preference) to also make arrangements and transcriptions of his more popular works for other instrument combinations. Beethoven acceded to these requests, as he could not prevent publishers from hiring others to do similar arrangements of his works. Cooper (2008), pp. 112115. 

===Loss of hearing===
Around 1796, by the age of 26, Beethoven began to lose his hearing. Grove Online, section 5 He suffered from a severe form of tinnitus, a "ringing" in his ears that made it hard for him to hear music; he also tried to avoid conversations. The cause of Beethoven's deafness is unknown, but it has variously been attributed to typhus, auto-immune disorders (such as systemic lupus erythematosus), and even his habit of immersing his head in cold water to stay awake. The explanation from Beethoven's autopsy was that he had a "distended inner ear," which developed lesions over time.

Beethoven in 1815 portrait by Joseph Willibrord Mhler
As early as 1801, Beethoven wrote to friends describing his symptoms and the difficulties they caused in both professional and social settings (although it is likely some of his close friends were already aware of the problems). Cooper (2008), p. 108 Beethoven, on the advice of his doctor, lived in the small Austrian town of Heiligenstadt, just outside Vienna, from April to October 1802 in an attempt to come to terms with his condition. There he wrote his Heiligenstadt Testament, a letter to his brothers which records his thoughts of suicide due to his growing deafness and records his resolution to continue living for and through his art. Cooper (2008), p. 120 Over time, his hearing loss became profound: at the end of the premiere of his Ninth Symphony in 1824, he had to be turned around to see the tumultuous applause of the audience because he could not hear it nor the orchestra. Beethoven's hearing loss did not prevent him from composing music, but it made playing at concertsa lucrative source of incomeincreasingly difficult. After a failed attempt in 1811 to perform his own Piano Concerto No. 5 (the "Emperor"), which was premiered by his student Carl Czerny, he never performed in public again.

A large collection of Beethoven's hearing aids, such as a special ear horn, can be viewed at the Beethoven House Museum in Bonn, Germany. Despite his obvious distress, Czerny remarked that Beethoven could still hear speech and music normally until 1812. By 1814 however, Beethoven was almost totally deaf, and when a group of visitors saw him play a loud arpeggio of thundering bass notes at his piano remarking, "Ist es nicht schn?" (Is it not beautiful?), they felt deep sympathy considering his courage and sense of humor (he lost the ability to hear higher frequencies first). Solomon (2001) 

As a result of Beethoven's hearing loss, his conversation books are an unusually rich written resource. Used primarily in the last ten or so years of his life, his friends wrote in these books so that he could know what they were saying, and he then responded either orally or in the book. The books contain discussions about music and other matters, and give insights into Beethoven's thinking; they are a source for investigations into how he intended his music should be performed, and also his perception of his relationship to art. Out of a total of 400 conversation books, it has been suggested that 264 were destroyed (and others were altered) after Beethoven's death by Anton Schindler, who wished only an idealised biography of the composer to survive. Clive, p. 239 However, Theodore Albrecht contests the verity of Schindler's destruction of a large number of conversation books. "In any case, it now becomes abundantly clear that Schindler never possessed as many as ca. 400 conversation books, and that he never destroyed roughly five-eighths of that number." Theodore Albrecht, 'Anton Schindler as destroyer and forger of Beethoven's conversation books: A case for decriminalization', Music's Intellectual History, RILM 2010, 16881. 

===Patronage===
Beethoven's patron, Archduke Rudolph

While Beethoven earned income from publication of his works and from public performances, he also depended on the generosity of patrons for income, for whom he gave private performances and copies of works they commissioned for an exclusive period prior to their publication. Some of his early patrons, including Prince Lobkowitz and Prince Lichnowsky, gave him annual stipends in addition to commissioning works and purchasing published works. Cooper (2008), pp. 7879 

Perhaps Beethoven's most important aristocratic patron was Archduke Rudolph, the youngest son of Emperor Leopold II, who in 1803 or 1804 began to study piano and composition with Beethoven. The cleric (Cardinal-Priest) and the composer became friends, and their meetings continued until 1824. Lockwood (2003), pp. 300301 Beethoven dedicated 14 compositions to Rudolph, including the Archduke Trio (1811) and his great Missa Solemnis (1823). Rudolph, in turn, dedicated one of his own compositions to Beethoven. The letters Beethoven wrote to Rudolph are today kept at the Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde in Vienna. Prevot, Dominique. "Beethoven's Pupils, Ludwig van Beethoven's Website. Trans. Hannah Salter. Accessed 5 June 2014. Another patron was Count (later Prince) Andreas Razumovsky, for whom the String Quartets Nos. 79, Op. 59, Rasumovsky were named.

In the Autumn of 1808, after having been rejected for a position at the royal theatre, Beethoven received an offer from Napoleon's brother Jrme Bonaparte, then king of Westphalia, for a well-paid position as Kapellmeister at the court in Cassel. To persuade him to stay in Vienna, the Archduke Rudolph, Prince Kinsky and Prince Lobkowitz, after receiving representations from the composer's friends, pledged to pay Beethoven a pension of 4000 florins a year. Only Archduke Rudolph paid his share of the pension on the agreed date. Cooper (2008), p. 195 Kinsky, immediately called to military duty, did not contribute and soon died after falling from his horse. Lobkowitz stopped paying in September 1811. No successors came forward to continue the patronage, and Beethoven relied mostly on selling composition rights and a small pension after 1815. The effects of these financial arrangements were undermined to some extent by war with France, which caused significant inflation when the government printed money to fund its war efforts.

===The middle period===
Beethoven Monument in Bonn, Mnsterplatz

Beethoven's return to Vienna from Heiligenstadt was marked by a change in musical style, and is now designated as the start of his "Middle" or "Heroic" period. According to Carl Czerny, Beethoven said, "I am not satisfied with the work I have done so far. From now on I intend to take a new way." Cooper (2008), p. 131 This "Heroic" phase was characterised by a large number of original works composed on a grand scale. 'Beethoven's Heroic Phase', The Musical Times, CX (1969), pp. 13941 The first major work employing this new style was the Third Symphony in E flat, known as the "Eroica". This work was longer and larger in scope than any previous symphony. When it premiered in early 1805 it received a mixed reception. Some listeners objected to its length or misunderstood its structure, while others viewed it as a masterpiece. Cooper (2008), p. 148 

The "middle period" is sometimes associated with a "heroic" manner of composing, but the use of the term "heroic" has become increasingly controversial in Beethoven scholarship. The term is more frequently used as an alternative name for the middle period. The appropriateness of the term "heroic" to describe the whole middle period has been questioned as well: while some works, like the Third and Fifth Symphonies, are easy to describe as "heroic", many others, like his Symphony No. 6, Pastoral, are not. 

Some of the middle period works extend the musical language Beethoven had inherited from Haydn and Mozart. The middle period work includes the Third through Eighth Symphonies, the Rasumovsky, Harp and Serioso string quartets, the "Waldstein" and "Appassionata" piano sonatas, Christ on the Mount of Olives, the opera Fidelio, the Violin Concerto and many other compositions. During this time Beethoven's income came from publishing his works, from performances of them, and from his patrons. His position at the Theater an der Wien was terminated when the theater changed management in early 1804, and he was forced to move temporarily to the suburbs of Vienna with his friend Stephan von Breuning. This slowed work on Fidelio, his largest work to date, for a time. It was delayed again by the Austrian censor, and finally premiered in November 1805 to houses that were nearly empty because of the French occupation of the city. In addition to being a financial failure, this version of Fidelio was also a critical failure, and Beethoven began revising it. Cooper (2008), p. 150 

During May 1809, when the attacking forces of Napoleon bombarded Vienna, according to Ferdinand Ries, Beethoven, very worried that the noise would destroy what remained of his hearing, hid in the basement of his brother's house, covering his ears with pillows. Cooper (2008), p. 185 

The work of the middle period established Beethoven as a master. In a review from 1810, he was enshrined by E. T. A. Hoffmann as one of the three great "Romantic" composers; Hoffman called Beethoven's Fifth Symphony "one of the most important works of the age."

===Personal and family difficulties===
Beethoven's love life was hampered by class issues. In late 1801 he met a young countess, Julie ("Giulietta") Guicciardi through the Brunsvik family, at a time when he was giving regular piano lessons to Josephine Brunsvik. Beethoven mentions his love for Julie in a November 1801 letter to his boyhood friend, Franz Wegeler, but he could not consider marrying her, due to the class difference. Beethoven later dedicated to her his Sonata No. 14, now commonly known as the "Moonlight" Sonata. Details in Steblin (2009). 

His relationship with Josephine Brunsvik deepened after the death in 1804 of her aristocratic first husband, the Count Joseph Deym. Beethoven wrote Josephine 15 passionate love letters from late 1804 to around 1809/10. Although his feelings were obviously reciprocated, Josephine was forced by her family to withdraw from him in 1807. She cited her "duty" and the fact that she would have lost the custodianship of her aristocratic children had she married a commoner. Cooper (2008), pp. 146, 168. After Josephine married Baron von Stackelberg in 1810, Beethoven may have proposed unsuccessfully to Therese Malfatti, the supposed dedicatee of "Fr Elise"; Lorenz (2011). his status as a commoner may again have interfered with those plans.

Life mask made in 1812

In the spring of 1811 Beethoven became seriously ill, suffering headaches and high fever. On the advice of his doctor, he spent six weeks in the Bohemian spa town of Teplitz. The following winter, which was dominated by work on the Seventh symphony, he was again ill, and his doctor ordered him to spend the summer of 1812 at the spa Teplitz. It is certain that he was at Teplitz when he wrote a love letter to his "Immortal Beloved." Brandenburg (1996), #582. The identity of the intended recipient has long been a subject of debate; candidates include Julie Guicciardi, Therese Malfatti, Josephine Brunsvik, and Antonie Brentano.

Beethoven visited his brother Johann at the end of October 1812. He wished to end Johann's cohabitation with Therese Obermayer, a woman who already had an illegitimate child. He was unable to convince Johann to end the relationship and appealed to the local civic and religious authorities. Johann and Therese married on 9 November. Cooper (2008), p. 212 

Beethoven in 1814. Portrait by Louis-Ren Ltronne.

In early 1813 Beethoven apparently went through a difficult emotional period, and his compositional output dropped. His personal appearance degradedit had generally been neatas did his manners in public, especially when dining. Beethoven took care of his brother (who was suffering from tuberculosis) and his family, an expense that he claimed left him penniless.

Beethoven was finally motivated to begin significant composition again in June 1813, when news arrived of the defeat of one of Napoleon's armies at Vitoria, Spain, by a coalition of forces under the Duke of Wellington. This news stimulated him to write the battle symphony known as Wellington's Victory. It was first performed on 8 December, along with his Seventh Symphony, at a charity concert for victims of the war. The work was a popular hit, probably because of its programmatic style, which was entertaining and easy to understand. It received repeat performances at concerts Beethoven staged in January and February 1814. Beethoven's renewed popularity led to demands for a revival of Fidelio, which, in its third revised version, was also well received at its July opening. That summer he composed a piano sonata for the first time in five years (No. 27, Opus 90). This work was in a markedly more Romantic style than his earlier sonatas. He was also one of many composers who produced music in a patriotic vein to entertain the many heads of state and diplomats who came to the Congress of Vienna that began in November 1814. His output of songs included his only song cycle, "An die ferne Geliebte," and the extraordinarily expressive second setting of the poem "An die Hoffnung" (Op. 94) in 1815. Compared to its first setting in 1805 (a gift for Josephine Brunsvik), it was "far more dramatic ... The entire spirit is that of an operatic scena." Lockwood (2003), p. 278. 

===Custody struggle and illness===
Between 1815 and 1817 Beethoven's output dropped again. Beethoven attributed part of this to a lengthy illness (he called it an "inflammatory fever") that afflicted him for more than a year, starting in October 1816. Cooper (2008), p. 254 Biographers have speculated on a variety of other reasons that also contributed to the decline, including the difficulties in the personal lives of his would-be paramours and the harsh censorship policies of the Austrian government. The illness and death of his brother Carl from tuberculosis may also have played a role.

Beethoven in 1818 by August Klber
Carl had been ill for some time, and Beethoven spent a small fortune in 1815 on his care. After Carl died on 15 November 1815, Beethoven immediately became embroiled in a protracted legal dispute with Carl's wife Johanna over custody of their son Karl, then nine years old. Beethoven, who considered Johanna an unfit parent because of her morals (she had an illegitimate child by a different father before marrying Carl and had been convicted of theft) and financial management, had successfully applied to Carl to have himself named sole guardian of the boy. A late codicil to Carl's will gave him and Johanna joint guardianship. While Beethoven was successful at having his nephew removed from her custody in February 1816, the case was not fully resolved until 1820, and he was frequently preoccupied by the demands of the litigation and seeing to Karl's welfare, whom he first placed in a private school.

The Austrian court system had one court for the nobility and members of the Landtafel, the R&I Landrechte, and many other courts for commoners, among them the Civil Court of the Vienna Magistrate. Beethoven disguised the fact that the Dutch "van" in his name did not denote nobility as does the German "von" On 18 December 1818, the Landrechte, the Austrian court for the nobility, handed over the whole matter of guardianship to the Vienna Magistrate, the court for commoners. "It ... appears from the statement of Ludwig van Beethoven, as the accompanying copy of the court minutes of 11 December of this year shows, that he is unable to prove nobility: hence the matter of guardianship is transferred to an honorable magistrate." and his case was tried in the Landrechte. Owing to his influence with the court, Beethoven felt assured of the favorable outcome of being awarded sole guardianship. While giving evidence to the Landrechte, however, Beethoven inadvertently admitted that he was not nobly born. On 18 December 1818 the case was transferred to the Magistracy, where he lost sole guardianship.

Beethoven appealed and regained custody. Johanna's appeal to the Emperor was not successful: the Emperor "washed his hands of the matter." During the years of custody that followed, Beethoven attempted to ensure that Karl lived to the highest moral standards. Beethoven had an overbearing manner and frequently interfered in his nephew's life. Karl attempted suicide on 31 July 1826 by shooting himself in the head. He survived and was brought to his mother's house, where he recuperated. He and Beethoven were reconciled, but Karl insisted on joining the army and last saw Beethoven in early 1827.

===Late works===
Beethoven began a renewed study of older music, including works by J. S. Bach and Handel, that were then being published in the first attempts at complete editions. He composed the overture The Consecration of the House, which was the first work to attempt to incorporate these influences. A new style emerged, now called his "Late period". He returned to the keyboard to compose his first piano sonatas in almost a decade: the works of the Late period are commonly held to include the last five piano sonatas and the Diabelli Variations, the last two sonatas for cello and piano, the late string quartets (see below), and two works for very large forces: the Missa Solemnis and the Ninth Symphony.

A modern medallion bearing the face of Beethoven

By early 1818 Beethoven's health had improved, and his nephew moved in with him in January. On the downside, his hearing had deteriorated to the point that conversation became difficult, necessitating the use of conversation books. His household management had also improved somewhat; Nanette Streicher, who had assisted in his care during his illness, continued to provide some support, and he finally found a skilled cook. Cooper (2008), p 260 His musical output in 1818 was still somewhat reduced, but included song collections and the "Hammerklavier" Sonata, as well as sketches for two symphonies that eventually coalesced into the epic Ninth. In 1819 he was again preoccupied by the legal processes around Karl, and began work on the Diabelli Variations and the Missa Solemnis.

For the next few years he continued to work on the Missa, composing piano sonatas and bagatelles to satisfy the demands of publishers and the need for income, and completing the Diabelli Variations. He was ill again for an extended time in 1821, and completed the Missa in 1823, three years after its original due date. He also opened discussions with his publishers over the possibility of producing a complete edition of his work, an idea that was arguably not fully realised until 1971. Beethoven's brother Johann began to take a hand in his business affairs, much in the way Carl had earlier, locating older unpublished works to offer for publication and offering the Missa to multiple publishers with the goal of getting a higher price for it.

Two commissions in 1822 improved Beethoven's financial prospects. The Philharmonic Society of London offered a commission for a symphony, and Prince Nikolas Golitsin of St. Petersburg offered to pay Beethoven's price for three string quartets. The first of these commissions spurred Beethoven to finish the Ninth Symphony, which was first performed, along with the Missa Solemnis, on 7 May 1824, to great acclaim at the Krntnertortheater. The Allgemeine musikalische Zeitung gushed, "inexhaustible genius had shown us a new world," and Carl Czerny wrote that his symphony "breathes such a fresh, lively, indeed youthful spirit ... so much power, innovation, and beauty as ever from the head of this original man, although he certainly sometimes led the old wigs to shake their heads." Cooper (2008), p. 317 Unlike his more lucrative earlier concerts, this did not make Beethoven much money, as the expenses of mounting it were significantly higher. A second concert on 24 May, in which the producer guaranteed Beethoven a minimum fee, was poorly attended; nephew Karl noted that "many people already gone into the country." Cooper (2008), p. 318 It was Beethoven's last public concert. 

Beethoven then turned to writing the string quartets for Golitsin. This series of quartets, known as the "Late Quartets," went far beyond what musicians or audiences were ready for at that time. One musician commented that "we know there is something there, but we do not know what it is." Composer Louis Spohr called them "indecipherable, uncorrected horrors." Opinion has changed considerably from the time of their first bewildered reception: their forms and ideas inspired musicians and composers including Richard Wagner and Bla Bartk, and continue to do so. Of the late quartets, Beethoven's favorite was the Fourteenth Quartet, op. 131 in C minor, which he rated as his most perfect single work. The last musical wish of Schubert was to hear the Op. 131 quartet, which he did on 14 November 1828, five days before his death. 

Beethoven wrote the last quartets amidst failing health. In April 1825 he was bedridden, and remained ill for about a month. The illnessor more precisely, his recovery from itis remembered for having given rise to the deeply felt slow movement of the Fifteenth Quartet, which Beethoven called "Holy song of thanks ('Heiliger Dankgesang') to the divinity, from one made well." He went on to complete the quartets now numbered Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Sixteenth. The last work completed by Beethoven was the substitute final movement of the Thirteenth Quartet, which replaced the difficult Groe Fuge. Shortly thereafter, in December 1826, illness struck again, with episodes of vomiting and diarrhea that nearly ended his life.

===Illness and death===

Beethoven's grave site, Vienna Zentralfriedhof

Beethoven was bedridden for most of his remaining months, and many friends came to visit. He died on 26 March 1827 at the age of 56 during a thunderstorm. His friend Anselm Httenbrenner, who was present at the time, said that there was a peal of thunder at the moment of death. An autopsy revealed significant liver damage, which may have been due to heavy alcohol consumption. Cooper (2008), p. 349 It also revealed considerable dilation of the auditory and other related nerves. See also correction: 

Death mask by Josef Danhauser
Beethoven's funeral procession on 29 March 1827 was attended by an estimated 20,000 Viennese citizens. Franz Schubert, who died the following year and was buried next to Beethoven, was one of the torchbearers. Beethoven was buried in a dedicated grave in the Whring cemetery, north-west of Vienna, after a requiem mass at the church of the Holy Trinity (Dreifaltigkeitskirche). His remains were exhumed for study in 1862, and moved in 1888 to Vienna's Zentralfriedhof. In 2012, his crypt was checked to see if his teeth had been stolen during a series of grave robberies of other famous Viennese composers. 

There is dispute about the cause of Beethoven's death: alcoholic cirrhosis, syphilis, infectious hepatitis, lead poisoning, sarcoidosis and Whipple's disease have all been proposed. Friends and visitors before and after his death clipped locks of his hair, some of which have been preserved and subjected to additional analysis, as have skull fragments removed during the 1862 exhumation. Some of these analyses have led to controversial assertions that Beethoven was accidentally poisoned to death by excessive doses of lead-based treatments administered under instruction from his doctor. 

==Character==
Beethoven's personal life was troubled by his encroaching deafness and irritability brought on by chronic abdominal pain (beginning in his twenties) which led him to contemplate suicide (documented in his Heiligenstadt Testament). Beethoven was often irascible. It has been suggested he suffered from bipolar disorder. Nevertheless, he had a close and devoted circle of friends all his life, thought to have been attracted by his strength of personality. Toward the end of his life, Beethoven's friends competed in their efforts to help him cope with his incapacities. Grove Online 

Sources show Beethoven's disdain for authority, and for social rank. He stopped performing at the piano if the audience chatted amongst themselves, or afforded him less than their full attention. At soires, he refused to perform if suddenly called upon to do so. Eventually, after many confrontations, the Archduke Rudolph decreed that the usual rules of court etiquette did not apply to Beethoven. 

Beethoven was attracted to the ideals of the Enlightenment. In 1804, when Napoleon's imperial ambitions became clear, Beethoven took hold of the title page of his Third Symphony and scratched the name Bonaparte out so violently that he made a hole in the paper. He later changed the work's title to "Sinfonia Eroica, composta per festeggiare il sovvenire d'un grand'uom" ("Heroic Symphony, composed to celebrate the memory of a great man"), and he rededicated it to his patron, Prince Joseph Franz von Lobkowitz, at whose palace it was first performed.

The fourth movement of his Ninth Symphony features an elaborate choral setting of Schiller's Ode An die Freude ("Ode to Joy"), an optimistic hymn championing the brotherhood of humanity.

==Music==
A bust by Hugo Hagen based upon Beethoven's life mask

Beethoven is acknowledged as one of the giants of classical music; he is occasionally referred to as one of the "three Bs" (along with Bach and Brahms) who epitomise that tradition. He was also a pivotal figure in the transition from the 18th century musical classicism to 19th century romanticism, and his influence on subsequent generations of composers was profound. His music features twice on the Voyager Golden Record, a phonograph record containing a broad sample of the images, common sounds, languages, and music of Earth, sent into outer space with the two Voyager probes. 

===Overview===
Beethoven composed in several musical genres and for a variety of instrument combinations. His works for symphony orchestra include nine symphonies (the Ninth Symphony includes a chorus), and about a dozen pieces of "occasional" music. He wrote seven concerti for one or more soloists and orchestra, as well as four shorter works that include soloists accompanied by orchestra. His only opera is Fidelio; other vocal works with orchestral accompaniment include two masses and a number of shorter works.

His large body of compositions for piano includes 32 piano sonatas and numerous shorter pieces, including arrangements of some of his other works. Works with piano accompaniment include 10 violin sonatas, 5 cello sonatas, and a sonata for French horn, as well as numerous lieder.

Beethoven also wrote a significant quantity of chamber music. In addition to 16 string quartets, he wrote five works for string quintet, seven for piano trio, five for string trio, and more than a dozen works for various combinations of wind instruments.

===The three periods===

Beethoven's compositional career is usually divided into Early, Middle, and Late periods. In this scheme, his early period is taken to last until about 1802, the middle period from about 1803 to about 1814, and the late period from about 1815.

In his Early period, Beethoven's work was strongly influenced by his predecessors Haydn and Mozart. He also explored new directions and gradually expanded the scope and ambition of his work. Some important pieces from the Early period are the first and second symphonies, the set of six string quartets Opus 18, the first two piano concertos, and the first dozen or so piano sonatas, including the famous Pathtique sonata, Op. 13.

His Middle (Heroic) period began shortly after Beethoven's personal crisis brought on by his recognition of encroaching deafness. It includes large-scale works that express heroism and struggle. Middle-period works include six symphonies (Nos. 38), the last three piano concertos, the Triple Concerto and violin concerto, five string quartets (Nos. 711), several piano sonatas (including the Moonlight, Waldstein and Appassionata sonatas), the Kreutzer violin sonata and Beethoven's only opera, Fidelio.

Beethoven's Late period began around 1815. Works from this period are characterised by their intellectual depth, their formal innovations, and their intense, highly personal expression. The String Quartet, Op. 131 has seven linked movements, and the Ninth Symphony adds choral forces to the orchestra in the last movement. Other compositions from this period include the Missa Solemnis, the last five string quartets (including the massive Groe Fuge) and the last five piano sonatas.

==Beethoven on screen==
Eroica is a 1949 Austrian film depicting the life and works of Beethoven (Ewald Balser). It was entered into the 1949 Cannes Film Festival. The film is directed by Walter Kolm-Velte, produced by Guido Bagier with Walter Kolm-Velte and written by Walter Kolm-Velte with Franz Tassi. 

Ludwig van Beethoven is a 1954 documentary directed by Max Jaap in the GDR that presents the life of Beethoven. Original documents, letters and photos are combined with highlights of Beethoven's musical oeuvre. 

In 1962, Walt Disney produced a made-for-television, largely fictionalised, life of Beethoven titled The Magnificent Rebel, starring Karlheinz Bhm as Beethoven. The film was given a two-part premiere on the Walt Disney anthology television series, and was released to theatres in Europe. ; 

Beethoven  Days in a Life is a 1976 feature film directed by Horst Seemann and produced by the former East German DEFA Studio for Feature Film. Beethoven is portrayed by Donatas Banionis. The film covers Beethoven's life in Vienna between 1813 and 1819. 

Neil Munro portrayed Beethoven in the 1992 Canadian television movie Beethoven Lives Upstairs; it won a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Children's Program. 

Gary Oldman portrayed Beethoven in the 1994 film Immortal Beloved, written and directed by Bernard Rose. The story follows Beethoven's secretary and first biographer, Anton Schindler (played by Jeroen Krabb), as he attempts to ascertain the true identity of the (Immortal Beloved) addressed in three letters found in the composer's private papers after his death. 

In 2003 a made-for-television BBC/Opus Arte film Eroica dramatised the 1804 first performance of the Eroica Symphony at the palace of Prince Lobkowitz. Ian Hart was cast as Beethoven, while Jack Davenport played Prince Lobkowitz; the Orchestre Rvolutionnaire et Romantique conducted by Sir John Eliot Gardiner perform the Symphony in its entirety during the film. 

In a 2005 three-part BBC miniseries, Beethoven was played by Paul Rhys. 

A movie entitled Copying Beethoven was released in 2006, starring Ed Harris as Beethoven. This film is a fictionalised account of Beethoven's production of his Ninth Symphony. 

==Memorials==
The Beethoven Monument, Bonn, was unveiled in August 1845, in honour of his 75th anniversary. It was the first statue of a composer created in Germany, and the music festival that accompanied the unveiling was the impetus for the very hasty construction of the original Beethovenhalle in Bonn (it was designed and built within less than a month, on the urging of Franz Liszt). A statue to Mozart had been unveiled in Salzburg, Austria in 1842. Vienna did not honour Beethoven with a statue until 1880. His name appears in gilded lettering above the stage of Symphony Hall, Boston, as it was the only one on which all the board members could agree when commemorating composers in the architecture.

There is a museum, the 'Beethoven Haus', the place of his birth, in central Bonn. The third largest crater on Mercury is named in his honor.

==See also==

*Beethoven and his contemporaries

==References==

===Notes===

===Cited sources===
*Brandenburg, Sieghard (ed.): Ludwig van Beethoven: Briefwechsel. Gesamtausgabe. 8 vols. Munich: Henle 1996.
*
*
*
*
*
*
*Lorenz, Michael: "Die 'Enttarnte Elise'. Elisabeth Rckels kurze Karriere als Beethovens 'Elise'". Bonner Beethoven-Studien 9, 2011, pp. 169190 .
*Sachs, Harvey, The Ninth: Beethoven and the World in 1824, London, Faber, 2010. ISBN 978-0-571-22145-5.
*
*
*
*
*

===Other sources===

*Albrecht, Theodore, and Elaine Schwensen, "More Than Just Peanuts: Evidence for December 16 as Beethoven's birthday". The Beethoven Newsletter 3 (1988) 49, 6063.
*Bohle, Bruce, and Robert Sabin. The International Cyclopedia of Music and Musicians. London: J.M. Dent & Sons LTD, 1975. ISBN 0-460-04235-1.
*Davies, Peter J. The Character of a Genius: Beethoven in Perspective. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 2002. ISBN 0-313-31913-8.
*Davies, Peter J. Beethoven in Person: His Deafness, Illnesses, and Death. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 2001. ISBN 0-313-31587-6.
*DeNora, Tia. "Beethoven and the Construction of Genius: Musical Politics in Vienna, 17921803". Berkeley, California: University of California Press, 1995. ISBN 0-520-21158-8.
*Geck, Martin. Beethoven. Translated by Anthea Bell. London: Haus, 2003. ISBN 1-904341-03-9 (h), ISBN 1-904341-00-4 (p).
*
*Kornyei, Alexius. Beethoven in Martonvasar. Verlag, 1960. OCLC Number: 27056305
*Kropfinger, Klaus. Beethoven. Verlage Brenreiter/Metzler, 2001. ISBN 3-7618-1621-9.
*Martin, Russell. Beethoven's Hair. New York: Broadway Books, 2000. ISBN 978-0-7679-0350-9.
*
*Morris, Edmund. Beethoven: The Universal Composer. New York: Atlas Books / HarperCollins, 2005. ISBN 0-06-075974-7.
*Rosen, Charles. The Classical Style: Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven. Expanded ed. New York: W. W. Norton, 1998. ISBN 0-393-04020-8 (hc); ISBN 0-393-31712-9 (pb).
*Solomon, Maynard. Late Beethoven: Music, Thought, Imagination. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2003. ISBN 0-520-23746-3.
*Sullivan, J. W. N., Beethoven: His Spiritual Development New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1927.

==External links==

*
*Beethoven-Haus Bonn, official website
*The Ira F. Brilliant Center for Beethoven Studies, The Beethoven Gateway (San Jos State University)
*
*
*
*
*Works by or about Ludwig van Beethoven at Internet Archive and Google Books (scanned books original editions color illustrated)
*

 



[[Lleyton Hewitt]]

Lleyton Glynn Hewitt (; See pronunciation of Lleyton Hewitt. born 24 February 1981) is an Australian professional tennis player and former world No. 1.

Hewitt is the youngest male ever to be ranked No. 1 in the world in singles, at the age of 20. His most notable career achievements include winning the 2001 US Open and 2002 Wimbledon men's singles titles, the 2000 US Open men's doubles title, and back-to-back Tennis Masters Cup (now called the ATP World Tour Finals) titles in 2001 and 2002. Hewitt also reached the final of the 2004 US Open, losing to Roger Federer, and the Australian Open final in 2005 where he was defeated by Marat Safin.

==Early life==
Hewitt was born in Adelaide, South Australia. His father, Glynn, is a former Australian Rules Football player, and his mother, Cherilyn, was a physical education teacher. Lleyton also played Australian Football until the age of 13, when he decided to pursue a tennis career. 

==Tennis career==
Hewitt commenced his professional career in 1998. He became one of the youngest winners of an Association of Tennis Professionals (ATP) tournament when he won the 1998 Next Generation Adelaide International, defeating Jason Stoltenberg in the final, having defeated Andre Agassi in the semifinals. Only Aaron Krickstein winning Tel Aviv in 1983 and Michael Chang winning San Francisco in 1988 were younger when claiming their first ATP title. Hewitt then left Immanuel College to concentrate on his tennis career. He
was an Australian Institute of Sport scholarship holder. 

===Juniors===
As a junior Hewitt posted a 4419 record in singles and reached as high as No. 17 in the world in 1997 (and No. 13 in doubles).

====Junior Grand Slam results====

 Tournament 1996 1997 WL 
 Junior Grand Slam Tournaments 
 Australian Open 2R QF 42 
 French Open A 3R 21 
 Wimbledon A 3R 21 
 US Open A 3R 21 
 WinLoss 11 94 105 

====Junior singles titles (1)====

 Legend (Singles) 
 Grand Slam (0) 
 Grade A (0) 
 Grade B (0) 
 Grade 15 (1) 

 No. Date Tournament Surface Opponent Score 
 1. 8 April 1997 Manila, Philippines Hard Wesley Whitehouse 64 63 

Hewitt and fellow Australian Mark Philippoussis confer during a doubles match at the 2005 Queen's Club Championships.

===2000===
In 2000, Hewitt reached his first Grand Slam final at the Wimbledon mixed doubles partnering Belgian Kim Clijsters, his then girlfriend. They lost the match, to Americans Kimberly Po and Donald Johnson. Hewitt later won his first Grand Slam title at the US Open when he along with Max Mirnyi claimed the men's doubles championship; thus becoming the youngest male (at 19 years, 6 months) to win a Grand Slam doubles crown in the open era. At the end of the year, Hewitt became the first teenager in ATP history to qualify for the year-end Tennis Masters Cup (ATP World Tour Finals). 

===2001: First Grand Slam title and ascent to number 1===

Hewitt started off the 2001 season well by winning the Medibank International in Sydney, and went on to win tournaments in London (Queen's Club) and 's-Hertogenbosch. He captured his first Grand Slam singles title at the US Open in 2001, when he beat former world no. 1 Yevgeny Kafelnikov in the semifinals and defeated then-four-time champion Pete Sampras the next day in straight sets. This win made Hewitt the only active ATP player to win a Grand Slam singles and doubles title during his career. Hewitt is still the last player to achieve this feat. The Australian went on to win the Tokyo Open and again qualify for the year-end Tennis Masters Cup held in Sydney. During the tournament, Hewitt won all matches in his group. He then went on to defeat Sbastien Grosjean in the finals to take the title and gain the world no. 1 ranking.

Hewitt won a total of six titles in 2001.

===2002: Reclaiming No. 1 spot===

The year 2002 was once again a solid year for Hewitt, winning three titles in San Jose, Indian Wells and London (Queen's Club). He followed his 2001 US Open win by capturing the Wimbledon singles title, dominating first-time finalist David Nalbandian in straight sets; Hewitt lost only two sets throughout the championship. His victory reinforced the idea that, although the tournament had tended to be dominated by serve-and-volleyers, a baseliner could still triumph on grass (Hewitt was the first 'baseliner' to win the tournament since Agassi in 1992).

For his third straight year, He qualified for the year-end Tennis Masters Cup held in Shanghai and successfully defended his title by defeating Juan Carlos Ferrero in the final. Hewitt's win helped him finish the year as world no. 1 for a second straight year.

===2003: Second Masters Title===

In 2003 Hewitt defeated former world no. 1 Gustavo Kuerten for the championship at Indian Wells. But at Wimbledon, as the defending champion, Hewitt lost in the first round to qualifier Ivo Karlovi. Hewitt became the first defending Wimbledon men's champion in the open era to lose in the first round. Only once before in the tournament's 126-year history had a defending men's champion lost in the opening round, in 1967, when Manuel Santana was beaten by Charlie Pasarell. Hewitt was only the third defending Grand Slam champion in the open era to lose in the first round, after Boris Becker at the 1997 Australian Open and Patrick Rafter at the 1999 US Open. After Wimbledon in 2003, Hewitt lost in the final of the tournament in Los Angeles, the second round of the ATP Masters Series tournament in Montreal, and the first round of the ATP Masters Series tournament in Cincinnati. At the US Open, Hewitt lost in the quarterfinals to Juan Carlos Ferrero. Hewitt played only Davis Cup matches for the remainder of the year, recording five-set wins over Roger Federer and Juan Carlos Ferrero in the semifinals and final respectively, as Australia went on to win the Davis Cup. Hewitt used much of his spare time in late 2003 to bulk up, gaining 7 kg.

Lleyton Hewitt at Wimbledon, 2004

===2004: US Open Final===
In 2004, Hewitt became the first man in history to lose in each Grand Slam singles tournament to the eventual champion. At the Australian Open, he was defeated in the fourth round by Swiss Roger Federer. At the French Open, he was defeated in a quarterfinal by Argentine Gastn Gaudio. At Wimbledon, he was defeated in a quarterfinal by Federer, and at the US Open, he was defeated in the final by Federer, losing two out of the three sets at love. At the year ending 2004 Tennis Masters Cup, Hewitt defeated Andy Roddick to advance to the final, but was yet again defeated by defending champion Federer. 

===2005: Australian Open Final===

In 2005, Hewitt won his only title at the Sydney Medibank International defeating little-known Czech player Ivo Min. Hewitt spent much time in the late stages of 2004 working with his former coach and good friend, Roger Rasheed, on bulking up his physique. His hard work paid off during the Australian summer, when he defeated an in-form world no. 2 Andy Roddick to reach his first Australian Open final. He was the first Australian player to reach the final since Pat Cash in 1988. In the final, he faced fourth seed, Marat Safin, who had defeated world no. 1 and defending champion Roger Federer in the semifinals. After easily taking the first set, he was defeated by the Russian despite being up a break in the third set. At Wimbledon, he reached the semifinals, but lost to eventual champion Federer. Two months later, Hewitt again lost to Federer in the US Open semifinal, although this time he was able to take one set from the Swiss. Hewitt had at this point lost to the eventual champion at seven consecutive Grand Slam tournaments he played (he missed the 2005 French Open because of injury). Hewitt pulled out of the Tennis Masters Cup tournament in Shanghai in November 2005 so that he could be with his wife Bec, who was due to give birth.

Hewitt at the 2006 US Open

===2006: 25th Career Title ===

Hewitt was defeated in the second round of the 2006 Australian Open by Juan Ignacio Chela of Argentina. He then reached the finals of the San Jose and Las Vegas tournaments, losing to British youngster Andy Murray and American James Blake, respectively. But he lost to Tim Henman in the second round of the Miami Masters, a player he had defeated eight times previously in as many matches. At the 2006 French Open, Hewitt reached the fourth round, where he lost to defending champion and eventual winner Rafael Nadal in four sets.

Hewitt won his first tournament of 2006 (after a 17 month hiatus from winning a tournament), when he beat Blake in the final of the Queen's Club Championships. This was his fourth title there, equalling the records of John McEnroe and Boris Becker. During the 2006 Wimbledon Championships, Hewitt survived a five-set match against South Korea's Hyung-Taik Lee that was played over two days. He then defeated Olivier Rochus and David Ferrer, before losing to Marcos Baghdatis in the quarterfinals. At the 2006 Legg Mason Tennis Classic in Washington, D.C., Hewitt was defeated by Arnaud Clment in the quarterfinals, after defeating Vincent Spadea in the second round and Denis Gremelmayr in the third round.

Hewitt participated at the 2006 US Open, despite having an injured knee. Hewitt won his first three matches in straight sets against, respectively, Albert Montas, Jan Hernych, and Novak okovi. He defeated Richard Gasquet in five sets to advance to the quarterfinals for the seventh consecutive year. He then lost to Roddick.

===2007: 26th Career Title===
At the 2007 Australian Open, Hewitt lost in the third round to tenth-seeded Chilean and eventual runner-up Fernando Gonzlez. With his win in Las Vegas in March, Hewitt had won at least one ATP title annually for ten consecutive years. This was a record among active players at the time. Hewitt reached the 2007 Hamburg Masters semifinals, where he pushed eventual finalist Rafael Nadal to three sets. At the 2007 French Open, Hewitt, for the second straight time lost in the fourth round to Nadal. At the 2007 Wimbledon Championships, Hewitt won his first three matches, including a four-set third round victory over Guillermo Caas. He then faced fourth seed Novak Djokovic in the fourth round, which he lost.

After Wimbledon, it was announced that he had hired former Australian tennis pro Tony Roche to coach him during Grand Slam and Masters tournaments in 2007 and 2008. At the Masters tournaments in Montral and Cincinnati Hewitt reached the quarterfinals and semifinals, respectively. In both cases, he lost to Roger Federer.

He was seeded 16th at the 2007 US Open, but for the first time in eight consecutive appearances at Flushing Meadows, he did not reach the quarterfinals or further. He lost in the second round to Argentine Agustn Calleri.

===2008: 500 Wins===
At the 2008 Australian Open, he advanced to the fourth round as the 19th seed, defeating 15th-seeded and 2006 Australian Open finalist Marcos Baghdatis in a thrilling third-round match. The 282 minute match started at 11:52 pm and ended at 4:34 am the following morning. It was a characteristically "gutsy" performance and cemented Hewitt's reputation as a tough competitor.
Hewitt lost his fourth-round match in straight sets to third-seeded and eventual champion Novak Djokovic.

A hip injury Hewitt acquired in March 2008 affected his preparation for the French Open and forced the loss of 300 rankings points as Hewitt was unable to defend his semifinal appearance at the Hamburg Masters, as well as compete in supplementary tournaments. However, Hewitt made the third round at Roland Garros, before losing a five-set thriller to fifth seed David Ferrer.

Despite his ongoing hip problem, Hewitt was able to compete at the Queens Club Championship with moderate success, falling to second seed Novak Djokovic in the quarterfinals. His good form continued into Wimbledon, Hewitt making the fourth round for the second successive year, before losing to world no. 1 and first seed Roger Federer. 

After Wimbledon, Hewitt elected to miss the Montreal and Cincinnati Masters in an effort to give his hip sufficient rest to enable him to play at the 2008 Beijing Olympics, where he defeated Jonas Bjrkman in the first round before losing to second seed Rafael Nadal. However, the more notable incident in the Olympics occurred in Hewitt's opening-round doubles match with Chris Guccione against Argentines Juan Mnaco and Agustn Calleri. The match went to an advantage third set with Hewitt and Guccione prevailing 1816. After the Olympics, due to the further damage Hewitt's hip sustained at the Olympics, he was left with no option but to pull out of the US Open and skip the rest of the season to have hip surgery. 2008 was the first year since 1997 in which Hewitt did not win a title. 

===2009: 27th Career Title===
After returning from hip surgery, Hewitt played his first match in 2009 at the Hopman Cup, where he defeated Nicolas Kiefer in three sets. Hewitt then participated in the Medibank International Sydney, winning his first two matches, but losing in the quarterfinals to David Nalbandian. Hewitt then went on to play in the 2009 Australian Open, where he was unseeded in a Grand Slam for the first time since 2000. He faced Fernando Gonzlez in the first round and lost in five sets.

At the tournament in Memphis, he caused an upset in the first round by defeating James Blake in three sets. He then defeated fellow Australian Chris Guccione in the second round and Christophe Rochus in the quarterfinals. He faced Andy Roddick in the semifinals, but lost in a close match. Hewitt then lost in the first round of Delray Beach to Yen-Hsun Lu, the eighth seed. Hewitt also competed in the BNP Paribas Open in Indian Wells, California, and reached the second round, being defeated by Fernando Gonzlez. At the Sony Ericsson Open in Miami, Hewitt played Israeli Dudi Sela in the first round. Hewitt lost the first set, before recovering to win the match. Hewitt was then defeated by seventh seed Gilles Simon of France in straight sets. 

At the 2009 U.S. Men's Clay Court Championships, Hewitt defeated seventh seed Diego Junqueira. Hewitt advanced to the quarterfinals after defeating Sergio Roitman in just 57 minutes, and thenGuillermo Garca-Lpez to advance to the semifinals, where he defeated Evgeny Korolev. He defeated Wayne Odesnik in the final, for his first title since 2007 and his first clay-court title in a decade. Hewitt entered the Monte Carlo Masters as a wild card. He lost in the first round to Marat Safin. Hewitt admitted to running out of energy in the second set. 

At the 2009 BMW Open, Hewitt recorded his 500th career win after defeating Philipp Petzschner in the first round, becoming one of only four active players to achieve this milestone; the others being Roger Federer and Carlos Moy. Andy Roddick would later achieve this feat at the 2009 Legg Mason Tennis Classic Tournament in Washington, D.C. In the 2009 French Open, he defeated 26th seed Ivo Karlovi in five sets in the first round, and then defeated Andrey Golubev in the second. He lost to No. 1 Rafael Nadal in the third round. His next tournament was the 2009 Aegon Championships in London. He was 15th seed and drew Eduardo Schwank in the first round, who he easily dispatched. In the second round, he went three sets against Portuguese Frederico Gil. Hewitt dropped the first set, but went on to win. Former rival Andy Roddick awaited Lleyton in the third round, and the match certainly did not disappoint. As they have many times in the past, the former world No. 1 players battled through a tough and intense match, which Roddick won. 

Hewitt at the 2009 US Open
In the 2009 Wimbledon Championships, Hewitt faced the prospect of Rafael Nadal in the second round. However, Nadal withdrew due to injury, and his slot was replaced by world no. 5 Juan Martn del Potro. Hewitt defeated American Robby Ginepri in the first round. Hewitt used his strong service game to advantage, losing only one service game the entire match. He upended Del Potro in straight sets. The third round also produced a straight-set victory for Hewitt, as he defeated Philipp Petzschner. He reversed a two-set deficit to defeat Radek tpnek in the fourth round. It was another classic Hewitt fightback to thrill the many Australians on hand to witness the match. His Cinderella run ended in the quarterfinals against sixth seed Andy Roddick. It was a five-set thriller which featured two tiebreaks. Hewitt lost a heartbreaking 36, 76 (10), 67 (1), 64, 46 match. It was the first time Lleyton had reached the quarterfinals of a Major since the 2006 U.S. Open.

After an extended break, Hewitt began working his way into the U.S Open series by playing in Washington at the Legg Mason Classic. There Hewitt made it into the third round, before losing in a three-set battle with Juan Martn del Potro. At the Montreal Masters, Hewitt lost in the first round to former world no. 1, Juan Carlos Ferrero. Cincinnati saw Hewitt reach the quarterfinals for the sixth time, where he lost to Roger Federer in straight sets. During the first round of the tournament, Hewitt showed his trademark fighting abilities by saving two match points to win against an in-form Robin Sderling. At the U.S Open, Hewitt progressed into the third round, where he played Federer for the 23rd time of their decade-long rivalry. Hewitt managed to take the first set 64 from Federer, before the 15-time Grand Slam champion took control of the second. The third set was tight, and both players saved multiple break points. Federer eventually prevailed the match in four sets. 

In late September, Hewitt travelled to Malaysia for his first time to take part in the inaugural Malaysian Open held in Kuala Lumpur. The new tournament was part of the ATP's new dedicated Asian swing. Hewitt lost in the first round to Swedish player Joachim Johansson. In Tokyo, Hewitt was drawn to once again meet del Potro in the quarterfinals, but was given a clear path when del Potro was knocked out by qualifier douard Roger-Vasselin in the first round. After defeating Fabrice Santoro in the second round, Hewitt downed Roger-Vasselin, to reach his first semifinals since winning the US Men's Clay Court Championships in April, but lost to Mikhail Youzhny. He then competed in the 2009 Shanghai ATP Masters 1000, where he won in the first round, defeating John Isner, before losing to Gal Monfils.

===2010: 28th Career Title===
Hewitt began his 2010 season partnering Samantha Stosur at the Hopman Cup. The Australians were the top seeds for the exhibition tournament. They, however, fared worse than expected, losing ties against Romania and Spain, and therefore failing to reach the final.

He was seeded fourth in the Medibank International and, like the previous year, reached the quarterfinals, losing to eventual champion Marcos Baghdatis. At the 2010 Australian Open, he lost to Roger Federer in the fourth round.

A week after his exit from the Australian Open, Hewitt announced at a press conference at Melbourne Park that he underwent another hip operation similar to his left hip operation this time on his right hip on 28 January 2010 in Hobart.

Hewitt returned to the tour at the U.S. Men's Clay Court Championships as the singles defending champion. He won his first match since the Australian Open, partnering coach Nathan Healey in the doubles, defeating James Cerretani and Adil Shamasdin, but lost to top seeds the Bryan brothers in the semifinals. Hewitt received a first-round bye, as he was seeded fourth in singles. In his first match, against lucky loser Somdev Devvarman, Hewitt dropped the first set, before battling to win in three sets. He then lost to Juan Ignacio Chela. Hewitt's next tournament was scheduled to be the Monte-Carlo Rolex Masters. However, he withdrew due to a recurring injury.

Hewitt then reached the second round in Barcelona, before losing to Eduardo Schwank, and lost in the second round of the Internazionali BNL d'Italia to Guillermo Garca-Lpez. Hewitt then travelled back to Australia to parcicipate in a Davis Cup tie against Japan, winning his two singles matches.

At the French Open, Hewitt reached the third round, before losing to Rafael Nadal, who went on to win the title without dropping a set and take the no. 1 ranking.

On 13 June, Hewitt defeated Roger Federer in the final of the Gerry Weber Open in Halle, Germany, a grass-court tuneup for Wimbledon Championships. The win was Hewitt's first over Federer since 2003 and snapped a 15-match losing streak against the Swiss.

At Wimbledon, Hewitt was seeded 15th and lost to third seed, Novak Djokovic in the fourth round. After dropping the first two sets, Hewitt took advantage of a stomach illness had by Djokovic to take the third set. However, Hewitt could not mount a comeback, and ended up losing in four sets.

At the Atlanta Tennis Championship, Hewitt lost in the first round to Luk Lacko. After receiving a first-round bye at the Legg Mason Classic, Hewitt retired in the second round due to a leg injury. He pulled out of the Rogers Cup in Toronto in order to recover, and returned in Cincinnati. Hewitt defeated Yen-Hsun Lu in the opening round, before losing in three sets to fifth seed Robin Sderling.

Hewitt was 32nd seed at the US Open and lost his first-round match to Paul-Henri Mathieu in five sets. It was his earliest exit at the US Open. He withdrew from the Asian hard-court swing due to a wrist injury suffered during the Australian Davis Cup playoff loss to Belgium.

===2011===
Hewitt began his 15th season on the ATP Tour at the Hopman Cup in Perth. He defeated his Belgian opponent Ruben Bemelmans and went on to win the tie for Australia with a three-set victory in the mixed doubles, partnering Alicia Molik. He next played world no. 3 Novak Djokovic, but lost in straight sets. For his final singles match of the tournament, he played Kazakhstani Andrey Golubev, defeating him in straight sets.

After the Hopman Cup, Hewitt competed in the AAMI Kooyong Classic, an exhibitional tournament in the build-up to the Australian Open. He started the tournament solidly, taking out third seed Mikhail Youzhny. In the second round, he defeated Russian Nikolay Davydenko. In the final, he defeated Frenchman Gal Monfils. It was the first time that Hewitt had played in the tournament.

At the 2011 Australian Open, Hewitt was defeated in the first round in five sets by Argentina's David Nalbandian. Hewitt was up two sets to one and during the fourth set had the chance to finish off the match, when the scores were 31 and 040 in Hewitt's favour, but failed to capitalise on the situation. Furthermore, Hewitt had two match point opportunities in the final set to close out victory. However, one of these was met with an excellent drop shot from Nalbandian, and he went on to save the other, securing victory.

After the Australian Open, Hewitt participated in the SAP Open, an ATP World Tour 250 event. He defeated his first-round opponent Bjrn Phau, and proceeded to the second round against Brian Dabul. Hewitt had some problems with Dabul, losing the first set, but managed to defeat him. In the quarterfinals, Hewitt played against former US Open champion Juan Martn del Potro, who was on a comeback from a wrist injury. In a weak performance, Hewitt lost.

The next tournament that Hewitt took part in was the Regions Morgan Keegan Championships and the Cellular South Cup, an ATP World Tour 500 event in Memphis, Tennessee. Hewitt played Lu Yen-Hsun in the opening round, which he won. He advanced to the second round against Adrian Mannarino. Despite losing the first set, Hewitt defeated Mannarino. In the quarterfinals, Hewitt played top seed Andy Roddick. Despite being a set up, Hewitt lost the match. 

Hewitt then played in the 2011 BNP Paribas Open, an ATP World Tour Masters 1000 event. His first-round opponent was Chinese Taipei's Lu Yen-Hsun. This was the second time in a row the two had played each other in the first round, and he suffered a shock defeat. This was to be Hewitt's last event on the ATP Tour for over three months after he underwent surgery on his left foot. He made his comeback at the 2011 Gerry Weber Open in Halle, Germany, where he returned as defending champion. He was originally scheduled to face top seed Roger Federer in the opening round. However, the Swiss withdrew after reaching the final of the French Open. Hewitt therefore took on an alternate from Argentina, Leonardo Mayer and came through the match comfortably. In the second round, he played Andreas Seppi and defeated him. However, Hewitt's reign as champion of Halle came to an end at the hands of home favourite Philipp Kohlschreiber, when the Australian went down in straight sets. During this match, Hewitt turned his ankle when he came in to the net to try to reach a net cord ball. The following week, Hewitt had to retire during a first round match at the Aegon International against Olivier Rochus. This was a result of the niggling ankle injury he had picked up at Halle the week before.

Hewitt came into Wimbledon with doubts over his fitness and condition and was unseeded in the 2011 Wimbledon Championships draw. Hewitt faced Kei Nishikori of Japan in the first round and won in four close sets. In the second round, Hewitt faced fifth seed Robin Sderling. Hewitt won the first set in a tiebreak and the second set. Sderling fought back to take the match in five sets. 

Hewitt's next tournament was the 2011 Atlanta Tennis Championships, an ATP World Tour 250 event and first event on the US hard-court swing. Hewitt won his first-round match against the American qualifier Phillip Simmonds in straight sets to advance to the second round. He went on to lose his second round encounter against the American qualifier Rajeev Ram. After this defeat, Hewitt who had been scheduled to play in Los Angeles the following week, opted not to take up the offer of a wildcard and withdrew from the event to recover from his foot injury. He then was offered a wild card to play at the 2011 US Open, but was unable to play due foot injury which ended his season. 

===2012===
Hewitt began his 2012 season at the Hopman Cup. In the opening singles tie against Spain, Hewitt lost in singles to Fernando Verdasco. For the mixed doubles match, Hewitt partnered with Jarmila Gajdoov. They lost the match in three sets 63, 36, 1911, despite being 51 up in the final set tie-breaker. In the second tie against France, Hewitt lost to Richard Gasquet in singles and in straight sets in mixed doubles. In the final tie against China, Hewitt defeated Wu Di in straight sets and won the mixed doubles match. His next tournament was the Apia International, where he lost in the first round against Serbian fifth seed Viktor Troicki. 

His next tournament was the 2012 Australian Open. In doubles, partnering countryman Peter Luczak, the Aussies went until the 2nd round where they lost in straight sets to the Bryan Twins. In singles, where he was awarded a wildcard, Hewitt won his first round match defeating unseeded Cedrik-Marcel Stebe in almost four hours. Long-time rival Andy Roddick, who was seeded 15th, awaited Hewitt in the second round. After dropping the first set, Hewitt won the next two. Roddick then retired due to a groin injury and Hewitt advanced. In the third round, he faced the 23rd seed Milos Raonic of Canada. Playing at night in front of a boisterous Aussie crowd, Hewitt dispatched Raonic in 3 hours 6 minutes. In the 4th round, Hewitt faced returning champ and world number one Novak Djokovic. Djokovic won the 1st two sets fairly easily, and was leading 30 in the 3rd set when Hewitt launched a spirited comeback, taking the set 64. Djokovic eventually prevailed however, winning the match in four sets, ending Hewitt's run. Lleyton's two next matches were in February at the Davis Cup, where he won 1 singles and 1 doubles match partnering Chris Guccione, what awarded Australia to go to the playoffs once more. After this Hewitt needed an operation to have a plate inserted in his toe.

Lleyton returned with a wildcard at the French Open where he lost in the first round to Bla Kavi. After this, Hewitt began his grass season at Queen's Club Championships. Unfortunately he lost in the 1st round to Croatian Ivo Karlovi. Lleyton's next tournament was the 2012 Wimbledon Championships, where he was defeated in the first round by 5th seed Jo-Wilfried Tsonga. During this match, ITF released wild cards for the 2012 Olympics, and Hewitt's name was in the singles list, marking his third appearance at the Olympic Games (2000, 2008 and now). After his loss against Tsonga, Hewitt played doubles at Wimbledon partnering countryman Chris Guccione, where they made the 3rd round before losing in 4 sets.

After Wimbledon, viewing to prepare for the Olympics, Hewitt was granted a wild card at Newport. In the opening round, he defeated Canadian Vasek Pospisil. In the 2nd round, he won in three sets, ousting American Tim Smyczek. In his next match, the Aussie won against Israeli Dudi Sela. With this win, Hewitt went on to the semi-final (his first since Halle 2010), where he was victorious over American Rajeev Ram. He lost to top seeded John Isner in the final. 

Playing in the Olympics, Hewitt was drawn against Sergiy Stakhovsky and won. Marin ili, seeded 13th, awaited in the second round and Hewitt dispatched the Croat in two sets to advance to the third round. There, he met 2nd seed Novak Djokovic. After losing the first set, Djokovic overpowered Hewitt to take the final two sets and eliminate Lleyton from the tournament. 

Beginning the American hard court season, Hewitt received a WC to the Cincinnati Masters, where he won against Mikhail Youzhny in the 1st round before losing to Viktor Troicki in the 2nd round. The Aussie's next tournament was the US Open, where he received a WC, completing the "Wild Card Slam" (received wild cards in all of the four Grand Slams in 2012). In the 1st round, Lleyton met Tobias Kamke, winning his first match at Flushing Meadows since 2009. In the 2nd round, Hewitt won a marathon five sets match against Gilles Mller. In the 3rd round, Hewitt lost to 4th seed and number 5 in the world David Ferrer, despite having set points in the 1st set. 

===2013===
Hewitt Serving at the 2013 US Open
Hewitt started off 2013 in Brisbane, where he lost in second round against Denis Istomin in straight sets. Prior to the Australian Open, Hewitt took part in the AAMI Kooyong Classic, in which he defeated Milos Raonic, Tom Berdych, and Juan Martn del Potro en route to claim his second title. Due to his excellent result in the preparation event before the 2013 Australian Open, people had high expectations of Hewitt. However, he suffered his sixth first-round exit in his home slam to world no. 9 Janko Tipsarevi in straight sets. Hewitt then played in Davis Cup action against Taiwan and won in both singles and doubles. 

He played the SAP Open next in San Jose, losing his second-round match to third-seeded American Sam Querrey in a three-set thriller. He also claimed a wild card to play in doubles with fellow Aussie Marinko Matosevic, beating the no. 1 American duo Mike Bryan and Bob Bryan in the quarterfinals, before losing to Xavier Malisse and Frank Moser in the final. With Hewitt's doubles run in the tournament, he surpassed the 100-wins mark in doubles. He next participated in the U.S. National Indoor Tennis Championships in Memphis. He faced Yen-Hsun Lu in the opening round, saving two match points to edge Lu in three sets. He lost to Denis Istomin, again in the second round. 

Hewitt moved on to play the BNP Paribas Open in Indian Wells, ousting Luk Rosol and 15th seed John Isner, before losing to Swiss No. 2 Stanislas Wawrinka. Hewitt lost to Gilles Simon in the opening round at Roland Garros. After winning the first two sets, he succumbed in five. In his first match at the Aegon Championships Queen's Club, he beat Mike Russell in three sets. He followed this with victory over Grigor Dimitrov in straight sets. He then defeated Sam Querrey to book a place in the quarterfinals. In the quarterfinals, he defeated world no. 8 Juan Martin Del Potro in three sets, to progress to the semifinals. Hewitt played Marin ili in the semifinals, but was beaten in three sets. At Wimbledon, Hewitt beat top ten player Stanislas Wawrinka in the first round in straight sets. He was then defeated by German qualifier Dustin Brown in the second round in four sets. 

In July 2013, he made it to his first final of the year at the Hall-of-Fame Championships, defeating Matthew Ebden, Prakash Amritraj, Jan Hernych, and John Isner on the way. He was beaten by Nicolas Mahut having served for the championship at 5-4 in the second set. His form continued at the Atlanta Open, defeating douard Roger-Vasselin 6-4 6-4, Rhyne Williams 7-6 6-4 and Ivan Dodig 1-6 6-3 6-0 in the quarterfinals. Hewitt played John Isner in the semifinals, but lost in three tough sets. His 2013 US Open run started well, beating Brian Baker in four sets and following up with a five-set epic upset against fellow former US Open champion Juan Martin Del Potro, where Hewitt came back from two sets to 1 down against the No.6, winning a fourth set tiebreak and sealing the match 6-1 in the fifth. He beat Evgeny Donskoy in the third round to set up a fourth round match with Mikhail Youzhny. Hewitt then lost to Youzhny 3-6 6-3 7-6 4-6 7-5, despite leading 4-1 in the fourth set and serving for the match at 5-3 in the fifth set. A measure of the success of Hewitt's 2013 season is the fact that he won the Newcombe medal as the most outstanding Australian tennis player in 2013, a year in which he returned to the world's top 100. 

===2014: 29th Career Title & 600 Wins===
Hewitt kicked off the 2014 season as an unseeded entrant into the 2014 Brisbane International. He won his first round match against Thanasi Kokkinakis in straight sets, 6-3, 7-5. His second round match was against #6 seed Feliciano Lpez, whom he defeated 7-5, 6-3. His quarterfinal encounter against qualifier Marius Copil resulted in a straight sets victory, winning 6-4, 6-2. In the semifinals Hewitt faced #2 seed Kei Nishikori. Hewitt prevailed 5-7, 6-4, 6-3, thus setting the final match against seventeen-time Grand Slam winner Roger Federer. Federer held an 18-8 record head-to-head against Hewitt. Hewitt managed to turn the tide on Federer, winning 6-1, 4-6, 6-3 and capturing the title, which was his 29th and first since 2010. As a result, his rank increased from 60th to 43rd, becoming Australian number one again. Lleyton Hewitt Australian No.1 again Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 27 January 2014. 

In the 2014 Australian Open, Hewitt played both singles and doubles as an unseeded player. In his first round singles match, he lost to #24 seed Andreas Seppi 6-7 (4-7), 3-6, 7-5, 7-5, 5-7. In doubles action, Hewitt partnered with retired and former Australian number one Patrick Rafter. However, the duo did not manage to win their first round match against Eric Butorac and Raven Klaasen, losing 4-6, 5-7. After the tournament, Hewitt's singles rank rose to #41, his highest position since late 2010. Hewitt battled for his 600th ATP win, becoming only the third active player to reach that milestone by beating Robin Haase in the 1st Round of the 2014 Sony Open Tennis. 

==National representation==

===Davis Cup===
Hewitt made his Davis Cup debut for Australia in the 1999 Davis Cup quarterfinals at age 18 against the United States in Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts. In the first rubber of the tie Hewitt faced world number 8 and Wimbledon quarter finalist Todd Martin. Hewitt would cause a major upset over Martin and would go on to win his second singles rubber against Alex O'Brien as well. The great start to his Davis Cup career would continue in the 1999 semifinals against Russia where he would record another two wins against Marat Safin and Yevgeny Kafelnikov. He would taste his first defeat in Davis Cup in the 1999 final against France but would become a Davis Cup champion anyway. In 2000 Hewitt and Australia would again make the Davis Cup final but fell to Spain in Barcelona.

In 2001 Hewitt would again be a part of the Australian team that would make the Davis Cup final but the Australians would lose the fifth rubber and hand France a 32 win. Determined to make amends for his last few finals, Hewitt led the Australian team to the 2003 Davis Cup final against Spain where he defeated Juan Carlos Ferrero in five sets. The team came away victorious 31 overall and Hewitt claimed his second Davis Cup title. By the age of 22, he had recorded more wins in Davis Cup singles than any other Australian player. Following the retirement of Pat Rafter and the semi-retirement of Mark Philippoussis, Hewitt would be forced to lead the Australian Davis Cup team with little success from his peers. In the 2006 quarterfinals in Melbourne, Hewitt defeated Belarusian Vladimir Voltchkov in just 91 minutes. Voltchkov said before the match that "Hewitt has no weapons to hurt me." Hewitt responded, "Voltchkov doesn't have a ranking 457 to hurt me." In the semifinals in Buenos Aires on clay, Hewitt lost to Argentine Jos Acasuso in five sets.

Despite a world group semifinal appearance in 2006, Hewitt and Australia would be relegated to the Asia/Oceania region in 2008. Hewitt continued showed his commitment to the team by competing in the regional ties but the team fell in the playoff stages every year between 20082011. In the 2011 playoffs, he played against Roger Federer and Stanislas Wawrinka in a grass court in Sydney, losing both matches. In doubles, together with Chris Guccione, he was able to defeat Federer and Wawrinka, but this was not enough to take Australia to the World Group. 

In 2012, Hewitt won in February his single and doubles match against China, which allowed Australia to return to the playoffs where they will play Germany in September. Hewitt is scheduled to play in this rubber.

Hewitt is the sole holder of several Australian Davis Cup records which include most wins, most singles wins, most ties played and most years played. His Davis Cup career has included wins over players who were top ten at the time which include Todd Martin, Marat Safin, Yevgeny Kafelnikov, Roger Federer, Gustavo Kuerten, Sbastien Grosjean and Juan Carlos Ferrero.

 All Davis Cup Matches: 5416 (Singles: 4013; Doubles: 143) 
 1999 Davis Cup World Group 
 Round Date Opponents Tie score Venue Surface Match Opponent Rubber score 
 QF 1618 Jul 1999 41 Chestnut Hill Hard Singles 1 Todd Martin 64, 67(17), 63, 60 
 Singles 5 Alex O'Brien 75, 64 
 SF 2426 Sep 1999 41 Brisbane Grass Singles 1 Marat Safin 76(70), 62, 46, 63 
 Singles 4 Yevgeny Kafelnikov 64, 75, 62 
 F 35 Dec 1999 32 Nice Clay (i) Singles 2 Cedric Pioline 67(79), 67(68), 57 
 Singles 5 Sebastian Grosjean 46, 36 
 2000 Davis Cup World Group 
 Round Date Opponents Tie score Venue Surface Match Opponent Rubber score 
 1R 46 Feb 2000 32 Zurich Carpet (i) Singles 1 George Bastl 46, 64, 62, 64 
 Singles 4 Roger Federer 62, 36, 76(72), 61 
 QF 79 Apr 2000 32 Adelaide Grass Singles 1 Michael Kohlmann 61, 61, 62 
 Singles 4 Rainer Schuettler 62, 36, 46 
 SF 1416 Jul 2000 50 Brisbane Grass Singles 2 Fernando Meligeni 64, 62, 63 
 Singles 4 Andre Sa 62, 61 
 F 810 Dec 2000 13 Barcelona Clay (i) Singles 1 Albert Costa 36, 61, 26, 64, 64 
 Singles 4 Juan Carlos Ferrero 26, 67(57), 64, 46 
 2001 Davis Cup World Group 
 Round Date Opponents Tie score Venue Surface Match Opponent Rubber score 
 1R 911 Feb 2001 41 Perth Grass Singles 2 Giovanni Lapentti 63, 62, 62 
 Singles 4 Nicolas Lapentti 62, 61, 61 
 QF 68 Apr 2001 31 Florianopolis Hard Singles 2 Fernando Meligeni 64, 62, 63 
 Doubles (with Rafter) Kuerten & Oncins 76(97), 76(73),76(75) 
 Singles 4 Gustavo Kuerten 76(75), 63, 76(73) 
 SF 2123 Sep 2001 41 Sydney Hard Singles 2 Jonas Bjorkman 46, 64, 76(75), 76(72) 
 Singles 4 Thomas Johansson 76(73), 57, 62, 61 
 F 30 Nov2 Dec 2001 23 Melbourne Grass Singles 1 Nicolas Escud 64, 36, 63, 36, 46 
 Doubles (with Rafter) Pioline & Santoro 62, 36, 67(57), 16 
 Singles 4 Sebastian Grosjean 63, 62, 63 
 2002 Davis Cup World Group 
 Round Date Opponents Tie score Venue Surface Match Opponent Rubber score 
 1R 1618 Jul 2002 50 Adelaide Hard Singles 1 Harsh Mankad 61, 76(72), 61 
 Doubles (with Woodbridge) Paes & Uppal 63, 76(75), 61 

====Finals Matches====

 Davis Cup Finals Matches 
 Year Venue Surface Opponents Rank Scores Result 
 1999 Nice Clay Cdric Pioline Sbastien Grosjean 1327 67, 67, 5746, 36 32 
 2000 Barcelona Clay Albert Costa Juan Carlos Ferrero 2612 36, 61, 26, 64, 6426, 67, 64, 46 13 
 2001 Melbourne Grass Nicolas Escud Sbastien Grosjean 276 64, 36, 63, 36, 4663, 62, 63 23 
 2003 Melbourne Grass Juan Carlos Ferrero 3 36, 63, 36, 76, 62 31 
 WinLoss record: 34 2 Titles 

===World Team Cup===

Hewitt made his World Team Cup debut for Australia in 2000 at the age of 19. He recorded two singles victories over Albert Costa and Marcelo Ros but fell to Yevgeny Kafelnikov in his last group stage match. Hewitt returned to the World Team Cup in 2001 and led Australia to the title by recording singles wins over lex Corretja, Magnus Norman, Tommy Haas in the group stages. In the final Hewitt defeated then world number 2 Marat Safin. Hewitt made his third appearance at the tournament in 2003 where he entered as the world number 1 singles player and went undefeated in his singles matches by recording wins over Ji Novk, James Blake and Carlos Moy but it wasn't enough to send Australia through to the final.

Fresh from their 2003 Davis Cup victory, Hewitt and Mark Philippoussis entered the 2004 World Team Cup with high hopes. In the group stages Hewitt recorded victories over Robby Ginepri and Martin Verkerk but fell to Gastn Gaudio in his last group singles match. Despite the loss, Australia still advanced to the final where Hewitt would lose to Fernando Gonzlez and Australia would lose the final 21. After a six-year hiatus Hewitt returned to compete in the 2010 World Team Cup and won his first match against John Isner but fell to Nicols Almagro in his last match.

====Finals Matches====

 World Team Cup Finals Matches 
 Year Venue Surface Opponents Rank Scores Result 
 2001 Dsseldorf Clay Marat Safin 2 63, 64 21 
 2004 Dsseldorf Clay Fernando Gonzlez 16 57, 26 12 
 WinLoss record: 11 1 Title 

===Olympics===

A 19-year-old Hewitt entered his first Olympics in 2000 and was given the fourth seeding in the draw. Hewitt was considered a strong favorite for a medal given his victory at the Sydney International earlier in the year but despite competing in his home nation Hewitt went out in the first round to Max Mirnyi 63 63. Hewitt elected not to compete in the 2004 Athens Olympic Games, deciding instead to focus on the 2004 US Open which would result in a runner up showing. He would return for his second Olympic Games in Beijing for both the singles and doubles competitions. A first round 75 76 victory over Jonas Bjrkman would set up a second round clash with the number 2 seed Rafael Nadal. Nadal eliminated Hewitt in the second round 61 62 and would go on the win the singles gold medal. Pairing up with Chris Guccione in the doubles, the team would record victories over Agustn Calleri/Juan Mnaco and Rafael Nadal/Tommy Robredo before falling to the Bryan brothers in the quarterfinals. 

Hewitt competed in his third olympics in London 2012 where he entered the men's singles event and defeated Ukrainian Sergiy Stakhovsky in the first round. He was the only Australian in any tennis event to progress past the first round. In the second round Hewitt took out 13th seeded Croatian Marin ili. In the third round Hewitt stunned the tennis world when he won the first set against the number 2 ranked Novak Djokovic, he would end up falling in three sets. He also sent an application to the International Olympic Committee to enter the men's doubles competition with Chris Guccione but the application was rejected. Following his men's doubles rejection, Hewitt decided to apply for a spot in the mixed doubles competition with Sam Stosur. The pair were granted entry and defeated Polish pair Marcin Matkowski and Agnieszka Radwaska in the first round. In the quarterfinals, Hewitt/Stosur faced British pair Andy Murray and Laura Robson, they would lose the encounter.

==Coaches==
Peter Smith, Darren Cahill, Jason Stoltenberg, Roger Rasheed, Scott Draper, Tony Roche, Nathan Healey and Brett Smith are all former coaches of Hewitt. Hewitt is currently co-coached by Tony Roche and Peter Luczak.

Lleyton Hewitt's coaches in his time on the ATP Tour:
* Peter Smith (January 1997  December 1998)
* Darren Cahill (December 1998  December 2001)
* Jason Stoltenberg (December 2001  June 2003)
* Roger Rasheed (June 2003  January 2007)
* Scott Draper (January 2007)
* Tony Roche (July 2007  August 2009)
* Nathan Healey (August 2009  August 2010)
* Brett Smith (August 2010  November 2010)
* Tony Roche (November 2010  Present) 
* Peter Luczak (January 2013  Present)

==Rivalries==

===Hewitt vs Federer===
Hewitt and Roger Federer have played each other on 27 occasions. Early in their careers, Hewitt dominated Federer, winning seven of their first nine meetings, including a victory from two sets down in the 2003 Davis Cup semifinal which allowed Australia to defeat Switzerland. However, from 2004 onward, Federer has dominated the rivalry, winning 16 of the last 18 meetings to emerge with an 189 overall head-to-head record. This is Hewitt's longest rivalry as these two first played each other as juniors in 1996. They have met in one Grand Slam final, the 2004 US Open final, where Federer won his first US Open title in a lopsided encounter in which Federer scored a bagel either side of a second set tiebreak. Federer has met Hewitt at six of the Grand Slam tournaments in which he lifted the trophy, including all five of his triumphs between 2004 and 2005. Their most recent meeting was at the 2014 Brisbane International, where Hewitt triumphed over Federer in three sets for his first title since 2010, when he also beat Federer to the Halle title.

===Hewitt vs Roddick===
Hewitt's second longest rivalry was against American Andy Roddick in which the two have played on 14 occasions. Early in the rivalry Hewitt dominated the rivalry with six wins from their first seven meetings. One of those wins included a five set victory at the 2001 US Open, the tournament in which Hewitt captured his first Singles Grand Slam title. In later years Roddick began to dominate Hewitt, with the rivalry finishing at 7 wins each upon Roddick's retirement.

===Hewitt vs Nalbandian===
A rivalry between Hewitt and Argentinian tennis players is believed to have begun at the 2002 Wimbledon final where Hewitt defeated Argentina's David Nalbandian in straight sets. The rivalry would hit boiling point in 2005 over a series of matches spread between the 2005 Australian Open and the 2005 Davis Cup Quarterfinals between Australia and Argentina. In the third round of 2005 Australian Open Hewitt faced Argentinian Juan Ignacio Chela in which Hewitt fired up Chela with his over-zealous celebrations for Chela's unforced errors, causing the Argentinian to spit at Hewitt during a change of ends. Hewitt would then face David Nalbandian in the quarterfinals with Hewitt coming out victorious 108 in the fifth set. Later in 2005 Hewitt would face Guillermo Coria in the Davis Cup quarterfinals where their rivalry would flare up however die down the following year in the 2006 Davis Cup semifinals where Argentina came out victorious 50 over Hewitt and the Australians.

==Playing style==
Lelyton Hewitt Gets Ready To Return
Hewitt is a defensive counterpuncher. He typically likes to stay back towards the baseline during a rally and will usually approach the net only to catch a short reply or drop shot from his opponent. Hewitt's lack of penetration in his groundstokes, most notably in his forehand, a typically dominant shot in most male players, forces him to rely on placement rather than simply "dominating" the point. At the 2004 Cincinnati Masters Final, commentator MaliVai Washington said that Hewitt was even more difficult to "ace" than Agassi because he gets more returns in play. Hewitt's tactics typically involve putting difficult service returns in play, consistently chasing down attempted winning shots from his opponent, and keep the ball deep until he feels he can hit a winner.

Although he is known primarily as a baseliner, Hewitt is a skilled volleyer and is known for having one of the best overhead smashes in the game. His signature shot, however, is the offensive topspin lob, a shot that he executes efficiently off both wings when his opponent approaches the net. US Davis Cup captain Patrick McEnroe, Jim Courier and Tim Henman have all described Hewitt's lob as being the best in the world (although Henman has since declared Andy Murray to have succeeded him). In Andre Agassi's book "Open", Hewitt is described as one of the best shot selectors in the history of Men's Tennis. 

==Awards==
* 2001ATP Player of the Year
* 2001Most Popular South Australian
* 2002ATP Player of the Year
* 2002Australia's Male Athlete
* 2002ESPY Best Male Tennis Player
* 2003Young Australian of the Year
* 2003Vogue Australia Sportsman of the Year
* 2003Most Popular South Australian
* 2011Newcombe Medal. Spirit of Tennis Award
* 2013Newcombe Medal. Most outstanding Australian player in 2013 
* Davis Cup Commitment Award

==Equipment==
Hewitt is currently sponsored by American athletic apparel company Athletic DNA and the Japanese sports manufacturer Yonex, with whom he signed a "Head to Toe" deal in late 2005. Yonex provides Hewitt's racquets, shoes and accessories. Hewitt's Yonex shoes (SHT-306) are inscribed with his nickname "Rusty" along with an image of an Australian flag. As of 7 August 2007, his first appearance with a new racquet at the Montreal Masters, Hewitt used to use the Yonex RQiS 1 Tour. He used to use the Yonex RDS tour 90 Model, but switched to the Yonex RDiS 100 mid in 2009. In 2011, he switched to Yonex VCORE 95 D, using a grip size of 4 3/8 (L3). Since mid-2011, he began alternating between Yonex, Nike, Adidas, Asics and Fila shoes.

==Personal life==
Hewitt is a keen supporter of Australian rules football, having played the game earlier in his career and is currently the joint No.1 ticket holder for the Adelaide Crows, alongside MP and Cabinet member Kate Ellis. He once had a close friendship with Crows star Andrew McLeod, but this broke down over much public controversy in 2005. It was not long before this that Hewitt produced a DVD titled Lleyton Hewitt: The Other Side which precipitated the falling out between him and McLeod over certain filming of Aboriginal sites.

Hewitt and Belgian tennis player Kim Clijsters started a relationship in January 2000, during the Australian Open. The two announced their engagement just before Christmas 2003, but separated in October 2004, cancelling a planned February 2005 wedding. 

On 30 January 2005, shortly after losing the 2005 Australian Open final to Marat Safin, Hewitt proposed to Australian actress Bec Cartwright after they had been dating for just six weeks. They married on 21 July 2005 and have three children: Mia Rebecca (born 29 November 2005), Cruz Lleyton (born 11 December 2008) and Lleyton Hewitt Welcomes New Son 16 December 2008 Ava Sydney (born 19 October 2010). 

In late 2008, to extend his tennis career and reduce the amount of tax he would otherwise have had to pay, the couple relocated for the European and North American season to their future holiday home in the Old Fort Bay estate, in Nassau, Bahamas. 

Hewitt has a nickname, 'Rusty', which was given to him by Darren Cahill who at the time thought Hewitt resembled the character Rusty, from the National Lampoon film series. 

==Controversies==
During the 2001 U.S. Open Hewitt complained to Swiss umpire Andreas Egli after being called for two foot-faults by a linesman and requested that the official be moved. "Look at him. Look at him and you tell me what the similarity is. Just get him off the court." The 'similarity' was possibly in reference to both his opponent James Blake and the linesman being black. Hewitt told officials what he meant by the comment was that the same linesman made both foot-fault calls. Tournament referee Brian Earley decided not to fine Hewitt, saying, "There was no gesture in the direction of Mr. Blake when he made the comments about 'the similarities'. He did not use Mr. Blake's name. He didn't say 'my opponent.'" 

At the French Open of the same year, Hewitt was involved in yet more controversy when he twice called match officials "spastic." Following his outbursts, a complaint was received from the Cerebral Palsy Association in Australia. Hewitt later apologised, stating "If I did say that in the heat of the battle, then I apologise. I didn't intend to offend anyone." 

==Career statistics==

===Singles performance timeline===

 Tournament 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 SR WL Win % 
 Grand Slam Tournaments 
 Australian Open 1R 1R 2R 4R 3R 1R 4R 4R F 2R 3R 4R 1R 4R 1R 4R 1R 1R 0 / 18 3018 62.50 
 French Open A LQ 1R 4R QF 4R 3R QF A 4R 4R 3R 3R 3R A 1R 1R 1R 0 / 14 2814 66.67 
 Wimbledon A LQ 3R 1R 4R W 1R QF SF QF 4R 4R QF 4R 2R 1R 2R 1 / 15 3914 73.58 
 US Open A LQ 3R SF W SF QF F SF QF 2R A 3R 1R A 3R 4R 1 / 13 4612 79.31 
 WinLoss 01 01 54 114 163 153 94 174 163 124 94 83 84 84 12 54 44 02 2 / 60 14458 71.29 
 Year-End Championship 
 ATP World Tour Finals Did Not Qualify RR W W DNQ F A Did Not Qualify 2 / 4 135 72.22 

===Grand Slam finals===

====Singles: 4 (22)====

 Outcome Year Championship Surface Opponent Score 
 Winner 2001 US Open Hard Pete Sampras 76(74), 61, 61 
 Winner 2002 Wimbledon Grass David Nalbandian 61, 63, 62 
 Runner-up 2004 US Open Hard Roger Federer 06, 67(37), 06 
 Runner-up 2005 Australian Open Hard Marat Safin 61, 36, 46, 46 

====Doubles: 1 (10)====

 Outcome Year Championship Surface Partner Opponent Score 
 Winner 2000 US Open Hard Max Mirnyi Ellis Ferreira Rick Leach 64, 57, 76(75) 

====Mixed doubles: 1 (01)====

 Outcome Year Championship Surface Partner Opponent Score 
 Runner-up 2000 Wimbledon Grass Kim Clijsters Kimberly Po Donald Johnson 46, 67(37) 

===Year-End Championships finals===

====Singles: 3 (21)====

 Outcome Year Championship Surface Opponent Score 
 Winner 2001 Sydney Hard (i) Sbastien Grosjean 63, 63, 64 
 Winner 2002 Shanghai Hard (i) Juan Carlos Ferrero 75, 75, 26, 26, 64 
 Runner-up 2004 Houston Hard Roger Federer 36, 26 

===Masters Series finals===

====Singles: 7 (25)====

 Outcome Year Championship Surface Opponent Score 
 Runner-up 2000 Stuttgart Hard (i) Wayne Ferreira 67(68), 63, 76(75), 67(27), 26 
 Winner 2002 Indian Wells Hard Tim Henman 61, 62 
 Runner-up 2002 Cincinnati Hard Carlos Moy 57, 67(57) 
 Runner-up 2002 Paris Carpet (i) Marat Safin 67(47), 06, 46 
 Winner 2003 Indian Wells (2) Hard Gustavo Kuerten 61, 61 
 Runner-up 2004 Cincinnati (2) Hard Andre Agassi 36, 63, 26 
 Runner-up 2005 Indian Wells Hard Roger Federer 26, 46, 46 

==See also==

* Wimbledon champions (Men's Singles)
* US Open champions (Men's Singles)
* List of Grand Slam Men's Singles champions

==References==

==External links==

* 
* 
* Lleyton Hewitt profile at Tennis Australia
* The official website for himself and his wife Bec

 
 



[[Lars von Trier]]

Lars von Trier (; born Lars Trier; 30 April 1956) is a Danish film director and screenwriter. He is closely associated with the Dogme 95 collective  an avant-garde filmmaking movement  although his own films have taken a variety of approaches. His work has frequently divided critical opinion. 

Von Trier began making films at age eleven. Von Trier suffers periodically from depression, as well as various fears and phobias, including an intense fear of flying. As he quipped in an interview, "basically, I'm afraid of everything in life, except filmmaking." His first publicly released film was the 1977 experimental short The Orchid Gardener and his first feature came seven years later with The Element of Crime (1984). Among many prizes, awards and nominations, he is the recipient of the Palme d'Or (for Dancer in the Dark), the Grand Prix, and the Prix du Jury at the Cannes Film Festival.

== Early life and career ==
Lars Trier was born in Kongens Lyngby, north of Copenhagen, the son of Inger Trier (ne Hst, 191589). He had believed that his biological father was Ulf Trier (190778), until his mother revealed to him on her deathbed that he had been conceived as a result of an affair she had with her employer, Fritz Michael Hartmann. His mother considered herself a Communist, while his father was a Social Democrat, and both were committed nudists, In "Trier on von Trier", by Stig Bjorkman, 2005 and the young Lars went on several childhood holidays to nudist camps. They regarded the disciplining of children as reactionary. Trier has noted that he was brought up in an atheist family, and that although Ulf Trier was Jewish, he was not religious. His parents did not allow much room in their household for "feelings, religion, or enjoyment", and also refused to make any rules for their children, with complex results for von Trier's personality and development. He began making his own films at the age of 11 after receiving a Super-8 camera as a gift and continued to be involved in independent moviemaking throughout his high school years. 

In 1979, he was enrolled in the National Film School of Denmark. His peers at the film school nicknamed him "von Trier". The name is sort of an inside-joke with the von (German "of" or "from" used as a nobiliary particle), suggesting nobility and a certain arrogance, while Lars is a very common and Trier not an unusual name in Denmark. He reportedly kept the "von" name in homage to Erich von Stroheim and Josef von Sternberg, both of whom also added it later in life. During his time as a student at the school he made the films Nocturne and The Last Detail, both of which won Best Film awards at the Munich International Festival of Film Schools. In 1983 he graduated with the 57-minute Images of Liberation, which became the first Danish school film to receive a regular theatrical release. 

== Europe trilogy ==
After graduation he began work on the very stylised drama The Element of Crime (Forbrydelsens element 1984), which won a the Technical Grand Prize at the 1984 Cannes Film Festival. 

His next film was Epidemic (1987), which was also shown at Cannes in the Un Certain Regard section. The film is partly a dark science fiction-tale of a future plague epidemic, and partly chronicles two filmmakers (played by Lars von Trier and screenwriter Niels Vrsel) preparing that film, with the two storylines ultimately colliding.

For television von Trier directed Medea (1988), which won the Jean d'Arcy prize in France. It was based on a screenplay by Carl Th. Dreyer and starred Udo Kier.

He completed the Europe-trilogy in 1991 with Europa (released as Zentropa in the US), which won the Prix du Jury at the 1991 Cannes Film Festival and picked up awards at other major festivals.

In 1990 he also directed the music video for the worldwide hit "Bakerman" by Laid Back. This video was reused in 2006 by the English DJ and artist Shaun Baker who did a remake of Bakerman.

== Zentropa and The Kingdom ==
In 1992 he and producer Peter Aalbk Jensen founded the movie production company Zentropa Entertainment, named after a train company in Europa, their most recent film at the time. The reason for doing this was to achieve financial independence and to have total creative control. The production company has produced many movies other than von Trier's own as well as television series. It also has produced hardcore sex films: Constance (1998), Pink Prison (1999), HotMen CoolBoyz (2000) and All About Anna (2005).

To make money for his newly founded company, he made The Kingdom (Riget, 1994) and The Kingdom II (Riget II, 1997), a pair of miniseries recorded in the Danish national hospital, the name "Riget" being a colloquial name for the hospital known as Rigshospitalet (lit. The Kingdom's Hospital) in Danish. A projected third instalment in the series was derailed by the 1998 death of Ernst-Hugo Jregrd, who played Helmer, one of the major characters.

== Dogme 95 ==
In 1995, Lars von Trier and Thomas Vinterberg presented their manifesto for a new cinematic movement which they called Dogme 95. It would however take a while before the first of these films appeared, and at this point many thought of the concept mainly as a radical idea with no future.

In 1996, von Trier conducted an unusual theatrical experiment in Copenhagen involving 53 actors, which he titled Psychomobile 1: The World Clock. A documentary chronicling the project was directed by Jesper Jargil, and was released in 2000 with the title De Udstillede (The Exhibited).

Von Trier's next film, Breaking the Waves (1996), the first film in von Trier's 'Golden Heart Trilogy', won the Grand Prix at Cannes and featured Emily Watson, who was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress. Its grainy images and hand-held photography pointed towards Dogme 95. The second was The Idiots (1998), nominated for a Palme d'Or, which he presented in person at the Cannes Film Festival notwithstanding his dislike of travelling. Dancer in the Dark (2000) was the final component of the trilogy.

As originator of the Dogme 95 concept, which has led to international interest in Danish film as a whole, he has inspired filmmakers all over the world. Trier and Thomas Vinterberg, who created the Dogme 95 Manifesto and the "Vow of Chastity" together with their fellow Dogme directors Kristian Levring and Sren Kragh-Jacobsen shared in 2008 the European Film Award European Achievement in World Cinema.

== Explicit images ==
Von Trier's use of sexually explicit images in The Idiots (1998) started a wave of arthouse mainstream films with unsimulated sex, such as Catherine Breillat's Romance (1999), Baise-Moi (2000), Intimacy (2001), Vincent Gallo's The Brown Bunny (2003) and Michael Winterbottom's 9 Songs (2004).

In 1998, Lars von Trier also made history by having his company Zentropa be the world's first mainstream film company to produce hardcore pornographic films. Three of these films, Constance (1998), Pink Prison (1999) and the adult/mainstream crossover-feature All About Anna (2005), were made primarily for a female audience, and were extremely successful in Europe, with the first two being directly responsible for the March 2006 legalising of pornography in Norway. 

Lars von Trier's initiative spearheaded a European wave of female-friendly porn films from directors such as Anna Span, Erika Lust and Petra Joy, while von Trier's company Zentropa was forced to abandon the experiment due to pressure from English business partners. Thomas Vilhelm: Filmbyen (Ekstra Bladets Forlag, 2003), ISBN 978-87-7731-274-8, page 74 In July 2009, women's magazine Cosmopolitan ranked Pink Prison as No. 1 in its Top Five of the best women's porn, calling it the "role model for the new porn-generation". Cosmopolitan (German edition), July 2009, page 30 Lars von Trier would return to explicit images in his self-directed Antichrist (2009), exploring darker themes, but ran into severe censorship problems when he tried once more with Nymphomaniac (2013).

== 2000s ==
In 2000, von Trier premiered a musical featuring Icelandic musician Bjrk, Dancer in the Dark. The film won the Palme d'Or at Cannes. The song "I've Seen It All" (which Trier co-wrote) received an Academy Award nomination for Best Song.

The Five Obstructions (2003), made by Lars von Trier and Jrgen Leth, is a documentary, but also incorporates lengthy sections of experimental films. The premise is that Lars von Trier challenges director Jrgen Leth, his friend and mentor, to remake his old experimental film The Perfect Human (1967) five times, each time with a different 'obstruction' (or obstacle) specified by von Trier. 

He then directed two films in his announced 'US trilogy': Dogville (2003), starring Nicole Kidman and Manderlay (2005), starring Bryce Dallas Howard in the same role  as Grace. Both films are extremely stylised, with the actors playing their parts on a nearly empty soundstage with little but chalk marks on the floor to indicate the sets. Both films had huge casts of major international actors (Harriet Andersson, Lauren Bacall, James Caan, Danny Glover, Willem Dafoe, etc.), and questioned various issues relating to American society, such as intolerance in Dogville and slavery in Manderlay.

Controversy erupted on the 2004 set for Manderlay when actor John C. Reilly walked off the Trollhttan, Sweden, set in late March. Reilly walked off the film when he learned that an upcoming scene involved the slaughter of a donkey for food. The film's producer says the animalwho was old and not expected to live much longerwas killed off-camera by a certified veterinarian, in accordance with Swedish law. Reilly was replaced by eljko Ivanek. 

The US was also the scene for Dear Wendy (2005), a feature film directed by von Trier's "Dogme-brother" Thomas Vinterberg from a script by von Trier. It starred Jamie Bell and Bill Pullman and dealt with gun worship and violence in American society.

In 2006, von Trier released a Danish-language comedy film, The Boss of It All. It was shot using a process that von Trier has called Automavision, which involves the director choosing the best possible fixed camera position and then allowing a computer to randomly choose when to tilt, pan or zoom.

It was followed by an autobiographical film, (2007), scripted by von Trier but directed by Jacob Thuesen, which tells the story of von Trier's years as a student at the National Film School of Denmark. It stars Jonatan Spang as von Trier's alter ego, called "Erik Nietzsche", and is narrated by von Trier himself. All main characters in the film are based on real people from the Danish film industry, with the thinly veiled portrayals including Jens Albinus as director Nils Malmros, Dejan uki as screenwriter Mogens Rukov and Sren Pilmark in an especially unflattering portrayal as sex-obsessed school principal Henning Camre.

Von Trier's next feature film was Antichrist, an art film about "a grieving couple who retreat to their cabin in the woods, hoping a return to Eden will repair their broken hearts and troubled marriage; but nature takes its course and things go from bad to worse". The film, which includes sexually explicit content, stars Willem Dafoe and Charlotte Gainsbourg. It premiered in competition at the 2009 Cannes Film Festival, where the festival's jury honoured the movie by giving the Best Actress award to Gainsbourg. The Cannes Film Festival Ecumenical Jury, which gives prizes for movies that promote spiritual, humanist and universal values, also "honoured" the film with a special "anti-award"; a spokesman for the jury described it as "the most misogynist movie from the self-proclaimed biggest director in the world." In 2010 the Swedish newspaper Dagens Nyheter reported on their website that the film production company Zentropa is reportedly making more revenue from suing movie pirates in Germany that have downloaded Antichrist illegally than from box office and DVD sales, demanding a payment of around 1,300 euros per download to avoid legal action. 

== 2010s ==
In 2011 Von Trier released Melancholia, a psychological disaster drama that was shot between 22 July and 8 September 2010 at Film i Vst's studios in Trollhttan, Sweden (exterior scenes were filmed in the area surrounding the Tjolholm Castle). Magnolia Pictures acquired the distribution rights for North America. The film was in competition at the 2011 Cannes Film Festival. 

Following Melancholia, von Trier commenced the production of Nymphomaniac, a film about the sexual awakening of a woman played by Charlotte Gainsbourg. The director explained his inspiration for the project:

my DP on , Manuel Claro, at one point voiced a surprising prejudice. He urged me not to fall into the trap that so many aging directors fall into  that the women get younger and younger and nuder and nuder. That's all I needed to hear. I most definitely intend for the women in my films to get younger and younger and nuder and nuder. 

In early December 2013, a four-hour version of the five-and-a-half-hour film was shown to the press in a private preview session and the cast also includes Stellan Skarsgrd (in his sixth von Trier film), Shia LaBeouf, Willem Dafoe, Jamie Bell, Christian Slater and Uma Thurman. In response to claims that he has merely created a "porn film", Skarsgrd stated: "... if you look at this film, it's actually a really bad porn movie, even if you fast forward. And after a while you find you don't even react to the explicit scenes. They become as natural as seeing someone eating a bowl of cereal." Von Trier refused to attend the private screening due to the negative response that he received to Nazi-related remarks at the 2011 Cannes Film Festival, which led to his expulsion from the festival. In the director's defense, Skarsgrd stated at the screening, "Everyone knows he's not a Nazi, and it was disgraceful the way the press had these headlines saying he was." 

For its public release in the UK, the four-hour version of Nymphomaniac was divided into two volumesVolume I and Volume IIand the film's UK premiere was on 22 February 2014. In interviews prior to the UK release date, Gainsbourg and co-star Stacy Martin revealed that prosthetic vaginas, body doubles, and special effects were used for the production of the film. Martin also stated that the film's characters are a reflection of the director himself and referred to the experience as an "honour" that she enjoyed. 

The film was also released in two volumes for the Australian release on 20 March 2014, with an interval separating the back-to-back sections. In his review of the film for 3RRR film criticism program, "Plato's Cave", presenter Josh Nelson stated that, since the production of Breaking the Waves, the filmmaker that Von Trier is most akin to is Alfred Hitchcock, due to his portrayal of feminine issues. Nelson also mentioned filmmaker Andrei Tarkovsky as another influence, who Von Trier himself has also cited. 

In February 2014, an uncensored version of Volume I was shown at the Berlin Film Festival, with no announcement of when or if the complete five-and-a-half-hour Nymphomaniac would be made available to the public Variety.com .

== Phobias ==
Von Trier suffers from multiple phobias, including an intense fear of flying. His fear of air travel frequently places severely limiting constraints on him and his crew, necessitating that virtually all of his films be shot in either Denmark or Sweden, even those set in the United States or other foreign countries. Von Trier has had a number of his films featured at the Cannes Film Festival over the course of his career, and each time has insisted on driving from Denmark to France for the festival and back.

On numerous occasions von Trier has also stated that he suffers from occasional depression which renders him incapable of performing his work and unable to fulfill social obligations. 

== Filming techniques ==
Lars von Trier has said that "a film should be like a stone in your shoe". To create original art he feels that filmmakers must distinguish themselves stylistically from other films, often by placing restrictions on the filmmaking process. The most famous restriction is the cinematic "vow of chastity" of the Dogme95 movement with which he is associated, though only one of his films, The Idiots, is an actual Dogme 95 film. In Dancer in the Dark, jump shots and dramatically-different color palettes and camera techniques were used for the "real world" and musical portions of the film, and in Dogville everything was filmed on a sound stage with no set where the walls of the buildings in the fictional town were marked as lines on the floor.

Von Trier often shoots digitally and operates the camera himself, preferring to continuously shoot the actors in-character without stopping between takes. In Dogville he let actors stay in character for hours, in the style of method acting. These techniques often put great strain on actors, most famously with Bjrk during the filming of Dancer in the Dark. Often he uses the same regular group of actors in many of his films: some of his frequently used actors are Jean-Marc Barr, Udo Kier and Stellan Skarsgrd.

He is heavily influenced by the work of Carl Theodor Dreyer and the film The Night Porter. He was so inspired by the short film The Perfect Human directed by Jrgen Leth that he challenged Leth to redo the short five times in feature film The Five Obstructions. 

== Trilogies ==
Von Trier has on occasion referred to his films as falling into thematic and stylistic trilogies. This pattern began with his first feature film, marking the beginning of The Europa trilogy, though he claims a trilogy was not initially planned, instead being applied to the films in retrospect. The Europe trilogy illuminated the traumas of Europe in the past and future. This trilogy includes The Element of Crime (1984), Epidemic (1987) and Europa (1991).

The Golden Heart trilogy was about naive heroines who maintain their 'golden hearts' despite the tragedies they experience. This trilogy consists of Breaking the Waves (1996), The Idiots (1998) and Dancer in the Dark (2000). While all three films are sometimes associated with the Dogme 95 movement, only The Idiots is a certified Dogme 95 film.

The USA: Land of Opportunities trilogy follows the character of Grace, and is set in a stylised American past. Von Trier has stated he was inspired to make a trilogy about the United States as a reaction to Americans at the Cannes film festival who said he had no right to make the Dancer in the Dark, which was often viewed as being critical of a country he has never been to (and has no intention of ever visiting, due to his phobia of travel); however, von Trier himself has stated in interviews he did not intend it to be a criticism of America, saying the film takes place in a "fictional America". Von Trier proposed the films as a series of sermons on Americas sins and hypocrisy, inspired by the fact that American movie makers have made many movies about places across the world to which they have not travelled. All three movies will be shot in the same distinctive style, on a bare sound stage with no set and buildings marked by lines on the floor. This style is inspired by 1970s televised theatre. The trilogy will consist of Dogville (2003), Manderlay (2005) and the so far not produced Wasington.

The Depression Trilogy consists of Antichrist, Melancholia and Nymphomaniac. All three star Charlotte Gainsbourg and deal with characters who suffer depression or grief in different ways. This trilogy is said to represent the depression that von Trier himself experiences.

The Kingdom (Riget) was planned as a trilogy of three seasons with 13 episodes in total, but the third season was not filmed due to death of star Ernst-Hugo Jregrd shortly after completion of the second season.

== Controversy at 2011 Cannes Film Festival ==
On 19 May 2011, Cannes Film Festival's board of directors declared von Trier persona non-grata for comments he made during a press conference for his film Melancholia the day before, an unprecedented move for the film festival. Responding to a question by The Times film critic Kate Muir about his German roots and his comments in a Danish film magazine about the Nazi aesthetic, von Trier claimed to have some sympathy for and understanding of Adolf Hitler, and then jokingly claimed to be a Nazi himself: 
Von Trier at the 2011 Cannes Film Festival.
::What can I say? I understand Hitler, but I think he did some wrong things, yes, absolutely. ... He's not what you would call a good guy, but I understand much about him, and I sympathise with him a little bit. But come on, I'm not for the Second World War, and I'm not against Jews. ... I am of course very much for Jews, no not too much, because Israel is pain in the ass, but still how can I get out of this sentence. 

Referring to the art of Nazi architect Albert Speer, von Trier added: " ... he had some talent that was kind of possible for him to use during ... Ok, I'm a Nazi." Then, to Toronto Star film critic Peter Howell, who questioned whether Melancholia could be an answer to Hollywood blockbusters and asked von Trier if he could "envision doing a film on a grander scale than this", von Trier replied: "On a grander scale? Yeah. Yeah that's what we Nazis, we have a tendency to try to do things on a greater scale. Yeah, maybe you could persuade me into the final solution with journalists."

Hours later, von Trier released a brief statement of apology about his comments at the press conference: "If I have hurt someone this morning by the words I said at the press conference, I sincerely apologise. I am not anti-semitic or racially prejudiced in any way, nor am I a Nazi." The next day, the festival directors held an extraordinary meeting, deciding his remarks were "unacceptable, intolerable and contrary to the ideals of humanity and generosity that preside over the very existence of the festival. The board of directors condemns these comments and declares Lars von Trier persona non-grata at the Festival de Cannes, with effect immediately." 

Afterwards, von Trier held a news conference of his own in Danish. His first remark to the Danish journalists was: "If any of you journalists will beat me, so just do it. I will enjoy it." He went on to say that "The Holocaust is the worst crime that ever happened. I have nothing against Jews. I have a Jewish name, and all my children have Jewish names." He admitted that his remarks about the Nazis had been misguided, saying "It was really stupidly done and it was in the wrong forum. At the press conference with Danish journalists, there were no problems, but I do not think the international journalists understand my Danish humor." But he also said he was proud to have been kicked out of the Cannes festival: "I am proud to have been declared 'persona non grata'. It is perhaps the first time in cinematic history, it has happened. ... I think one reason is that French people treated the Jews badly during World War II. Therefore, it is a sensitive topic for them. I respect the Cannes festival very highly, but I also understand that they are very angry at me right now." 

Speaking to other news outlets he said that his comments were "very sarcastic and very rude, but that's very Danish." He also added, "I don't sympathize with Hitler for one second." He explained to the New York Times in May 2011, "I got carried away. I feel this obligation, which is completely stupid and very unprofessional, to kind of entertain the crowd a little bit." 

In the October 2011 issue of GQ, von Trier is quoted in an interview saying he was not really sorry for the comments he made, only sorry he didn't make it clear that he was joking. He added, "I can't be sorry for what I saidit's against my nature." On 5 October 2011, von Trier was interviewed by police in Denmark about his remarks at Cannes. Afterwards, he announced that he had 'decided from this day forth to refrain from all public statements and interviews'. 

In keeping with his announcement in October 2011, Von Trier did not attend a private press screening of his 2013 film Nymphomaniac. Skarsgrd stated in December 2013, following a Copenhagen screening of the film, "The explosions in Cannes had nothing to do with Lars ... and that's why he doesn't want to talk, because he feels insecure. He feels that whatever he says can be turned into something outrageous." At the screening of Nymphomaniac at the 64th Berlin International Film Festival in February 2014, Von Trier attended a photocall wearing a t-shirt that had the words "Persona non grata" and the golden leaf logo of the Cannes Film Festival. 

== Honours ==
Von Trier was made a Knight of the Order of the Dannebrog on 14 January 1997. Ten years later von Trier decided to hand back the prize, saying that the Danish royal family are just "simple people of bad quality". 

Sight & Sound magazine conducts a poll every ten years of the world's finest film directors to find out the Ten Greatest Films of All Time. This poll has been going since 1992, and has become the most recognised poll of its kind in the world. In 2012, Cyrus Frisch voted for "Dancer in the Dark". Frisch commented: "A superbly imaginative film that leaves conformity in shambles." 

== Personal life ==
In 1989, Von Trier's mother revealed on her deathbed that the man who he thought was his father was not, and that she had had a tryst with her former employer, Fritz Michael Hartmann (19092000), who descended from a long line of Roman Catholic classical musicians (his grandfather was Emil Hartmann, his great grandfather J.P.E. Hartmann, his uncles included Niels Gade and Johan Ernst Hartmann and thus Niels Viggo Bentzon was his cousin). She stated that she did this to give her son "artistic genes". 

Until that point I thought I had a Jewish background. But I'm really more of a Nazi. I believe that my biological father's German family went back two further generations. Before she died, my mother told me to be happy that I was the son of this other man. She said my foster father had had no goals and no strength. But he was a loving man. And I was very sad about this revelation. And you then feel manipulated when you really do turn out to be creative. If I'd known that my mother had this plan, I would have become something else. I would have shown her. The slut! 

During the German occupation of Denmark, Fritz Michael Hartmann worked as a civil servant and joined a resistance group (Frit Danmark), actively counteracting any pro-German and pro-Nazi colleagues in his department. Another member of this infiltrative resistance group was Hartmann's colleague Viggo Kampmann, who would later become prime minister of Denmark. 

After four awkward meetings with his biological father, the man refused further contact. The revelations led von Trier to attempt to "erase" the connections with his stepfather by converting to Catholicism, and to rework his filmmaking into a style emphasising "honesty". 

I don't know if I'm all that Catholic really. I'm probably not. Denmark is a very Protestant country. Perhaps I only turned Catholic to piss off a few of my countrymen. 

In 2009, he declared, "I'm a very bad Catholic. In fact I'm becoming more and more of an atheist." Fielder, Miles (4 August 2009). . The Big Issue Scotland. Retrieved 11 September 2011. 

== Filmography ==

 Year Film Rotten Tomatoes Metacritic IMDb 
 1977 The Orchid Gardener - - - 
 1982 Images of Liberation N/A N/A 5.1/10 
 1984 The Element of Crime 77% N/A 6.9/10 
 1987 Epidemic 33% 66% 6.1/10 
 1991 Europa 85% 66% 7.7/10 
 1996 Breaking the Waves 86% 76% 7.9/10 
 1998 The Idiots 70% 47% 6.9/10 
 2000 Dancer in the Dark 68% 61% 8.0/10 
 2003 The Five Obstructions 88% 79% 7.5/10 
 Dogville 70% 59% 8.0/10 
 2005 Manderlay 51% 46% 7.4/10 
 2006 The Boss of It All 74% 71% 6.7/10 
 2009 Antichrist 48% 49% 6.6/10 
 2011 Melancholia 77% 80% 7.1/10 
 2013 Nymphomaniac: Volume I] 76% 64% 7.3/10 
 Nymphomaniac: Volume II] 60% 60% 7.0/10 

== References ==

=== Notes ===

=== Further reading ===
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* Sthl, Leo (2012): Die Kunst im Horrorgenre: Gewaltexzesse und Pornografie in Lars von Triers Antichrist. Diplomica, Hamburg 2013, ISBN 978-3955490997. Retrieved 09. September 2013. 
*
*
*
* Tiefenbach, Georg: Drama und Regie (Writing and Directing): Lars von Trier's Breaking the Waves, Dancer in the Dark, Dogville. 2010 Knigshausen & Neumann. ISBN 978-3-8260-4096-2

== External links ==

* 
* 
* Lars from 110
* Production Company
* The Director Interviews: Lars von Trier, The Boss of It All at Filmmaker Magazine
* Senses of Cinema: Great Directors Critical Database
* Geoffrey Macnab, "I'm a Control Freak  But I Was Not in Control" (Geoffrey Macnab Talks to Lars von Trier), The Guardian (22 September 2006).
* Slave to Cinema
* The Age Interview
* Time Out Interview



[[Monty Python's Life of Brian]]

Monty Python's Life of Brian, also known as Life of Brian, is a 1979 British comedy film starring and written by the comedy group Monty Python (Graham Chapman, John Cleese, Terry Gilliam, Eric Idle, Terry Jones and Michael Palin), and directed by Jones. It tells the story of Brian Cohen (played by Chapman), a young Jewish man who is born on the same day as, and next door to, Jesus Christ and is subsequently mistaken for the Messiah.

The film contains themes of religious satire that were controversial at the time of its release, drawing accusations of blasphemy and protests from some religious groups. Thirty-nine local authorities in the UK either imposed an outright ban, or imposed an X (18 years) certificate, effectively preventing the film from being shown, as the distributors said the film could not be shown unless it was unedited and carried the original AA (14) certificate. Some countries, including Ireland and Norway, banned its showing, with a few of these bans lasting decades. The film makers used such notoriety to benefit their marketing campaign, with posters stating "So funny it was banned in Norway!"

The film was a box-office success, grossing fourth-highest of any film in the United Kingdom in 1979 and highest of any British film in the United States that year. It has remained popular since then, receiving positive reviews. The film received a 96% "Fresh" rating on Rotten Tomatoes with the consensus "One of the more cutting-edge films of the 1970s, this religious farce from the classic comedy troupe is as poignant as it is funny and satirical", and it was named "greatest comedy film of all time" by several magazines and television networks. It is the first Monty Python film to receive an R rating in the United States. 

==Plot==
Brian Cohen is born in a stable next door to the one in which Jesus is born, which initially confuses the three wise men who come to praise the future King of the Jews. Brian grows up an idealistic young man who resents the continuing Roman occupation of Judea. While attending Jesus's Sermon on the Mount, Brian becomes infatuated with an attractive young rebel, Judith. His desire for her and hatred for the Romans lead him to join the People's Front of Judea (PFJ), one of many fractious and bickering independence movements, who spend more time fighting each other than the Romans.

After several misadventures, and escaping from Pontius Pilate, the fugitive winds up in a line-up of would-be mystics and prophets who harangue the passing crowd in a plaza. Forced to come up with something plausible in order to blend in and keep the guards off his back, Brian babbles pseudo-religious truisms, and quickly attracts a small but intrigued audience. Once the guards have left, Brian tries to put the episode behind him, but he has unintentionally inspired a movement. He grows frantic when he finds that some people have started to follow him around, with even the slightest unusual occurrence being hailed as a "miracle". After slipping away from the mob, Brian runs into Judith, and they spend the night together. In the morning, Brian opens the curtains to discover an enormous crowd of people outside his mother's house, all proclaiming him to be the Messiah. Brian's mother protests: "He's not the Messiah, he's a very naughty boy". Brian finds himself unable to change their minds, because his every word and action are immediately seized as points of doctrine.

The hapless Brian finds no solace at the PFJ's headquarters, where people fling their afflicted bodies at him demanding miracle cures. After sneaking out the back, Brian finally is captured and scheduled to be crucified. Meanwhile, a huge crowd has assembled outside the palace. Pilate (together with the visiting Biggus Dickus) tries to quell the feeling of revolution by granting them the decision of who should be pardoned. The crowd, however, simply shouts out names containing the letter "r", in order to mock Pilate's speech impediment. Eventually, Judith appears in the crowd and calls for the release of Brian, which the crowd echoes, since the name contains the letter "r". Pilate then agrees to "welease Bwian".

The order from Pilate is eventually relayed to the guards, but in a moment parodying the climax of the film Spartacus, various crucified people all claim to be "Brian of Nazareth" (one man shouting "I'm Brian and so's my wife") and the wrong man is released. Various other opportunities for a reprieve for Brian are denied as, one by one, his "allies" (including Judith and his mother) step forward to explain why they are leaving the "noble freedom fighter" hanging in the hot sun. Hope is renewed when a crack suicide squad from the Judean People's Front (not to be confused with the PFJ) come charging towards the Romans, but rather than fighting to release Brian they commit mass suicide as a political statement. Condemned to a long and painful death, Brian finds his spirits lifted by his fellow sufferers, who break into song with "Always Look on the Bright Side of Life". Alan Parker, Mick O'Shea (2006) And Now For Something Completely Digital: The Complete Illustrated Guide to Monty Python CDs and DVDs The Disinformation Company, 2006 

==Cast==
A list of all the characters given actual names in the script, or with a spoken role. All names and character descriptions are taken from the published script. Each Python (especially Terry Gilliam) also played various bystanders and hangers-on. The Pythons themselves are listed first (in alphabetical order) followed by the rest of the cast in order of appearance.
Chapman as Brian Cohen in Life of Brian

* Graham Chapman  Brian, Biggus Dickus, 2nd wise man
* John Cleese  Reg, High priest, Centurion of the Yard, Deadly Dirk, Arthur, 1st wise man
* Terry Gilliam  Another person further forward (at Mount  "Do you hear that? 'Blessed are the Greek'!"), Blood and Thunder prophet, Geoffrey, Gaoler, Frank
* Eric Idle  Mr Cheeky, Stan/Loretta, Harry the Haggler, Culprit woman who casts first stone, Intensely dull youth, Otto, Gaoler's assistant, Mr Frisbee III
* Terry Jones  Brian Cohen's mother (Mandy), Colin, Simon the Holy Man, Saintly passer-by
* Michael Palin  Mr Big-Nose, Francis, Mrs A, Ex-leper, Ben, Pontius Pilate, Boring Prophet, Eddie, Nisus Wettus, 3rd wise man
* Kenneth Colley  Jesus Christ
* Neil Innes  A weedy Samaritan
* Gwen Taylor  Mrs Big-Nose, Woman with sick donkey, young girl
* Terence Bayler  Gregory, Dennis
* Carol Cleveland  Mrs Gregory, Elsie
* Charles McKeown  Man further forward (at Mount), Stig, Blind Man, False Prophet, Giggling Guard
* Chris Langham - Alfonso, Giggling guard
* Sue Jones-Davies  Judith Iscariot
* John Young  Matthias
* Bernard McKenna  Stoner's Helper, Parvus
* Spike Milligan  Spike
* George Harrison (uncredited)  Mr Papadopoulos

Several characters remained unnamed during the film but do have names that are used in the soundtrack album track listing and elsewhere. There is no mention in the film of the fact that Eric Idle's ever-cheerful joker is called 'Mr. Cheeky', or that the Roman guard played by Michael Palin is named 'Nisus Wettus'.

Spike Milligan plays a prophet, ignored because his acolytes are chasing after Brian. By coincidence he was visiting his old World War II battlefields in Tunisia where the film was being made. The Pythons were alerted to this one morning and he was promptly included in the scene that just happened to be being filmed. He disappeared again in the afternoon before he could be included in any of the close-up or publicity shots for the film. 

==Production==
A cameo appearance by Executive Producer George Harrison (right)
There are various stories about the origins of Life of Brian. Shortly after the release of Monty Python and the Holy Grail (1975), Eric Idle flippantly suggested that the title of the Pythons' forthcoming feature would be Jesus Christ  Lust for Glory (a play on the UK title for the 1970 American film Patton). This was after he had become frustrated at repeatedly being asked what it would be called, despite the troupe not having given the matter of a third film any consideration. However, they shared a distrust of organised religion, and, after witnessing the critically acclaimed Holy Grails enormous financial turnover, confirming an appetite among the fans for more cinematic endeavours, they soon began to seriously consider a film lampooning the New Testament era in the same way Holy Grail had lampooned Arthurian legend. All they needed was an idea for a plot. Eric Idle and Terry Gilliam, while promoting Holy Grail in Amsterdam, had come up with a sketch in which Jesus' cross was falling apart because of the idiotic carpenters who built it and he angrily tells them how to do it correctly. However, after an early brainstorming stage, and despite being non-believers, they agreed that Jesus was "definitely a good guy" and found nothing to mock in his actual teachings: "He's not particularly funny, what he's saying isn't mockable, it's very decent stuff..." said Idle later. After settling on the name Brian for their new protagonist, one idea considered was that of "the 13th disciple". The focus eventually shifted to a separate individual born at a similar time and location, who would be mistaken for the Messiah, but had no desire to be followed as such.

Writing began in December 1976, with a first draft completed by mid-1977. The final pre-production draft was ready in January 1978, following "a concentrated two-week writing and water-skiing period in Barbados". The film would not have been made without former Beatle and Python fan George Harrison, who set up HandMade Films to help fund it at a cost of 3 million. Harrison put up the money for it as he "wanted to see the movie" (this was later described by Terry Jones as the "world's most expensive cinema ticket" Eunarchy in the UK: George Harrison's first movie | Film | The Guardian ). The original backers, EMI Films, had been scared off at the last minute by the subject matter, particularly Bernard Delfont. As a result, the very last words in the film are: "I said to him, 'Bernie, they'll never make their money back on this one'", teasing Delfont for his lack of faith in the project. Terry Gilliam later said, "They pulled out on the Thursday. The crew was supposed to be leaving on the Saturday. Disastrous. It was because they read the script... finally." 
 As a reward for his help, Harrison appears in a cameo appearance as Mr. Papadopoulos, "owner of the Mount", who briefly shakes hands with Brian in a crowd scene (this happens at 1h09min of the film). His one word of dialogue (a cheery Scouse, but out-of-place-in-Judea, "ullo") had to be dubbed in later.

Directing duties were handled solely by Terry Jones on this project, having amicably agreed with Gilliam (who co-directed Holy Grail) that Jones' approach to film-making was better suited for Python's general performing style. Holy Grails production had often been stilted by their differences behind the camera. Gilliam again contributed two animated sequences (one being the opening credits) and took charge of set design. However, this did not put an absolute end to their feuding. On the DVD commentary, Gilliam expresses great pride in one set in particular, the main hall of Pilate's fortress, which had been designed so that it accurately looked like an old Judean temple that the Romans had converted by dumping their structural artifacts (such as marble floors and columns) on top. He later reveals his consternation at Jones not paying enough attention to it in the cinematography. Gilliam also worked on the matte paintings, useful in particular for the very first shot of the three wise men against a starscape and in giving the illusion of the whole of the outside of the fortress being covered in graffiti. Perhaps the most significant contribution from Gilliam was the scene where Brian accidentally leaps off a high building and inadvertently lands inside a starship about to engage in an interstellar war. This was done "in camera" using a hand-built model starship and miniature pyrotechnics; clearly this was influenced by Star Wars. Afterwards, George Lucas met Terry Gilliam in San Francisco and praised Gilliam for his work.

The film was shot on location in Monastir, Tunisia, which allowed the production to reuse sets from Franco Zeffirelli's Jesus of Nazareth (1977). Many locals were employed as extras on Life of Brian. Director Terry Jones noted, "They were all very knowing because they'd all worked for Franco Zeffirelli on Jesus of Nazareth, so I had these elderly Tunisians telling me, 'Well, Mr Zeffirelli wouldn't have done it like that, you know.'" Further location shooting took place in Sousse (Jerusalem outer walls and gateway), Carthage (Roman amphitheatre) and Matmata, Tunisia (Sermon on the Mount and Crucifixion). Michael Palin, Diaries: The Python Years, 19691979 Graham Chapman, suffering from alcoholism, was so determined to play the lead role  at one point coveted by Cleese  that he dried out in time for filming, so much so that he was also able to act as the on-set doctor on top of his acting duties. Channel 4 (1 January 2007). The Secret Life of Brian. Following shooting between 16 September and 12 November 1978, a two-hour-long rough cut of the film was put together for its first private showing in January 1979. Over the next few months Life of Brian was re-edited and re-screened a number of times for different preview audiences before the final cut was complete, losing a number of entire filmed sequences (see Lost scenes below). 

==Religious satire and blasphemy accusations==
Richard Webster comments in his A Brief History of Blasphemy (1990) that, "internalised censorship played a significant role in the handling" of Monty Python's Life of Brian. In his view, "As a satire on religion, this film might well be considered a rather slight production. As blasphemy it was, even in its original version, extremely mild. Yet the film was surrounded from its inception by intense anxiety, in some quarters of the Establishment, about the offence it might cause. As a result it gained a certificate for general release only after some cuts had been made. Perhaps more importantly still, the film was shunned by the BBC and ITV, who declined to show it for fear of offending Christians in the UK. Once again a blasphemy was restrained - or its circulation effectively curtailed - not by the force of law but by the internalisation of this law." On its initial release in the UK, the film was banned by several town councils  some of which had no cinemas within their boundaries, or had not even seen the film. A member of Harrogate council, one of those that banned the film, revealed during a television interview that the council had not seen the film, and had based their opinion on what they had been told by the Nationwide Festival of Light, a grouping with an evangelical Christian base, of which they knew nothing. 

Some bans continued into the 21st century. In 2008, Torbay Council finally permitted the film to be shown after it won an online vote for the English Riviera International Comedy Film Festival. In 2009, it was announced that a thirty-year-old ban of the film in the Welsh town of Aberystwyth had finally been lifted, and the subsequent showing was attended by Terry Jones and Michael Palin alongside mayor Sue Jones-Davies (who portrayed Judith Iscariot in the film). However, before the showing, an Aberystwyth University student discovered that the film had never been banned in Aberystwyth, but had been shown (or scheduled to be shown) at a cinema in the town in 1981. In 2013, a German official in the state of North Rhine-Westphalia considered the film to be possibly offensive to Christians and hence subject to a local regulation prohibiting its public screening on Good Friday, despite protests by local atheists. Germany: Life of Brian banned on Good Friday Fr Auffhrung der Jesus-Satire in Bochum am Karfreitag droht Strafe (German) 

In New York (the film's release in the US preceded British distribution), screenings were picketed by both rabbis and nuns ("Nuns with banners!" observed Michael Palin). It was also banned for eight years in Ireland and for a year in Norway (it was marketed in Sweden as "The film so funny that it was banned in Norway"). During the film's theatrical run in Finland, a text explaining that the film was a parody of Hollywood historical epics was added to the opening credits. ELONET - Life of Brian 

In the UK, Mary Whitehouse, and other campaigners, launched waves of leaflets and picketed at and around cinemas that showed the film, a move that was only felt to have boosted publicity. Leaflets arguing against the film's representation of the New Testament (for example, suggesting that the Wise Men would not have approached the wrong stable as they do in the opening of the film) were documented in Robert Hewison's book Monty Python: The Case Against.

One of the most controversial scenes was the film's ending: Brian's crucifixion. Many Christian protesters said that it was mocking Jesus' suffering by turning it into a "Jolly Boys Outing" (such as when Mr Cheeky turns to Brian and says: "See, not so bad once you're up!"), capped by Brian's fellow sufferers suddenly bursting into song. This is also reinforced by the fact that several characters throughout the film claim crucifixion is not as bad as it seems, such as when Brian asks his cellmate in prison what will happen to him, he replies; "Oh, you'll probably get away with crucifixion." and when Matthias, the old man who works with the PFJ dismisses crucifixion as "a doddle" and says being stabbed would be worse. The director, Terry Jones, issued the following riposte to this criticism: "Any religion that makes a form of torture into an icon that they worship seems to me a pretty sick sort of religion quite honestly". Religious figures later responded by saying that Jones did not seem to understand the meaning of the crucifix symbol or its significance to Christians as a reminder of the suffering and death Christ endured for their sake. They also argued that crucifixion was a standard form of execution in ancient times and not just one especially reserved for Jesus. Ancient Jewish and Christian Perceptions of Crucifixion, By David W. Chapman, p. 44. Mohr Siebeck, 2008. ISBN 3-16-149579-9 

The Pythons often prided themselves on the depths of the historical research they had taken before writing the script. They all believe that, as a consequence, the film portrays 1st century Judea more accurately than actual Biblical epics, with its focus centred more on the average person of the era.

Shortly after the film was released, Cleese and Palin engaged in debate on the BBC2 discussion programme Friday Night, Saturday Morning with Malcolm Muggeridge and Mervyn Stockwood, the Bishop of Southwark, who put forward arguments against the film. Muggeridge and the Bishop, it was later claimed, had arrived 15 minutes late to see a screening of the picture prior to the debate, missing the establishing scenes demonstrating that Brian and Jesus were two different characters, and hence contended that it was a send-up of Christ himself. Both Pythons later felt that there had been a strange role reversal in the manner of the debate, with two young upstart comedians attempting to make serious, well-researched points, while the establishment figures engaged in cheap jibes and point scoring. They also expressed disappointment in Muggeridge, whom all in Python had previously respected as a satirist. Cleese expressed that his reputation had "plummeted" in his eyes, while Palin commented that, "He was just being Muggeridge, preferring to have a very strong contrary opinion as opposed to none at all". Muggeridge's verdict on the film was that it was "Such a tenth-rate film that it couldn't possibly destroy anyone's genuine faith".

The Pythons unanimously deny that they were ever out to destroy people's faith. On the DVD audio commentary, they contend that the film is heretical because it lampoons the practices of modern organised religion, but that it does not blasphemously lampoon the God that Christians and Jews worship. When Jesus does appear in the film (on the Mount, speaking the Beatitudes), he is played straight (by actor Kenneth Colley) and portrayed with respect. The music and lighting make it clear that there is a genuine aura around him. The comedy begins when members of the crowd mishear his statements of peace, love and tolerance ("I think he said, 'blessed are the cheese makers'"). Importantly, he is distinct from the character of Brian, which is also evident in the scene where an annoying and ungrateful ex-leper pesters Brian for money, while moaning that since Jesus cured him, he has lost his source of income in the begging trade (referring to Jesus as a "bloody do-gooder").

James Crossley, however, has argued that the film makes the distinction between Jesus and the character of Brian to make a contrast between the traditional Christ of both faith and cinema and the historical figure of Jesus in critical scholarship and how critical scholars have argued that ideas later got attributed to Jesus by his followers. Crossley points out that the film uses a number of potentially controversial scholarly theories about Jesus but now with reference to Brian, such as the Messianic Secret, the Jewishness of Jesus, Jesus the revolutionary, and having a single mother. Crossley, James. (2011) Life of Brian or Life of Jesus? Uses of Critical Biblical Scholarship and Non-orthodox Views of Jesus in Monty Pythons Life of Brian, Relegere 1, pp. 93-114. ISSN 1179-7231. 

Not all the Pythons agree on the definition of the movie's tone. There was a brief exchange that occurred when the surviving members reunited in Aspen, Colorado, in 1998 for a show that was broadcast on HBO and has since become available on video. The appearance was billed as the "U.S. Comedy Arts Festival Tribute to Monty Python", although video releases have gone by varying titles, including "Monty Python Live at Aspen (1998)". The programme mostly consists of an interview, on stage, by U.S. comedian Robert Klein. In the section where Life of Brian is being discussed, Terry Jones says, "I think the film is heretical, but its not blasphemous". Eric Idle can be heard to concur, adding, "Its a heresy". However, John Cleese, disagreeing, counters, "I dont think its a heresy. It's making fun of the way that people misunderstand the teaching". Jones responds, "Of course it's a heresy, John! It's attacking the Church! And that has to be heretical". Cleese replies, "No, it's not attacking the Church, necessarily. It's about people who cannot agree with each other".

In a later interview Jones said the film isn't blasphemous because it doesnt touch on belief at all. It is heretical, because it touches on dogma and the interpretation of belief, rather than belief itself. 

The film continues to cause controversy; in February 2007 the Church of St Thomas the Martyr in Newcastle upon Tyne held a public screening in the church itself, with song-sheets, organ accompaniment, stewards in costume and false beards for female members of the audience (alluding to an early scene where a group of women disguise themselves as men so that they are able to take part in a stoning). Although the screening was a sell-out, some Christian groups, notably the conservative Christian Voice, were highly critical of the decision to allow the screening to go ahead. Stephen Green, the head of Christian Voice, insisted that "You don't promote Christ to the community by taking the mick out of him". The Reverend Jonathan Adams, one of the church's clergy, defended his taste in comedy, saying that it did not mock Jesus, and that it raised important issues about the hypocrisy and stupidity that can affect religion. Again on the film's DVD commentary, Cleese also spoke up for religious people who have come forward and congratulated him and his colleagues on the film's highlighting of double standards among purported followers of their own faith. 

==Political satire==
The film pokes fun at revolutionary groups and 1970s British left-wing politics. "What the film does do is place modern stereotypes in a historical setting, which enables it to indulge in a number of sharp digs, particularly at trade unionists and guerilla organisations". Wilmut, Roger (1980). From Fringe to Flying Circus. London: Eyre Methuen Ltd. p. 250 The groups in the film all oppose the Roman occupation of Judea, but fall into the familiar pattern of intense competition among factions that appears, to an outsider, to be over ideological distinctions so small as to be invisible; "ideological purity", as Cleese once described it. Michael Palin says that the various separatist movements were modelled on "modern resistance groups, all with obscure acronyms which they can never remember and their conflicting agendas". Michael Palin in Monty Python Speaks, ed. David Morgan, Fourth Estate, 1999 

The People's Front of Judea, composed of the Pythons' characters, harangue their "rivals" with cries of "splitters" and stand vehemently opposed to the Judean People's Front, the Judean Popular People's Front, the Campaign for a Free Galilee, and the Popular Front of Judea (the last composed of a single old man, mocking the size of real revolutionary Trotskyist factions). The infighting among revolutionary organisations is demonstrated most dramatically when the PFJ attempts to kidnap Pontius Pilate's wife, but encounters agents of the Campaign for a Free Galilee, and the two factions begin a violent brawl over which of them conceived of the plan first. When Brian exhorts them to cease their fighting to struggle "against the common enemy," the revolutionaries stop and cry in unison, "the Judean People's Front!" However, they soon resume their fighting and, with two Roman legionnaires watching bemusedly, continue until Brian is left the only survivor, at which point he is captured.

Other scenes have the freedom fighters wasting time in debate, with one of the debated items being that they should not waste their time debating so much. There is also a famous scene in which Reg gives a revolutionary speech asking, "What have the Romans ever done for us?" at which point the listeners outline all forms of positive aspects of the Roman occupation such as sanitation, medicine, education, wine, public order, irrigation, roads, a fresh water system, public health and peace, followed by "what have the Romans ever done for us except sanitation, medicine, education...". Python biographer George Perry notes, "The People's Liberation Front of Judea conducts its meetings as though they have been convened by a group of shop stewards". Perry, George. The Life of Python, Pavillion, 1994, p. 161 

==Lost scenes==
A number of scenes were cut during the editing process. Five deleted scenes, a total of 13 minutes, including the controversial "Otto", were first made available in 1997 on the Criterion Collection Laserdisc. An unknown amount of raw footage was destroyed in 1998 by the company that bought Handmade Films. However, a number of them (of varying quality) were shown the following year on the Paramount Comedy Channel in the UK; it has not been disclosed how these scenes were saved or where they came from; possibly the source was the Criterion laserdisc.
The scenes shown included three shepherds discussing sheep and completely missing the arrival of the angel heralding Jesus's birth, which would have been at the very start of the movie; a segment showing the attempted kidnap of Pilate's wife (a large woman played by John Case) whose escape results in a fistfight; a scene introducing hardline Zionist Otto, leader of the Judean People's Front (played by Eric Idle) and his men who practice a suicide run in the courtyard; and a brief scene in which Judith releases some birds into the air in an attempt to summon help. The shepherds' scene has badly distorted sound, and the kidnap scene has poor colour quality. The same scenes that were on the Criterion laserdisc can now be found on the Criterion Collection DVD.

The most controversial cuts were the scenes involving Otto, initially a recurring character, who had a thin Adolf Hitler moustache and spoke with a German accent, shouting accusations of "racial impurity" at people whose conceptions were similar to Brian's (Roman centurion rape of native Judean women), and other Nazi phrases. The logo of the Judean People's Front, designed by Terry Gilliam, was a Star of David with a small line added to each point so it resembled a swastika, most familiar in the West as the symbol of the anti-Semitic Nazi movement. The rest of this faction also all had the same thin moustaches, and wore a spike on their helmets, similar to those on Imperial German helmets. The official reason for the cutting was that Otto's dialogue slowed down the narrative. However, Gilliam, writing in The Pythons Autobiography by The Pythons, said he thought it should have stayed, saying "Listen, we've alienated the Christians, let's get the Jews now". Idle himself was said to have been uncomfortable with the character; "It's essentially a pretty savage attack on rabid Zionism, suggesting it's rather akin to Nazism, which is a bit strong to take, but certainly a point of view". Michael Palin's personal journal entries from the period when various edits of Brian were being test-screened consistently reference the Pythons' and filmmakers' concerns that the Otto scenes were slowing the story down and thus were top of the list to be chopped from the final cut of the film. However, Oxford Brookes University historian David Nash says the removal of the scene represented "a form of self-censorship" and the Otto sequence "which involved a character representative of extreme forms of Zionism" was cut "in the interests of smoothing the way for the film's distribution in America." 

The only scene with Otto that remains in the film is during the crucifixion sequence. Otto arrives with his "crack suicide squad", sending the Roman soldiers fleeing in terror. Instead of doing anything useful, they "attack" by committing mass suicide in front of the cross ("Zat showed 'em, huh?" says the dying Otto, to which Brian despondently replies "You silly sods!"), ending Brian's hope of rescue (they do however show some signs of life during the famous rendition of "Always Look on the Bright Side of Life" when they are seen waving their toes in unison in time to the music). Terry Jones once mentioned that the only reason this excerpt was not cut too was due to continuity reasons, as their dead bodies were very prominently placed throughout the rest of the scene. He acknowledged that some of the humour of this sole remaining contribution was lost through the earlier edits, but felt they were necessary to the overall pacing.

Otto's scenes, and those with Pilate's wife, were cut from the film after the script had gone to the publishers, and so they can be found in the published version of the script. Also present is a scene where, after Brian has led the Fifth Legion to the headquarters of the People's Front of Judea, Reg (John Cleese) says "You cunt!! You stupid, bird-brained, flat-headed..." The profanity was overdubbed to "you klutz" before the film was released. Cleese approved of this editing as he felt the reaction to the four-letter word would "get in the way of the comedy". 

An early listing of the sequence of sketches reprinted in Monty Python: The Case Against by Robert Hewison reveals that the film was to have begun with a set of sketches at an English public school. Much of this material was first printed in the "MONTYPYTHONSCRAPBOOK" that accompanied the original script publication of The Life of Brian and then subsequently reused. The song "All Things Dull and Ugly" and the parody scripture reading "Martyrdom of St. Victor" were performed on Monty Python's Contractual Obligation Album (1980). The idea of a violent rugby match between school masters and small boys was filmed in Monty Python's The Meaning of Life (1983). A sketch about a boy who dies at school appeared on the unreleased The Hastily Cobbled Together for a Fast Buck Album (1981).

==Box office==
For the original British and Australian releases, a spoof travelogue narrated by John Cleese, Away From It All, was shown before the film itself. It consisted mostly of stock travelogue footage and featured arch comments from Cleese. For instance, a shot of Bulgarian girls in ceremonial dresses was accompanied by the comment "Hard to believe, isn't it, that these simple happy folk are dedicated to the destruction of Western Civilisation as we know it!", Communist Bulgaria being a member of the Warsaw Pact at the time. Not only was this a spoof of travelogues per se, it was a protest against the then common practice in Britain of showing cheaply made banal short features before a main feature.

Life of Brian opened on 17 August 1979 in five North American theatres and grossed $140,034 USD ($28,007 per screen) in its opening weekend. Its total gross was $19,398,164 USD. It was the highest grossing British film in North America that year. Released on 8 November 1979 in the UK, Robert Sellers "Welease Bwian", The Guardian, 28 March 2003 the film was the fourth highest grossing film in Britain in 1979.

On 30 April 2004, Life of Brian was re-released on five North American screens to "cash in" (as Terry Jones put it) on the box office success of Mel Gibson's The Passion of the Christ. It grossed $26,376 USD ($5,275 per screen) in its opening weekend. It ran until October 2004, playing at 28 screens at its widest point, eventually grossing $646,124 USD during its re-release. By comparison, a re-release of Monty Python and the Holy Grail had earned $1.8 million USD three years earlier. A DVD of the film was also released that year.

==Album==

An album was also released by Monty Python in 1979 in conjunction with the film. In addition to the "Brian Song" and "Always Look on the Bright Side of Life", it contains scenes from the film with brief linking sections performed by Eric Idle and Graham Chapman. The album opens with a brief rendition of "Hava Nagila" on Scottish bagpipes. A CD version was released in 1997.

==Legacy==
Life of Brian has regularly been cited as a serious contender for the title "greatest comedy film of all time", and has been named as such in polls conducted by Total Film magazine in 2000, the British TV network Channel 4 in 2006 and The Guardian newspaper in 2007. Rotten Tomatoes lists it as one of the best reviewed comedies, with a 96% approval rating from 44 published reviews. Internet Movie Database includes the film in its list of the top 250 movies of all time. IMDb Top 250 - IMDb A 2011 poll by Time Out magazine ranked it as the third greatest comedy film ever made, behind Airplane! and This is Spinal Tap.

The BFI declared Life of Brian to be the 28th best British film of all time, in their equivalent of the AFI's original 100 Years...100 Movies list. It was the seventh highest ranking comedy on this list (four of the better placed efforts were classic Ealing Films). Another Channel 4 poll in 2001 named it the 23rd greatest film of all time (the only comedy that came higher on this occasion was Billy Wilder's Some Like It Hot, which was ranked 5th). 

The line, "He's not the Messiah, he's a very naughty boy!", spoken by Brian's mother Mandy to the crowd assembled outside her house, has been voted by readers of BOL.com the funniest line in film history. 
This poll also featured two of the film's other famous lines ("What have the Romans ever done for us?" and "I'm Brian and so's my wife") in the top 10.

===Spin-offs===
Spin-offs include a script-book The Life of Brian of Nazareth, which was printed back-to-back with MONTYPYTHONSCRAPBOOK as a single book. The printing of this book also caused problems, due to rarely used technical laws in the United Kingdom against blasphemy, dictating what can and cannot be written about religion. The publisher refused to print both halves of the book, and original prints were by two companies. See Hewison. 

An album of the songs sung in Monty Python's Life of Brian was released on the Disky label. "Always Look on the Bright Side of Life" was later re-released with great success, after being sung by British football fans. Its popularity became truly evident in 1982 during the Falklands War when sailors aboard the destroyer HMS Sheffield, severely damaged in an Argentinean Exocet missile attack on 4 May, started singing it while awaiting rescue. 
 Many people have come to see the song as a life-affirming ode to optimism. One of its more famous renditions was by the dignitaries of Manchester's bid to host the 2000 Olympic Games, just after they were awarded to Sydney. Idle later performed the song as part of the 2012 Olympic Games closing ceremony. "Always Look on the Bright Side of Life" is also featured in Eric Idle's Spamalot, a Broadway musical based upon Monty Python and the Holy Grail, and was sung by the rest of the Monty Python group at Graham Chapman's memorial service and at the Monty Python Live At Aspen special. The song is a staple at Iron Maiden concerts, where the recording is played after the final encore.

Julian Doyle, the film's editor, wrote The Life of Brian/Jesus, a book which not only describes the filmmaking and editing process but argues that it is the most accurate Biblical film ever made. In October 2008, a memoir by Kim "Howard" Johnson titled Monty Python's Tunisian Holiday: My Life with Brian was released. Johnson became friendly with the Pythons during the filming of Life of Brian and his notes and memories of the behind-the-scenes filming and make-up. Monty Python's Tunisian Holiday by Kim "Howard" Johnson at ThomasDunneBooks.com. Retrieved 31 August 2008 

In October 2011, BBC Four premiered the made-for-television comedy film Holy Flying Circus, written by Tony Roche and directed by Owen Harris. The "Pythonesque" film explored the events surrounding the 1979 television debate on talk show Friday Night, Saturday Morning between John Cleese and Michael Palin and Malcolm Muggeridge and Mervyn Stockwood, the then Bishop of Southwark. The Internet Movie Database 

===Oratorio===
With the success of Eric Idle's musical retelling of Monty Python and the Holy Grail, called Spamalot, Idle announced that he would be giving Life of Brian a similar treatment. The oratorio, called Not the Messiah (He's a Very Naughty Boy), was commissioned to be part of the festival called Luminato in Toronto, Ontario, in June 2007, and was written/scored by Idle and John Du Prez, who also worked with Idle on Spamalot. Not the Messiah is a spoof of Handel's oratorio Messiah. It runs approximately 50 minutes, and was conducted at its World Premiere by Toronto Symphony Orchestra music director Peter Oundjian, who is Idle's cousin. 

Not the Messiah received its U.S. premiere at the Caramoor International Music Festival in Katonah, New York. Cousins Peter Oundjian (Caramoor's Artistic Advisor and Principal Conductor) and Eric Idle joined forces once again for a double performance of the oratorio in July 2007. 

===Appearances in other media===
In a Not the Nine O'Clock News sketch, a bishop who has made a scandalous film called The Life of Christ is hauled over the coals by a representative of the "Church of Python", claiming that the film is an attack on "Our Lord, John Cleese" and on the members of Python, who, in the sketch, are the objects of Britain's true religious faith. This was a parody of the infamous Friday Night, Saturday Morning programme, broadcast a week previously. The director of the film (played by Rowan Atkinson) claims that the reaction to the film has surprised him, as he "didn't expect the Spanish Inquisition."

"Talk Radio" host John Williams, of Chicago's WGN 720 AM, has used "Always Look on the Bright Side of Life" from Life of Brian in a segment of his Friday shows. The segment is used to highlight good events from the past week in listeners' lives and to generally celebrate the end of the work week. In the 1997 Oscar winning film As Good as It Gets, the misanthropic character played by Jack Nicholson sings "Always Look on the Bright Side of Life" as evidence of the character's change in attitude. Monica Silveira Cyrino (2006) Big screen Rome Wiley-Blackwell, 2005 

A BBC history series What the Romans Did for Us, written and presented by Adam Hart-Davis and first broadcast in 2000, takes its title from John Cleese's rhetorical question "What have the Romans ever done for us?" in one of the film's scenes. (Cleese himself parodied this line in a 1986 BBC advert defending the Television Licence Fee: "What has the BBC ever given us?") 

Former British Prime Minister Tony Blair in his Prime Minister's Questions of 3 May 2006 made a shorthand reference to the types of political groups, "Judean People's Front" or "People's Front of Judea", lampooned in Life of Brian. This was in response to a question from the MP David Clelland, asking "What has the Labour government ever done for us?"  itself a parody of John Cleese's "What have the Romans ever done for us?"

On New Year's Day 2007, and again on New Year's Eve, UK television station Channel 4 dedicated an entire evening to the Monty Python phenomenon, during which an hour-long documentary was broadcast called The Secret Life of Brian about the making of The Life of Brian and the controversy that was caused by its release. The Pythons featured in the documentary and reflected upon the events that surrounded the film. This was followed by a screening of the film itself. The documentary (in a slightly extended form) was one of the special features on the 2007 DVD re-release  the "Immaculate Edition", also the first Python release on Blu-ray.

==See also==
* Freedom of speech versus blasphemy
* Holy Flying Circus
* List of films considered the best

==References==

* Davies, Philip. "Life of Brian Research", pp. 142155 in Whose Bible Is It Anyway? 2nd edition; London & New York: T&T Clark International, 2004. ISBN 0-567-08073-0. This book chapter discusses the ancient sources which may have been used in the film and its critical take on theology.
* Hewison, Robert. Monty Python: The Case Against. New York: Grove, 1981. ISBN 0-413-48660-5. This book discusses at length the censorship and controversy surrounding the film.
* Vintaloro, Giordano. "Non sono il Messia, lo giuro su Dio!"  Messianismo e modernit in Life of Brian dei Monty Python. Trieste: Battello Stampatore, 2008. ISBN 978-88-87208-44-3. "I'm not the Messiah, honestly!"  Messianism and modernity in Monty Python's "Life of Brian". This book analyses the film structure as an hypertext and Brian the Messiah as a modern leader figure.

==External links==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* Monty Python's Life of Brian film script
* Graffiti vandal strikes in Gloucester
*  A 2007 documentary about the controversy surrounding the film.



[[Lomography]]

The original Lomo LC-A
Lomography is an analog camera movement and community, and is also a commercial trademark of Lomographische AG. The Lomographic Society International was founded in 1992 by a group of Viennese students after they discovered the Lomo LC-A camera http://www.lomography.com/about/timeline created by LOMO PLC of Saint Petersburg, Russia. Lomography started as an art movement through which the students put on exhibitions of photos within Vienna; the art movement then developed into a commercial enterprise. Since 1995, Lomography has been the sole distributor of the LC-A camera outside of the former Soviet Union, and has moved into producing their own range of analog cameras, films and accessories. 

The Lomographic Society was formed in 1992 and maintains a strong community following through the internet. They have worked with Light for the World to raise money for vision care in Kenya, and with the International Red Cross for famine relief in East Africa. The online community allows the sharing of images and techniques, and celebrity lomographic camera owners include Elijah Wood, Neil Gaiman and The White Stripes.

==History==

Lomography is a community of Lomographic photographers who advocate creative and experimental film photography. The name is inspired by the former state-run optics manufacturer LOMO PLC of Saint Petersburg, Russia that created and produced the 35 mm LOMO LC-A Compact Automat camera, now the centerpiece of the Lomographic movement. This camera was loosely based upon the Cosina CX-1 and introduced in the early 1980s. 

Lomography also represents the commercial trademark of Lomographische AG, an Austrian company that produces cameras and other tools that cater to the needs of this photographic movement. The society is headquartered in Vienna, Austria.

In 1991, a group of Viennese students discovered the Lomo LC-A and were "charmed by the unique, colorful, and sometimes blurry" images that the camera produced. The Lomographic Society International was subsequently founded in 1992. After a series of international art exhibitions culminating in shows in New York City and Moscow, Lomography signed an exclusive distribution agreement with LOMO PLC in 1995  thereby becoming the sole distributor of all Lomo LC-A cameras outside of the former Soviet Union. The new company reached an agreement with the deputy mayor of St Petersburg, the future Russian Prime Minister and President, Vladimir Putin, to receive a tax break in order to keep the LOMO factory in the city open. 

Sample shot from Lomo LC-A camera

Since the introduction of the original Lomo LC-A, Lomography has produced and marketed an entire line of their own analog cameras. In 2005, production of the original Lomo LC-A was discontinued. Its replacement, the Lomo LC-A+, was introduced in 2006. The new camera, made in China rather than Russia, featured the original Russian lens manufactured by LOMO PLC. This changed as of mid-2007 with the lens now made in China as well.

Similar to Eastman Kodak's concept of the "Kodak moment", the philosophy behind Lomography is summarized in its motto, "Dont Think, Just Shoot." This motto is accompanied by The Ten Golden Rules which are supposed to encourage spontaneity and taking photos anywhere, while minimizing considerations of formal technique. Typical Lomography cameras are deliberately low-fidelity and constructed to make sure their mechanics are not too technical. Some cameras make use of multiple lenses and rainbow-colored flashes, or exhibit extreme optical distortions and even light leaks. In November 2012, the Lomographic Society International celebrated its 20th anniversary. The LC-A+ camera was re-released as a special edition and the online magazine section ran articles about some of the best lomographic shots of the last 20 years. In addition to that, a microsite was set up, highlighting some of the company's most well-known releases and stunts. |url=http://microsites.lomography.com/twenty_years 

==Models and techniques==
A Diana mini camera
The Fisheye2 model
Current models marketed by Lomographische AG include Lomo LC-A+, Diana F+, Spinner 360, Sprocket Rocket, Actionsampler, Pop-9, Oktomat, Fisheye, Fisheye2, Colorsplash, Colorsplash Flash, SuperSampler. Recent releases include the La Sardina cameras, a line of wide-angle cameras inspired by vintage sardine cans and whose design is loosely based on old the Kandor Candid camera, the LomoKino, a 35mm analog movie camera, the Diana Baby and Fisheye Baby cameras which shoot 110 film and the Konstruktor, a Build-It-Yourself 35mm SLR camera. In 2013, together with Zenit, Lomography produced a new version of the Petzval Lens designed to work with Canon EF and Nikon F mount SLR cameras. The company produces and sells several kinds of 35mm, 120 and 110 film.

Lomographys website showcases many high-contrast photographs  with unusual saturation and color  that were created using the technique called cross processing in which film intended for developing in slide chemistry (E-6) is processed in photographic negative chemistry (C-41), and vice versa. This technique can be employed with any film camera and can be somewhat mimicked with photo-editing software such as GIMP or Photoshop. However the use of digital manipulation to create this effect goes somewhat against the principles of Lomography.

==Community==
Lomography Shop in Wan Po Yan St., Hong Kong
The Lomographic Society International provides Lomographers with Lomography Gallery Stores and "embassies" dedicated to the growth, support and public exposure of the analogue lifestyle. Lomographers from all over the world interact through social events such as exhibits and educational workshops. Gallery Stores not only provide places for Lomographers to socialise, but also encourage public enthusiasm and awareness. 

An example of the society's cultural events showcasing Lomographers' talents is the Lomokikuyu competition, which raises money for eye surgeries and vision care in Kenya, in partnership with Viennese vision aid organisation Light for the World. The project has since been updated and donations now also go to the International Red Cross to help fight the famine in East Africa. More recently, portion of the sales from Japan Golden Week Edition cameras were donated to the Red Cross as relief to the victims of the March 2011 tsunami. The organisation also organises the Lomography World Congress, an international conference of practitioners held in varying host cities.

They maintain a Web-based Lomography magazine, which provides a photo archive storage to showcase the global communitys works. Articles track trends and ideas about new fun methods to photograph. Community members can blog their own tutorials to share their discoveries, fostering enthusiasm with the Lomographic art. The site also celebrates the work of Lomographers with online exhibits and competitions. 

==Photo gallery==

Image:Fisheye2 0709.jpg|A Lomography Fisheye 2 with a fisheye viewfinder
Image:LOMOLCA.jpg|A 1988 LOMO LC-A camera
Image:Wakayama-jo-Lomo.jpg|Fisheye-lens photo of Wakayama Castle
Image:DowntownLA.jpg|alt=The view of buildings in Downtown Los Angeles |The view of buildings in Downtown Los Angeles through the Fisheye 2 camera.

==References==

==External links==
*Lomography official website
*Fabio Pluda - Lomographer
*



[[Loglan]]

Loglan is a constructed language originally designed for linguistic research, particularly for investigating the SapirWhorf Hypothesis. The language was developed beginning in 1955 by Dr James Cooke Brown with the goal of making a language so different from natural languages that people learning it would think in a different way if the hypothesis were true. Loglan is the first among, and the main inspiration for, the languages known as logical languages, which also includes Lojban and Ceqli.

Brown founded The Loglan Institute (TLI) to develop the language and other applications of it. He always considered the language an incomplete research project, and although he released many papers about its design, he continued to claim legal restrictions on its use. Because of this, a group of his followers later formed the Logical Language Group to create the language Lojban along the same principles, but with the intention to make it freely available and encourage its use as a real language.

Supporters of Lojban use the term Loglan as a generic term to refer to both their own language, and Brown's Loglan, referred to as "TLI Loglan" when in need of disambiguation. Although the non-trademarkability of the term Loglan was eventually upheld by the United States Patent and Trademark Office, many supporters and members of The Loglan Institute find this usage offensive, and reserve Loglan for the TLI version of the language.

== Grammar ==
Brown intended Loglan to be as culturally neutral as possible, and metaphysically parsimonious, which means that obligatory categories are kept to a minimum. An example of an obligatory category in English is the time-tense of verbs, as it is impossible to express a finite verb without also expressing a tense.

Also, Brown intended the language to be totally regular and unambiguous. In particular, phonemes that could be confused with each other were to be avoided.

The languages grammar is based on predicate logic, which is why it was named Loglan, an abbreviation for "logical language". This has been thought to make it suitable for humancomputer communication, which led Robert A. Heinlein to mention the language in his science fiction novel The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress (1966), and as a fully-fledged computer language in The Number of the Beast (1980).

Loglan has no distinction between nouns and verbs. The predicate words can serve as verbs, nouns, adjectives or adverbs depending on where they occur in a sentence. Each predicate has its argument structure with places for arguments, which may be variables. For example: vedma, "X sells Y to P for price Q". Prefixes allow one to reorder the argument structure of predicates, to emphasize one of the variables by putting it first. For example, to make price the first variable, use ju vedma (with the "little word" ju). Similarly, the sentence can be reordered to speak about seller, ware, or buyer. Modifications for time, location, actor, type of action, and others are provided by "little words" which are optional. Predicates can be compounded: a predicate can act as an argument of another predicate, when the former is prefixed by a "little word".

The language is designed so that the patterns of phonemes always parse into words uniquely. Even when run together, the words can be separated in only one way. In Loglan, one can directly and precisely say any of the different meanings of the English phrase "a pretty little girls school." This feature is so pronounced that people fluent in Loglan say impossible things as a sort of jokea type of humor not supported by the linguistic machinery of other languages. For example, in Loglan it is possible to say that John, a person, is literally a short word.

Loglan has a wide range of words used for expressing emotions and attitudes about what one is saying, but unlike natural languages, these are kept clearly distinct from the actual statements being made.

==Alphabet and pronunciation==
The alphabet of Loglan has two historical versions. In that of 1975 Brown, James Cooke (1975, 2nd edition). Loglan 4 & 5: A Loglan-English/English-Loglan Dictionary. Gainesville, Florida: The Loglan Institute, Inc. there were only 21 letters with their corresponding phonemes. In the final version of 1989 Brown, James Cooke (1989, 4th edition). Loglan 1: A Logical Language. Gainesville, Florida: The Loglan Institute, Inc. five more phonemes had been incorporated: letter H (/h/) was added to the alphabet in 1977 by popular demand; letter Y (//) was added in 1982 to work as a kind of hyphen between the terms of a complex word; letters Q (//), W (/y/) and X (/x/) were added in 1986 in order to allow the incorporation of the Linnaean vocabulary of biology, and they were useful to give more exact pronunciations to many borrowed names.

 Capital letters 
 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 
 Lower case 
 a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z 
 IPA phonemes 
 a b  d e f g h i / j  k l m n o p  r s t u / w v y x  z 

*The letters I and U when placed before vowels will represent the IPA sounds /j/ and /w/ respectively. For example: ie /je/ ("what?"), ue /we/ ("what!" as an expression of surprise or interest).

== In popular culture ==
Loglan was mentioned in a couple of science fiction works: Robert A. Heinleins well-known books, beginning with "Gulf" and including The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress and The Number of the Beast, and Robert Rimmers utopian book Love Me Tomorrow (1978).

Loglans inventor, James Cooke Brown, also wrote a utopian science fiction novel The Troika Incident (1970) that uses Loglan phrases but calls the language a different name, "Panlan". The Troika incident: a tetralogue in two parts, Author:James Cooke Brown, Publisher:Doubleday, 1970, Length:399 pages, ASIN: B0006C09JO 

Loglan is used as the official interspecies language in the roleplaying game .

==Archival Collection==
Archival material related to the creation and teaching of Loglan can be found in the Faith Rich Papers, located at Chicago Public Library Special Collections, Chicago, Illinois. https://bmrcprocessingproject.uchicago.edu/sites/bmrcprocessingproject.uchicago.edu/files/Finding%20Aids/Faith%20Rich%20Papers_0.pdf 

== See also ==
* Artificial language
* Linguistics
* Lojban
* Philosophy of language
* SapirWhorf hypothesis
* Faith Rich

==References==

;Notes
* James Cooke Brown, 1960. "Loglan". Scientific American 202:4363
* Loglan in Russia 

== External links==
* The Loglan Institute homepage
** Loglan 1: A Logical Language
*** in HTML
*** in PDF
*** on Scribd.com
*** Readings from Loglan 1 (MP3 files, playable online)
** Loglan 2: Methods of Construction
*** at Stanford University Library (microfilm)
*** at Cornell University Library (microfilm)
*** on amazon.co.uk (microfilm)
** Loglan 3: The Primer, by Stephen L. Rice
*** three PDF Volumes
*** Volume 1 at Scribd.com
*** Volume 2 at Scribd.com
*** Volume 3 at Scribd.com
** Loglan 4: A Loglan to English Dictionary
*** in HTML hosted by Randall Holmes at Boise State University's math department
*** HTML file in a ZIP file (warning: downloads immediately upon clicking)
** Loglan 5: An English to Loglan Dictionary
*** in HTML hosted by Randall Holmes at Boise State University's math department
*** HTML file in a ZIP file (warning: downloads immediately upon clicking)
* mirror of loglan.org by Randall Holmes (at Boise State University's Department of Mathematics)
* June 1960 "Loglan" article by James Cooke Brown for Scientific American (hosted by the Logical Language Group)
*Faith Rich Papers, including a series on Loglan, at Chicago Public Library



[[Leucippus]]

Leucippus (; , Leukippos; fl. 5th century BCE) was one of the earliest Greeks to develop the theory of atomism  the idea that everything is composed entirely of various imperishable, indivisible elements called atoms  which was elaborated in greater detail by his pupil and successor, Democritus. 

A possible earlier candidate for atomism is Mochus of Sidon, from the Trojan War era (13th or 12th century BCE). Ancienthistory.about.com Ancientlibrary.com Plato.stanford.eu 

He was most likely born in Miletus, The Cambridge Companion to Early Greek Philosophy, pg. xxiii. Note that Democritus was a resident of Abdera. Some said Leucippus from Elea, perhaps since he was unsuitably associated with the Eleatic philosophers. although Abdera and Elea are also mentioned as possible birth-places. Diogenes Lartius says "Leucippus was born at Elea, but some say at Abdera and others at Miletus," Diogenes Lartius, ix. 30. Simplicius refers to him as "Leucippus of Elea or Miletus," Simplicius, Physica, 28, 4 

== Overview ==
Leucippus is a shadowy figure, as his dates are not recorded and he is often mentioned in conjunction with his more well-known pupil Democritus, who replaced indeterminism with determinism as the ontological cause of atomic movement. It is therefore difficult to determine which contributions come from Democritus and which come from Leucippus. 

In his Corpus Democriteum, Jonathan Barnes, Early Greek Philosophy, 1987 Thrasyllus of Alexandria, an astrologer and writer living under the emperor Tiberius (14-37 CE) compiled a list of writings traditionally attributed to Democritus to the exclusion of Leucippus.

Leucippus was an Ionian Greek (Ionia, now part of western Turkey), as was Anaxagoras. And he was a contemporary of Zeno of Elea and Empedocles (Magna Graecia, now part of southern Italy). He belonged to the same Ionian School of naturalistic philosophy as Thales, Anaximander, Anaximenes, and he was interested in reality and not idealism as the Italic Eleatics were. Later stories about the influence of Zeno have been questioned by modern studies, also because the ontological conception of being of the Eleatics is static, monistic and deterministic, while Leucippus' is dynamic, pluralistic and indeterministic. 

Around 440 or 430 BCE Leucippus founded a school at Abdera, which his pupil, Democritus, was closely associated with. Leucippus, in The Presocratics, Philip Wheelwright ed., The Odyssey Press, 1966, pg. 177. His fame was so completely overshadowed by that of Democritus, who systematized his views on atoms, that Epicurus doubted his very existence. Diogenes Lartius x. 7 

However, Aristotle and Theophrastus explicitly credit Leucippus with the invention of Atomism. Leucippus agreed with the Eleatic argument that true being does not admit of vacuum, and there can be no movement in the absence of vacuum. Leucippus contended that since movement exists, there has to be vacuum. However, he concludes that vacuum is identified with non-being, since it cannot really be. Leucippus differed from the Eleatics in not being encumbered by the conceptual intermingling of being and non-being. Plato made the necessary distinction between grades of being and types of negation. 

The most famous among Leucippus' lost works was titled Megas Diakosmos (The Big World-System, or Great Cosmology, which was sometimes described as a work of Democritus like the Micros Diakosmos or Little World-System) The Cambridge Companion to Early Greek Philosophy, pg. xxiii and Peri Nou (On mind). Stobaeus, i. 4. 7c 

Fragments and doxographical reports about Leucippus were collected by Hermann Diels (18481922), firstly in Doxographi Graeci (Berlin, 1879, reprint Berlin: de Gruyter, 1929) and then in Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, Berlin, 1903, 6th ed., rev. by Walther Kranz (Berlin: Weidmann, 1952; the editions after the 6th are mainly reprints with little or no change.) One fragment of Leucippus which is probably accurate is the Great Cosmology fragment that says: "The cosmos, then, became like a spherical form in this way: the atoms being submitted to a casual and unpredictable movement, quickly and incessantly." (24, I, 1)

==See also==
* Atomism
* Democritus
* Epicurus
* Indeterminism

== Notes==

== References ==
*A. A. Long (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Early Greek Philosophy (pgs. xxiii, 185)
*Diels-Kranz, Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker 67A
*Diogenes Lartius, Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers, IX.30-33

== External links ==
* 
*
*Leucippus and Democritus Fragments at demonax.info



[[League of Nations]]

The League of Nations (abbreviated as LN in English, "Socit des Nations" abbreviated as SDN in French) was an intergovernmental organisation founded as a result of the Paris Peace Conference that ended the First World War. It was the first international organisation whose principal mission was to maintain world peace. Its primary goals, as stated in its Covenant, included preventing wars through collective security and disarmament, and settling international disputes through negotiation and arbitration. Other issues in this and related treaties included labour conditions, just treatment of native inhabitants, human and drug trafficking, arms trade, global health, prisoners of war, and protection of minorities in Europe. See Article 23, , and Minority Rights Treaties. At its greatest extent from 28 September 1934 to 23 February 1935, it had 58 members.

The diplomatic philosophy behind the League represented a fundamental shift from the preceding hundred years. The League lacked its own armed force and depended on the Great Powers to enforce its resolutions, keep to its economic sanctions, or provide an army when needed. However, the Great Powers were often reluctant to do so. Sanctions could hurt League members, so they were reluctant to comply with them. When, during the Second Italo-Abyssinian War, the League accused Italian soldiers of targeting Red Cross medical tents, Benito Mussolini responded that "the League is very well when sparrows shout, but no good at all when eagles fall out." 

After a number of notable successes and some early failures in the 1920s, the League ultimately proved incapable of preventing aggression by the Axis powers in the 1930s. Germany withdrew from the League, as did Japan, Italy, Spain, and others. The onset of the Second World War showed that the League had failed its primary purpose, which was to prevent any future world war. The League lasted for 27 years; the United Nations (UN) replaced it after the end of the Second World War and inherited a number of agencies and organisations founded by the League.

==Origins==
The 1864 Geneva Convention, one of the earliest formulations of international law.
The concept of a peaceful community of nations had been proposed as far back as 1795, when Immanuel Kant's outlined the idea of a league of nations to control conflict and promote peace between states. Kant argued for the establishment of a peaceful world community, not in a sense of a global government, but in the hope that each state would declare itself a free state that respects its citizens and welcomes foreign visitors as fellow rational beings, thus promoting peaceful society worldwide. International co-operation to promote collective security originated in the Concert of Europe that developed after the Napoleonic Wars in the 19th century in an attempt to maintain the status quo between European states and so avoid war. This period also saw the development of international law, with the first Geneva Conventions establishing laws dealing with humanitarian relief during wartime, and the international Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907 governing rules of war and the peaceful settlement of international disputes.

The forerunner of the League of Nations, the Inter-Parliamentary Union, was formed by the peace activists William Randal Cremer and Frdric Passy in 1889. The organisation was international in scope, with a third of the members of parliaments (in the 24 countries that had parliaments) serving as members of the IPU by 1914. Its aims were to encourage governments to solve international disputes by peaceful means. Annual conferences were held to help governments refine the process of international arbitration. Its structure consisted of a council headed by a president, which would later be reflected in the structure of the League. 

At the start of the 20th century, two power blocs emerged from alliances between the European Great Powers. It was these alliances that, at the start of the First World War in 1914, drew all the major European powers into the conflict. This was the first major war in Europe between industrialised countries, and the first time in Western Europe that the results of industrialisation (for example, mass production) had been dedicated to war. The result of this industrialised warfare was an unprecedented casualty level: eight and a half million soldiers killed, an estimated 21 million wounded, and approximately 10 million civilian deaths.

Lord Bryce, one of the earliest advocates for a League of Nations. 
By the time the fighting ended in November 1918, the war had had a profound impact, affecting the social, political and economic systems of Europe and inflicting psychological and physical damage. Anti-war sentiment rose across the world; the First World War was described as "the war to end all wars", and its possible causes were vigorously investigated. The causes identified included arms races, alliances, secret diplomacy, and the freedom of sovereign states to enter into war for their own benefit. One proposed remedy was the creation of an international organisation whose aim was to prevent future war through disarmament, open diplomacy, international co-operation, restrictions on the right to wage war, and penalties that made war unattractive.

At the start of the First World War the first schemes for international organisation to prevent future wars, began to gain considerable public support, particularly in the United Kingdom and the United States. Goldsworthy Lowes Dickinson, a British political scientist, coined the term "League of Nations" in 1914 and drafted a scheme for its organisation. Together with Lord Bryce, he played a leading role in the founding of the group of internationalist pacifists known as the Bryce Group, later the League of Nations Union. The group became steadily more influential among the public and as a pressure group within the then governing Liberal Party. In Dickinson's 1915 pamphlet After the War he wrote of his "League of Peace" as being essentially an organisation for arbitration and conciliation. He felt that the secret diplomacy of the early twentieth century had brought about war and thus could write that, "the impossibility of war, I believe, would be increased in proportion as the issues of foreign policy should be known to and controlled by public opinion." The Proposals of the Bryce Group were circulated widely, both in England and the US, where they had a profound influence on the nascent international movement. 

In 1915, a similar body was set up in the United States by a group of like-minded individuals, including William Howard Taft. It was called the League to Enforce Peace and was substantially based on the proposals of the Bryce Group. It advocated the use of arbitration in conflict resolution and the imposition of sanctions on aggressive countries. However, none of these early organisations envisioned a continuously functioning body; with the exception of the Fabian Society in England they maintained a legalistic approach that would limit the international body to a court of justice. The Fabians were the first to argue for a 'Council' of states, necessarily the Great Powers, who would adjudicate world affairs, and for the creation of a permanent secretariat to enhance international co-operation across a range of activities. 

The British Foreign Secretary Lord Balfour commissioned the first official report into the matter in early 1918, under the initiative of Lord Robert Cecil. The British committee was finally appointed in February 1918; it was led by Walter Phillimore (and became known as the Phillimore Committee) but also included Eyre Crowe, William Tyrrell, and Cecil Hurst. The recommendations of the so-called Phillimore Commission included the establishment of a 'Conference of Allied States' that would arbitrate disputes and impose sanctions on offending states. The proposals were approved by the British government and much of the commission's results were later incorporated into the Covenant of the League of Nations. 

The French also drafted a much more far-reaching proposal in June of that year; they advocated annual meetings of a council to settle all disputes as well as an 'international army' to enforce its' decisions. 

The American President Woodrow Wilson instructed Edward House to draft a US plan which reflected Wilson's own idealistic views, as well as the work of the Phillimore Commission. The outcome of House's work, and Wilson's own first draft proposed the termination of 'unethical' state behaviour, including forms of espionage and dishonesty. Methods of compulsion against recalcitrant states would include severe measures, such as "blockading and closing the frontiers of that power to commerce or intercourse with any part of the world and to use any force that may be necessary..." 

The two principal drafters and architects of the covenant of the League of Nations were Lord Robert Cecil, lawyer and diplomat and Jan Smuts, Commonwealth statesman. Smuts' proposals included the creation of a Council of the Great powers as permanent members and a non-permanent selection of the minor states. He also proposed the creation of a Mandate system for captured colonies of the Central Powers during the war. Cecil focused on the administrative side, and proposed annual Council meetings and quadrennial meetings for the Assembly of all members. He also argued for a large and permanent secretariat to carry out the League's administrative duties. 

alt=A card with a back and white picture of President Wilson looking serious in the centre and dates with their significance to the League of Nations around the side
At the Paris Peace Conference in 1919, Wilson, Cecil and Smuts all put forward their draft proposals. After lengthy negotiations between the delegates, the Hurst-Miller draft was finally produced as a basis for the Covenant. After more negotiation and compromise, the delegates finally approved of the proposal to create the League of Nations (, ) on 25 January 1919. The final Covenant of the League of Nations was drafted by a special commission, and the League was established by Part I of the Treaty of Versailles. On 28 June 1919, 44 states signed the Covenant, including 31 states which had taken part in the war on the side of the Triple Entente or joined it during the conflict.

The League would be made up of a General Assembly (representing all member states), an Executive Council (with membership limited to major powers), and a permanent secretariat. Member states were expected to "respect and preserve as against external aggression" the territorial integrity of other members, and to disarm "to the lowest point consistent with domestic safety." All states were required to submit complaints for arbitration or judicial inquiry before going to war. The Executive Council would create a Permanent Court of International Justice to make judgements on the disputes.

Despite Wilson's efforts to establish and promote the League, for which he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in October 1919, the United States did not join. Opposition in the Senate, particularly from two Republican politicians, Henry Cabot Lodge and William Borah, and especially in regard to Article X of the Covenant, ensured that the United States would not ratify the agreement. 

The League held its first council meeting in Paris on 16 January 1920, six days after the Versailles Treaty came into force. In November, the headquarters of the League was moved to Geneva, where the first General Assembly was held on 15 November 1920.

==Languages and symbols==
The official languages of the League of Nations were French, English and Spanish (from 1920). The League considered adopting Esperanto as their working language and actively encouraging its use, but this proposal was never acted on. In 1921 Lord Robert Cecil proposed the introduction of Esperanto into state schools of member nations, and a report was commissioned. When the report was presented two years later, it recommended the adoption of Cecil's idea, a proposal that 11 delegates accepted. The strongest opposition came from the French delegate, Gabriel Hanotaux, partially to protect French, which he argued was already the international language. As a result of such opposition, the recommendation was not accepted.

In 1939 a semi-official emblem for the League of Nations emerged: two five-pointed stars within a blue pentagon. They symbolised the Earth's five continents and five "races". A bow at the top displayed the English name ("League of Nations"), while another at the bottom showed the French ("Socit des Nations"). 

==Principal organs==
alt=A drive leads past a manicured lawn to large white rectangular building with a columns on it facade. Two wings of the building are set back from the middle section.

The main constitutional organs of the League were the Assembly, the Council, and the Permanent Secretariat. It also had two essential wings: the Permanent Court of International Justice, and the International Labour Organization. In addition, there were a number of auxiliary agencies and commissions. Each organ's budget was allocated by the Assembly (the League was supported financially by its member states). 

The relations between the Assembly and the Council and the competencies of each were for the most part not explicitly defined. Each body could deal with any matter within the sphere of competence of the League or affecting peace in the world. Particular questions or tasks might be referred to either.

Unanimity was required for the decisions of both the Assembly and the Council, except in matters of procedure and some other specific cases, such as the admission of new members. This requirement was a reflection of the League's belief in the sovereignty of its component nations; the League sought solution by consent, not by dictation. However, in case of a dispute, the consent of the parties to the dispute was not required for unanimity.

The Permanent Secretariat, established at the seat of the League at Geneva, comprised a body of experts in various spheres under the direction of the general secretary. Its principal sections were: Political, Financial and Economics, Transit, Minorities and Administration (administering the Saar and Danzig), Mandates, Disarmament, Health, Social (Opium and Traffic in Women and Children), Intellectual Cooperation and International Bureaux, Legal, and Information. The staff of the Secretariat was responsible for preparing the agenda for the Council and the Assembly and publishing reports of the meetings and other routine matters, effectively acting as the League's civil service. In 1931, the staff numbered 707. 

The Assembly consisted of representatives of all members of the League, with each state allowed up to three representatives and one vote. It met in Geneva and, after its initial sessions in 1920, it convened once a year in September. The special functions of the Assembly included the admission of new members, the periodical election of non-permanent members to the Council, the election with the Council of the judges of the Permanent Court, and control of the budget. In practice, the Assembly was the general directing force of League activities.

The League Council acted as a type of executive body directing the Assembly's business. It began with four permanent members (Great Britain, France, Italy, Japan) and four non-permanent members that were elected by the Assembly for a three-year term. The first non-permanent members were Belgium, Brazil, Greece and Spain. 

The composition of the Council was changed a number of times. The number of non-permanent members was first increased to six on 22 September 1922, and then to nine on 8 September 1926. Werner Dankwort of Germany pushed for his country to join the League, which it eventually did in 1926, becoming the fifth permanent member of the Council. Later, after Germany and Japan both left the League, the number of non-permanent seats was increased from nine to eleven, and the Soviet Union was made a permanent member giving the Council a total of fifteen members. The Council met, on average, five times a year and in extraordinary sessions when required. In total, 107 sessions were held between 1920 and 1939. 

===Other bodies===
The League oversaw the Permanent Court of International Justice and several other agencies and commissions created to deal with pressing international problems. These included the Disarmament Commission, the Health Organisation, the International Labour Organization (ILO), the Mandates Commission, the International Commission on Intellectual Cooperation (precursor to UNESCO), the Permanent Central Opium Board, the Commission for Refugees, and the Slavery Commission. Several of these institutions were transferred to the United Nations after the Second World War: the International Labour Organization, the Permanent Court of International Justice (as the International Court of Justice), and the Health Organisation (restructured as the World Health Organisation). 

The Permanent Court of International Justice was provided for by the Covenant, but not established by it. The Council and the Assembly established its constitution. Its judges were elected by the Council and the Assembly, and its budget was provided by the latter. The Court was to hear and decide any international dispute which the parties concerned submitted to it. It might also give an advisory opinion on any dispute or question referred to it by the Council or the Assembly. The Court was open to all the nations of the world under certain broad conditions. 

Child labour in a coal mine, United States, ca. 1912

The International Labour Organization was created in 1919 on the basis of Part XIII of the Treaty of Versailles. The ILO, although having the same members as the League and being subject to the budget control of the Assembly, was an autonomous organisation with its own Governing Body, its own General Conference and its own Secretariat. Its constitution differed from that of the League: representation had been accorded not only to governments but also to representatives of employers' and workers' organisations. Albert Thomas was its first director.

alt=A row of more than a dozen children holding wooden looms stretches into the distance.

The ILO successfully restricted the addition of lead to paint, and convinced several countries to adopt an eight-hour work day and forty-eight-hour working week. It also campaigned to end child labour, increase the rights of women in the workplace, and make shipowners liable for accidents involving seamen. After the demise of the League, the ILO became an agency of the United Nations in 1946. 

The League's health organisation had three bodies: the Health Bureau, containing permanent officials of the League; the General Advisory Council or Conference, an executive section consisting of medical experts; and the Health Committee. The Committee's purpose was to conduct inquiries, oversee the operation of the League's health work, and prepare work to be presented to the Council. This body focused on ending leprosy, malaria, and yellow fever, the latter two by starting an international campaign to exterminate mosquitoes. The Health Organization also worked successfully with the government of the Soviet Union to prevent typhus epidemics, including organising a large education campaign.

The League of Nations had devoted serious attention to the question of international intellectual co-operation since its creation. The First Assembly in December 1920 recommended that the Council take action aiming at the international organisation of intellectual work, which it did by adopting a report presented by the Fifth Committee of the Second Assembly and inviting a Committee on Intellectual Cooperation to meet in Geneva in August 1922. The French philosopher Henri Bergson became the first chairman of the committee. The work of the committee included: inquiry into the conditions of intellectual life, assistance to countries where intellectual life was endangered, creation of national committees for intellectual co-operation, co-operation with international intellectual organisations, protection of intellectual property, inter-university co-operation, co-ordination of bibliographical work and international interchange of publications, and international co-operation in archaeological research.

The League established the Permanent Central Opium Board to supervise the statistical control system introduced by the second International Opium Convention that mediated the production, manufacture, trade, and retailing of opium and its by-products. The board also established a system of import certificates and export authorisations for the legal international trade in narcotics.

The Slavery Commission sought to eradicate slavery and slave trading across the world, and fought forced prostitution. Its main success was through pressing the governments who administered mandated countries to end slavery in those countries. The League secured a commitment from Ethiopia to end slavery as a condition of membership in 1926, and worked with Liberia to abolish forced labour and inter-tribal slavery. It also succeeded in reducing the death rate of workers constructing the Tanganyika railway from 55 to 4 percent. Records were kept to control slavery, prostitution, and the trafficking of women and children. Partly as a result of pressure brought by the League of Nations, Afghanistan abolished slavery in 1923, Iraq in 1924, Nepal in 1926, Transjordan and Persia in 1929, Bahrain in 1937, and Ethiopia in 1942. 

A sample Nansen passport

Led by Fridtjof Nansen, the Commission for Refugees was established on 27 June 1921 to look after the interests of refugees, including overseeing their repatriation and, when necessary, resettlement. At the end of the First World War, there were two to three million ex-prisoners of war from various nations dispersed throughout Russia; within two years of the commission's foundation, it had helped 425,000 of them return home. It established camps in Turkey in 1922 to aid the country with an ongoing refugee crisis, helping to prevent disease and hunger. It also established the Nansen passport as a means of identification for stateless people.

The Committee for the Study of the Legal Status of Women sought to inquire into the status of women all over the world. It was formed in 1937, and later became part of the United Nations as the Commission on the Status of Women. 

==Members==

A map of the world in the years 19201945, which shows the League of Nations members during its history
Of the League's 42 founding members, 23 (24 counting Free France) remained members until it was dissolved in 1946. In the founding year, six other states joined, only two of which remained members throughout the League's existence. An additional 15 countries joined later. The largest number of member states was 58, between 28 September 1934 (when Ecuador joined) and 23 February 1935 (when Paraguay withdrew). 

The Soviet Union became a member on 18 September 1934, and was expelled on 14 December 1939 for aggression against Finland. In expelling the Soviet Union, the League broke its own rule: only 7 of 15 members of the Council voted for expulsion (Great Britain, France, Belgium, Bolivia, Egypt, South Africa, and the Dominican Republic), short of the majority required by the Covenant. Three of these members had been made Council members the day before the vote (South Africa, Bolivia, and Egypt). This was one of the League's final acts before it practically ceased functioning due to the Second World War.

On 26 May 1937, Egypt became the last state to join the League. The first member to withdraw permanently from the League was Costa Rica on 22 January 1925; having joined on 16 December 1920, this also makes it the member to have most quickly withdrawn. Brazil was the first founding member to withdraw (14 June 1926), and Haiti the last (April 1942). Iraq, which joined in 1932, was the first member that had previously been a League of Nations mandate.

==Mandates==

At the end of the First World War, the Allied powers were confronted with the question of the disposal of the former German colonies in Africa and the Pacific, and the several non-Turkish provinces of the Ottoman Empire. The Peace Conference adopted the principle that these territories should be administered by different governments on behalf of the League  a system of national responsibility subject to international supervision. This plan, defined as the mandate system, was adopted by the "Council of Ten" (the heads of government and foreign ministers of the main Allied powers: Britain, France, the United States, Italy, and Japan) on 30 January 1919 and transmitted to the League of Nations. 

League of Nations mandates were established under Article 22 of the Covenant of the League of Nations. The Permanent Mandates Commission supervised League of Nations mandates, and also organised plebiscites in disputed territories so that residents could decide which country they would join. There were three mandate classifications: A, B and C.

The A mandates (applied to parts of the old Ottoman Empire) were "certain communities" that had 

The B mandates were applied to the former German colonies that the League took responsibility for after the First World War. These were described as "peoples" that the League said were 

South-West Africa and certain of the South Pacific Islands were administered by League members under C mandates. These were classified as "territories" 

===Mandatory powers===
The territories were governed by mandatory powers, such as the United Kingdom in the case of the Mandate of Palestine, and the Union of South Africa in the case of South-West Africa, until the territories were deemed capable of self-government. Fourteen mandate territories were divided up among seven mandatory powers: the United Kingdom, the Union of South Africa, France, Belgium, New Zealand, Australia and Japan. With the exception of the Kingdom of Iraq, which joined the League on 3 October 1932, these territories did not begin to gain their independence until after the Second World War, in a process that did not end until 1990. Following the demise of the League, most of the remaining mandates became United Nations Trust Territories. 

In addition to the mandates, the League itself governed the Territory of the Saar Basin for 15 years, before it was returned to Germany following a plebiscite, and the Free City of Danzig (now Gdask, Poland) from 15 November 1920 to 1 September 1939.

==Resolving territorial disputes==
The aftermath of the First World War left many issues to be settled, including the exact position of national boundaries and which country particular regions would join. Most of these questions were handled by the victorious Allied powers in bodies such as the Allied Supreme Council. The Allies tended to refer only particularly difficult matters to the League. This meant that, during the early interwar period, the League played little part in resolving the turmoil resulting from the war. The questions the League considered in its early years included those designated by the Paris Peace treaties.

As the League developed, its role expanded, and by the middle of the 1920s it had become the centre of international activity. This change can be seen in the relationship between the League and non-members. The United States and Russia, for example, increasingly worked with the League. During the second half of the 1920s, France, Britain and Germany were all using the League of Nations as the focus of their diplomatic activity, and each of their foreign secretaries attended League meetings at Geneva during this period. They also used the League's machinery to try to improve relations and settle their differences.

===land Islands===

land is a collection of around 6,500 islands in the Baltic Sea, midway between Sweden and Finland. The islands are almost exclusively Swedish-speaking, but in 1809, Sweden had lost both Finland and the land Islands to Imperial Russia. In December 1917, during the turmoil of the Russian October Revolution, Finland declared its independence, but most of the landers wished to rejoin Sweden. However, the Finnish government considered the islands to be a part of their new nation, as the Russians had included land in the Grand Duchy of Finland, formed in 1809. By 1920, the dispute had escalated to the point that there was danger of war. The British government referred the problem to the League's Council, but Finland would not let the League intervene, as they considered it an internal matter. The League created a small panel to decide if it should investigate the matter and, with an affirmative response, a neutral commission was created. In June 1921, the League announced its decision: the islands were to remain a part of Finland, but with guaranteed protection of the islanders, including demilitarisation. With Sweden's reluctant agreement, this became the first European international agreement concluded directly through the League.

===Upper Silesia===
The Allied powers referred the problem of Upper Silesia to the League after they had been unable to resolve the territorial dispute. After the First World War, Poland laid claim to Upper Silesia, which had been part of Prussia. The Treaty of Versailles had recommended a plebiscite in Upper Silesia to determine whether the territory should become part of Germany or Poland. Complaints about the attitude of the German authorities led to rioting and eventually to the first two Silesian Uprisings (1919 and 1920). A plebiscite took place on 20 March 1921, with 59.6 percent (around 500,000) of the votes cast in favour of joining Germany, but Poland claimed the conditions surrounding it had been unfair. This result led to the Third Silesian Uprising in 1921.

On 12 August 1921, the League was asked to settle the matter; the Council created a commission with representatives from Belgium, Brazil, China and Spain to study the situation. The committee recommended that Upper Silesia be divided between Poland and Germany according to the preferences shown in the plebiscite and that the two sides should decide the details of the interaction between the two areas  for example, whether goods should pass freely over the border due to the economic and industrial interdependency of the two areas. In November 1921, a conference was held in Geneva to negotiate a convention between Germany and Poland. A final settlement was reached, after five meetings, in which most of the area was given to Germany, but with the Polish section containing the majority of the region's mineral resources and much of its industry. When this agreement became public in May 1922, bitter resentment was expressed in Germany, but the treaty was still ratified by both countries. The settlement produced peace in the area until the beginning of the Second World War.

===Albania===
The frontiers of Albania had not been set during the Paris Peace Conference in 1919, as they were left for the League to decide; however, they had not yet been determined by September 1921, creating an unstable situation. Greek troops held military operations in the south of Albania. Yugoslavian forces became engaged, after clashes with Albanian tribesmen, in the northern part of the country. The League sent a commission of representatives from various powers to the region. In November 1921, the League decided that the frontiers of Albania should be the same as they had been in 1913, with three minor changes that favoured Yugoslavia. Yugoslav forces withdrew a few weeks later, albeit under protest.

The borders of Albania again became the cause of international conflict when Italian General Enrico Tellini and four of his assistants were ambushed and killed on 24 August 1923 while marking out the newly decided border between Greece and Albania. Italian leader Benito Mussolini was incensed, and demanded that a commission investigate the incident within five days. Whatever the results of the investigation, Mussolini insisted that the Greek government pay Italy fifty million lire in reparations. The Greeks said they would not pay unless it was proved that the crime was committed by Greeks.

Mussolini sent a warship to shell the Greek island of Corfu, and Italian forces occupied the island on 31 August 1923. This contravened the League's covenant, so Greece appealed to the League to deal with the situation. The Allies, however, agreed (at Mussolini's insistence) that the Conference of Ambassadors should be responsible for resolving the dispute because it was the conference that had appointed General Tellini. The League Council examined the dispute, but then passed on their findings to the Conference of Ambassadors to make the final decision. The conference accepted most of the League's recommendations, forcing Greece to pay fifty million lire to Italy, even though those who committed the crime were never discovered. Italian forces then withdrew from Corfu.

===Memel===

The port city of Memel (now Klaipda) and the surrounding area, with a predominantly German population, was under provisional Allied control according to Article 99 of the Treaty of Versailles. The French and Polish governments favoured turning Memel into an international city, while Lithuania wanted to annexe the area. By 1923, the fate of the area had still not been decided, prompting Lithuanian forces to invade in January 1923 and seize the port. After the Allies failed to reach an agreement with Lithuania, they referred the matter to the League of Nations. In December 1923, the League Council appointed a Commission of Inquiry. The commission chose to cede Memel to Lithuania and give the area autonomous rights. The Klaipda Convention was approved by the League Council on 14 March 1924, and then by the Allied powers and Lithuania.

===Hatay===

With League oversight, the Sanjak of Alexandretta in the French Mandate of Syria was given autonomy in 1937. Renamed Hatay, its parliament declared independence as the Republic of Hatay in September 1938, after elections the previous month. It was annexed by Turkey with French consent in mid-1939. 

===Mosul===
The League resolved a dispute between the Kingdom of Iraq and the Republic of Turkey over control of the former Ottoman province of Mosul in 1926. According to the British, who had been awarded a League of Nations mandate over Iraq in 1920 and therefore represented Iraq in its foreign affairs, Mosul belonged to Iraq; on the other hand, the new Turkish republic claimed the province as part of its historic heartland. A League of Nations Commission of Inquiry, with Belgian, Hungarian and Swedish members, was sent to the region in 1924; it found that the people of Mosul did not want to be part of either Turkey or Iraq, but if they had to choose, they would pick Iraq. In 1925, the commission recommended that the region stay part of Iraq, under the condition that the British hold the mandate over Iraq for another 25 years, to ensure the autonomous rights of the Kurdish population. The League Council adopted the recommendation and decided on 16 December 1925 to award Mosul to Iraq. Although Turkey had accepted League of Nations' arbitration in the Treaty of Lausanne in 1923, it rejected the decision, questioning the Council's authority. The matter was referred to the Permanent Court of International Justice, which ruled that, when the Council made a unanimous decision, it must be accepted. Nonetheless, Britain, Iraq and Turkey ratified a separate treaty on 5 June 1926 that mostly followed the decision of the League Council and also assigned Mosul to Iraq. It was agreed, however, that Iraq could still apply for League membership within 25 years and that the mandate would end upon its admittance.

===Vilnius===

After the First World War, Poland and Lithuania both regained their independence but soon became immersed in territorial disputes. During the PolishSoviet War, Lithuania signed the Moscow Peace Treaty with the Soviet Union that laid out Lithuania's frontiers. This agreement gave Lithuanians control of the city of Vilnius (, ), the old Lithuanian capital, but a city with a majority Polish population. This heightened tension between Lithuania and Poland and led to fears that they would resume the PolishLithuanian War, and on 7 October 1920, the League negotiated the Suwaki Agreement establishing a cease-fire and a demarcation line between the two nations. On 9 October 1920, General Lucjan eligowski, commanding a Polish military force in contravention of the Suwaki Agreement, took the city and established the Republic of Central Lithuania.

After a request for assistance from Lithuania, the League Council called for Poland's withdrawal from the area. The Polish government indicated they would comply, but instead reinforced the city with more Polish troops. This prompted the League to decide that the future of Vilnius should be determined by its residents in a plebiscite and that the Polish forces should withdraw and be replaced by an international force organised by the League. However, the plan was met with resistance in Poland, Lithuania, and the Soviet Union, which opposed any international force in Lithuania. In March 1921, the League abandoned plans for the plebiscite. After unsuccessful proposals by Paul Hymans to create a federation between Poland and Lithuania, Vilnius and the surrounding area was formally annexed by Poland in March 1922. After Lithuania took over the Klaipda Region, the Allied Conference set the frontier between Lithuania and Poland, leaving Vilnius within Poland, on 14 March 1923. Lithuanian authorities refused to accept the decision, and officially remained in a state of war with Poland until 1927. It was not until the 1938 Polish ultimatum that Lithuania restored diplomatic relations with Poland and thus de facto accepted the borders.

===Colombia and Peru===

There were several border conflicts between Colombia and Peru in the early part of the 20th century, and in 1922, their governments signed the Salomn-Lozano Treaty in an attempt to resolve them. As part of this treaty, the border town of Leticia and its surrounding area was ceded from Peru to Colombia, giving Colombia access to the Amazon River. On 1 September 1932, business leaders from Peruvian rubber and sugar industries who had lost land as a result organised an armed takeover of Leticia. At first, the Peruvian government did not recognise the military takeover, but President of Peru Luis Snchez Cerro decided to resist a Colombian re-occupation. The Peruvian army occupied Leticia, leading to an armed conflict between the two nations. After months of diplomatic negotiations, the governments accepted mediation by the League of Nations, and their representatives presented their cases before the Council. A provisional peace agreement, signed by both parties in May 1933, provided for the League to assume control of the disputed territory while bilateral negotiations proceeded. In May 1934, a final peace agreement was signed, resulting in the return of Leticia to Colombia, a formal apology from Peru for the 1932 invasion, demilitarisation of the area around Leticia, free navigation on the Amazon and Putumayo Rivers, and a pledge of non-aggression. 

===Saar===
Saar was a province formed from parts of Prussia and the Rhenish Palatinate and placed under League control by the Treaty of Versailles. A plebiscite was to be held after fifteen years of League rule to determine whether the province should belong to Germany or France. When the referendum was held in 1935, 90.3 percent of voters supported becoming part of Germany, which was quickly approved by the League Council.

==Other conflicts==
In addition to territorial disputes, the League also tried to intervene in other conflicts between and within nations. Among its successes were its fight against the international trade in opium and sexual slavery, and its work to alleviate the plight of refugees, particularly in Turkey in the period up to 1926. One of its innovations in this latter area was the 1922 introduction of the Nansen passport, which was the first internationally recognised identity card for stateless refugees. 

===Greece and Bulgaria===

After an incident involving sentries on the Greek-Bulgarian border in October 1925, fighting began between the two countries. Three days after the initial incident, Greek troops invaded Bulgaria. The Bulgarian government ordered its troops to make only token resistance, and evacuated between ten thousand and fifteen thousand people from the border region, trusting the League to settle the dispute. The League condemned the Greek invasion, and called for both Greek withdrawal and compensation to Bulgaria.

===Liberia===
Following accusations of forced labour on the large American-owned Firestone rubber plantation and American accusations of slave trading, the Liberian government asked the League to launch an investigation. The resulting commission was jointly appointed by the League, the United States, and Liberia. In 1930, a League report confirmed the presence of slavery and forced labour. The report implicated many government officials in the selling of contract labour and recommended that they be replaced by Europeans or Americans, which generated anger within Liberia and led to the resignation of President Charles D. B. King and his vice-president. The Liberian government outlawed forced labour and slavery and asked for American help in social reforms. 

===Mukden Incident===

Chinese delegate addresses the League of Nations concerning the Manchurian Crisis in 1932.
The Mukden Incident, also known as the "Manchurian Incident" or the "Far Eastern Crisis", was one of the League's major setbacks and acted as the catalyst for Japan's withdrawal from the organisation. Under the terms of an agreed lease, the Japanese government had the right to station its troops in the area around the South Manchurian Railway, a major trade route between the two countries, in the Chinese region of Manchuria. In September 1931, a section of the railway was lightly damaged by the Japanese Kwantung Army as a pretext for an invasion of Manchuria. The Japanese army claimed that Chinese soldiers had sabotaged the railway and in apparent retaliation (acting contrary to the civilian government's orders) occupied the entire region of Manchuria. They renamed the area Manchukuo, and on 9 March 1932 set up a puppet government, with Pu Yi, the former emperor of China, as its executive head. This new entity was recognised only by the governments of Italy and Nazi Germany; the rest of the world still considered Manchuria legally part of China. In 1932, Japanese air and sea forces bombarded the Chinese city of Shanghai, sparking the January 28 Incident.

The League of Nations agreed to a request for help from the Chinese government, but the long voyage by ship delayed League officials. When they arrived, they were confronted with Chinese assertions that the Japanese had invaded unlawfully, while the Japanese claimed they were acting to keep peace in the area. Despite Japan's high standing in the League, the subsequent Lytton Report declared Japan to be the aggressor and demanded Manchuria be returned to the Chinese. Before the report could be voted on by the Assembly, Japan announced its intention to push further into China. The report passed 421 in the Assembly in 1933 (only Japan voting against), but instead of removing its troops from China, Japan withdrew from the League.

According to the Covenant, the League should have responded by enacting economic sanctions or declaring war; it did neither. The threat of economic sanctions would have been almost useless because the United States, a nonLeague member, could continue trade with Japan. The League could have assembled an army, but major powers like Britain and France were too preoccupied with their own affairs, such as keeping control of their extensive colonies, especially after the turmoil of the First World War. Japan was therefore left in control of Manchuria until the Soviet Union's Red Army took over the area and returned it to China at the end of the Second World War. 

===Chaco War===

The League failed to prevent the 1932 war between Bolivia and Paraguay over the arid Gran Chaco region. Although the region was sparsely populated, it contained the Paraguay River, which would have given either landlocked country access to the Atlantic Ocean, and there was also speculation, later proved incorrect, that the Chaco would be a rich source of petroleum. Border skirmishes throughout the late 1920s culminated in an all-out war in 1932 when the Bolivian army attacked the Paraguayans at Fort Carlos Antonio Lpez at Lake Pitiantuta. Paraguay appealed to the League of Nations, but the League did not take action when the Pan-American Conference offered to mediate instead. The war was a disaster for both sides, causing 57,000 casualties for Bolivia, whose population was around three million, and 36,000 dead for Paraguay, whose population was approximately one million. It also brought both countries to the brink of economic disaster. By the time a ceasefire was negotiated on 12 June 1935, Paraguay had seized control of most of the region, as was later recognised by the 1938 truce.

===Italian invasion of Abyssinia===

Emperor Haile Selassie escaping Ethiopia via Jerusalem
In October 1935, Italian dictator Benito Mussolini sent 400,000 troops to invade Abyssinia (Ethiopia). Marshal Pietro Badoglio led the campaign from November 1935, ordering bombing, the use of chemical weapons such as mustard gas, and the poisoning of water supplies, against targets which included undefended villages and medical facilities. The modern Italian Army defeated the poorly armed Abyssinians and captured Addis Ababa in May 1936, forcing Emperor of Ethiopia Haile Selassie to flee.

The League of Nations condemned Italy's aggression and imposed economic sanctions in November 1935, but the sanctions were largely ineffective since they did not ban the sale of oil or close the Suez Canal (controlled by Britain). As Stanley Baldwin, the British Prime Minister, later observed, this was ultimately because no one had the military forces on hand to withstand an Italian attack. In October 1935, the US President, Franklin D. Roosevelt, invoked the recently passed Neutrality Acts and placed an embargo on arms and munitions to both sides, but extended a further "moral embargo" to the belligerent Italians, including other trade items. On 5 October and later on 29 February 1936, the United States endeavoured, with limited success, to limit its exports of oil and other materials to normal peacetime levels. The League sanctions were lifted on 4 July 1936, but by that point Italy had already gained control of the urban areas of Abyssinia.

The HoareLaval Pact of December 1935 was an attempt by the British Foreign Secretary Samuel Hoare and the French Prime Minister Pierre Laval to end the conflict in Abyssinia by proposing to partition the country into an Italian sector and an Abyssinian sector. Mussolini was prepared to agree to the pact, but news of the deal leaked out. Both the British and French public vehemently protested against it, describing it as a sell-out of Abyssinia. Hoare and Laval were forced to resign, and the British and French governments dissociated themselves from the two men. In June 1936, although there was no precedent for a head of state addressing the Assembly of the League of Nations in person, Haile Selassie spoke to the Assembly, appealing for its help in protecting his country. 

The Abyssinian crisis showed how the League could be influenced by the self-interest of its members; one of the reasons why the sanctions were not very harsh was that both Britain and France feared the prospect of driving Mussolini and Adolf Hitler into an alliance.

===Spanish Civil War===

On 17 July 1936, the Spanish Army launched a coup d'tat, leading to a prolonged armed conflict between Spanish Republicans (the leftist national government) and the Nationalists (conservative, anti-communist rebels who included most officers of the Spanish Army). Julio lvarez del Vayo, the Spanish Minister of Foreign Affairs, appealed to the League in September 1936 for arms to defend Spain's territorial integrity and political independence. The League members, however, would not intervene in the Spanish Civil War nor prevent foreign intervention in the conflict. Adolf Hitler and Mussolini continued to aid General Francisco Franco's Nationalists, while the Soviet Union helped the Spanish Republic. In February 1937, the League did ban foreign volunteers, but this was in practice a symbolic move.

===Second Sino-Japanese War===

Following a long record of instigating localised conflicts throughout the 1930s, Japan began a full-scale invasion of China on 7 July 1937. On 12 September, the Chinese representative, Wellington Koo, appealed to the League for international intervention. Western countries were sympathetic to the Chinese in their struggle, particularly in their stubborn defence of Shanghai, a city with a substantial number of foreigners. However, the League was unable to provide any practical measures; on 4 October, it turned the case over to the Nine Power Treaty Conference. 

==Failure of disarmament==
Article 8 of the Covenant gave the League the task of reducing "armaments to the lowest point consistent with national safety and the enforcement by common action of international obligations." A significant amount of the League's time and energy was devoted to this goal, even though many member governments were uncertain that such extensive disarmament could be achieved or was even desirable. The Allied powers were also under obligation by the Treaty of Versailles to attempt to disarm, and the armament restrictions imposed on the defeated countries had been described as the first step toward worldwide disarmament. The League Covenant assigned the League the task of creating a disarmament plan for each state, but the Council devolved this responsibility to a special commission set up in 1926 to prepare for the 193234 World Disarmament Conference. Members of the League held different views towards the issue. The French were reluctant to reduce their armaments without a guarantee of military help if they were attacked; Poland and Czechoslovakia felt vulnerable to attack from the west and wanted the League's response to aggression against its members to be strengthened before they disarmed. Without this guarantee, they would not reduce armaments because they felt the risk of attack from Germany was too great. Fear of attack increased as Germany regained its strength after the First World War, especially after Adolf Hitler gained power and became German Chancellor in 1933. In particular, Germany's attempts to overturn the Treaty of Versailles and the reconstruction of the German military made France increasingly unwilling to disarm.

The World Disarmament Conference was convened by the League of Nations in Geneva in 1932, with representatives from 60 states. A one-year moratorium on the expansion of armaments, later extended by a few months, was proposed at the start of the conference. The Disarmament Commission obtained initial agreement from France, Italy, Japan, and Britain to limit the size of their navies. The KelloggBriand Pact, facilitated by the commission in 1928, failed in its objective of outlawing war. Ultimately, the Commission failed to halt the military build-up by Germany, Italy and Japan during the 1930s. The League was mostly silent in the face of major events leading to the Second World War, such as Hitler's re-militarization of the Rhineland, occupation of the Sudetenland and Anschluss of Austria, which had been forbidden by the Treaty of Versailles. In fact, League members themselves re-armed. In 1933, Japan simply withdrew from the League rather than submit to its judgement, as did Germany the same year (using the failure of the World Disarmament Conference to agree to arms parity between France and Germany as a pretext), and Italy in 1937. The final significant act of the League was to expel the Soviet Union in December 1939 after it invaded Finland.

==General weaknesses==
The Gap in the Bridge the sign reads "This League of Nations Bridge was designed by the President of the U.S.A."
Cartoon from Punch magazine, 10 December 1920, satirising the gap left by the USA not joining the League.
The onset of the Second World War demonstrated that the League had failed in its primary purpose, the prevention of another world war. There were a variety of reasons for this failure, many connected to general weaknesses within the organisation. Additionally, the power of the League was limited by the United States' refusal to join.

===Origins and structure===
The origins of the League as an organisation created by the Allied powers as part of the peace settlement to end the First World War led to it being viewed as a "League of Victors". The League's neutrality tended to manifest itself as indecision. It required a unanimous vote of nine, later fifteen, Council members to enact a resolution; hence, conclusive and effective action was difficult, if not impossible. It was also slow in coming to its decisions, as certain ones required the unanimous consent of the entire Assembly. This problem mainly stemmed from the fact that the primary members of the League of Nations were not willing to accept the possibility of their fate being decided by other countries, and by enforcing unanimous voting had effectively given themselves veto power. 

===Global representation===
Representation at the League was often a problem. Though it was intended to encompass all nations, many never joined, or their period of membership was short. The most conspicuous absentee was the United States. President Woodrow Wilson had been a driving force behind the League's formation and strongly influenced the form it took, but the US Senate voted not to join on 19 November 1919. Ruth Henig has suggested that, had the United States become a member, it would have also provided support to France and Britain, possibly making France feel more secure, and so encouraging France and Britain to co-operate more fully regarding Germany, thus making the rise to power of the Nazi Party less likely. Conversely, Henig acknowledges that if the US had been a member, its reluctance to engage in war with European states or to enact economic sanctions might have hampered the ability of the League to deal with international incidents. The structure of the US federal government might also have made its membership problematic, as its representatives at the League could not have made decisions on behalf of the executive branch without having the prior approval of the legislative branch.

In January 1920, when the League was born, Germany was not permitted to join because it was seen as having been the aggressor in the First World War. Soviet Russia was also initially excluded, as Communist regimes were not welcomed. The League was further weakened when major powers left in the 1930s. Japan began as a permanent member of the Council, but withdrew in 1933 after the League voiced opposition to its invasion of Manchuria. Italy also began as a permanent member of the Council, but withdrew in 1937. The League had accepted Germany, also as a permanent member of the Council, in 1926, deeming it a "peace-loving country", but Adolf Hitler pulled Germany out when he came to power in 1933.

===Collective security===
Another important weakness grew from the contradiction between the idea of collective security that formed the basis of the League and international relations between individual states. The League's collective security system required nations to act, if necessary, against states they considered friendly, and in a way that might endanger their national interests, to support states for which they had no normal affinity. This weakness was exposed during the Abyssinia Crisis, when Britain and France had to balance maintaining the security they had attempted to create for themselves in Europe "to defend against the enemies of internal order", in which Italy's support played a pivotal role, with their obligations to Abyssinia as a member of the League.

On 23 June 1936, in the wake of the collapse of League efforts to restrain Italy's war against Abyssinia, the British Prime Minister, Stanley Baldwin, told the House of Commons that collective security had 

Ultimately, Britain and France both abandoned the concept of collective security in favour of appeasement in the face of growing German militarism under Hitler.
In this context, The League of Nations was also the institution where the first international debate on terrorism took place following the 1934 assassination of King Alexander I of Yugoslavia in Marseille, showing its conspiratorial features, many of which are detectable in the discourse of terrorism among states after 9/11. * Ditrych, Ondrej : International Terrorism' as Conspiracy: Debating Terrorism in the League of Nations. = Historical Social Research Vol. 38, 1 (2013). 

===Pacifism and disarmament===
The League of Nations lacked an armed force of its own and depended on the Great Powers to enforce its resolutions, which they were very unwilling to do. Its two most important members, Britain and France, were reluctant to use sanctions and even more reluctant to resort to military action on behalf of the League. Immediately after the First World War, pacifism became a strong force among both the people and governments of the two countries. The British Conservatives were especially tepid to the League and preferred, when in government, to negotiate treaties without the involvement of that organisation. Moreover, the League's advocacy of disarmament for Britain, France, and its other members, while at the same time advocating collective security, meant that the League was depriving itself of the only forceful means by which it could uphold its authority.

When the British cabinet discussed the concept of the League during the First World War, Maurice Hankey, the Cabinet Secretary, circulated a memorandum on the subject. He started by saying, "Generally it appears to me that any such scheme is dangerous to us, because it will create a sense of security which is wholly fictitious". He attacked the British pre-war faith in the sanctity of treaties as delusional and concluded by claiming:

The Foreign Office minister Sir Eyre Crowe also wrote a memorandum to the British cabinet claiming that "a solemn league and covenant" would just be "a treaty, like other treaties". "What is there to ensure that it will not, like other treaties, be broken?" Crowe went on to express scepticism of the planned "pledge of common action" against aggressors because he believed the actions of individual states would still be determined by national interests and the balance of power. He also criticised the proposal for League economic sanctions because it would be ineffectual and that "It is all a question of real military preponderance". Universal disarmament was a practical impossibility, Crowe warned.

==Demise and legacy==
The League of Nations' Assembly building in Geneva
As the situation in Europe escalated into war, the Assembly transferred enough power to the Secretary General on 30 September 1938 and 14 December 1939 to allow the League to continue to exist legally and carry on reduced operations. The headquarters of the League, the Palace of Nations, remained unoccupied for nearly six years until the Second World War ended.

At the 1943 Tehran Conference, the Allied powers agreed to create a new body to replace the League: the United Nations. Many League bodies, such as the International Labour Organization, continued to function and eventually became affiliated with the UN. The designers of the structures of the United Nations intended to make it more effective than the League.

The final meeting of the League of Nations took place on 12 April 1946 in Geneva. Delegates from 34 nations attended the assembly. This session concerned itself with liquidating the League: it transferred assets worth approximately US$22,000,000 in 1946, (including the Palace of Peace and the League's archives) to the UN, returned reserve funds to the nations that had supplied them, and settled the debts of the League. Robert Cecil, addressing the final session, said:

The motion that dissolved the League passed unanimously: "The League of Nations shall cease to exist except for the purpose of the liquidation of its affairs." Motion of the League of Nations, quoted in Scott 1973, p. 404
 It also set the date for the end of the League as the day after the session closed. On 19 April 1946, the President of the Assembly, Carl J. Hambro of Norway, declared "the twenty-first and last session of the General Assembly of the League of Nations closed". 
"League of Nations Ends, Gives Way to New U.N.", Syracuse Herald-American, 20 April 1946, p. 12
 The League of Nations ceased to exist the following day. 
 

Professor David Kennedy portrays the League as a unique moment when international affairs were "institutionalized", as opposed to the preFirst World War methods of law and politics. The principal Allies in the Second World War (the UK, the USSR, France, the US, and the Republic of China) became permanent members of the United Nations Security Council in 1946. (In 1971 the People's Republic of China replaced the Republic of China (Taiwan) as permanent member of the UN Security Council, and in 1991 the Russian Federation replaced the USSR.) Decisions of the Security Council are binding on all members of the UN; however, unanimous decisions are not required, unlike in the League Council. Permanent members of the Security Council can wield a veto to protect their vital interests.

Like its predecessor, the United Nations does not have its own standing armed forces, but calls on its members to contribute to armed interventions, such as during the Korean War and for the peacekeeping mission in the former Yugoslavia.

== See also ==

* Atlantic Charter
* Latin America and the League of Nations
* League against Imperialism
* Ligue internationale de la paix

== Notes ==

== References ==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== Further reading ==
* Cooper, John Milton. Breaking the Heart of the World: Woodrow Wilson and the Fight for the League of Nations (2001) 454pp excerpt and text search
* 
* 
* Ginneken, Anique H.M. van. Historical Dictionary of the League of Nations (2006) excerpt and text search
* (The founding of the League of Nations).
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* The League of Nations., Boston : Old Colony Trust Company, 1919. A collection of charters, speeches, etc. on the topic.

== External links ==

* League of Nations Photo archive, Indiana.edu
* League of Nations chronology
* League of Nations timeline, worldatwar.net
* History of the League of Nations, University of Oxford-led project
* Wilson's Final Address in Support of the League of Nations Speech made 25 September 1919
* History (19191946) from the United Nations Office at Geneva
* League of Nations Archives from the United Nations Office at Geneva
* Table of Assemblies Dates of each annual assembly, links to list of members of each country's delegation
* LONSEA  League of Nations Search Engine, Cluster of Excellence "Asia and Europe in a Global Context", Universitt Heidelberg

 



[[Logic programming]]

Logic programming is a programming paradigm based on formal logic. A program written in a logic programming language is a set of sentences in logical form, expressing facts and rules about some problem domain. Major logic programming language families include Prolog, Answer set programming (ASP) and Datalog. In all of these languages, rules are written in the form of clauses:

:H :- B1, , Bn.

and are read declaratively as logical implications:

:H if B1 and  and Bn.

H is called the head of the rule and B1, , Bn is called the body. Facts are rules that have no body, and are written in the simplified form:

:H.

In the simplest case in which H, B1, , Bn are all atomic formulae, these clauses are called definite clauses or Horn clauses. However, there exist many extensions of this simple case, the most important one being the case in which conditions in the body of a clause can also be negations of atomic formulae. Logic programming languages that include this extension have the knowledge representation capabilities of a non-monotonic logic.

In ASP and Datalog, logic programs have only a declarative reading, and their execution is performed by means of a proof procedure or model generator whose behaviour is not meant to be under the control of the programmer. However, in the Prolog family of languages, logic programs also have a procedural interpretation as goal-reduction procedures: 

:to solve H, solve B1, and ... and solve Bn.

The declarative reading of logic programs can be used by a programmer to verify their correctness. Moreover, logic-based program transformation techniques can also be used to transform logic programs into logically equivalent programs that are more efficient. In the Prolog family of logic programming languages, the programmer can also use the known problem-solving behaviour of the execution mechanism to improve the efficiency of programs.

==History==

The use of mathematical logic to represent and execute computer programs is also a feature of the lambda calculus, developed by Alonzo Church in the 1930s. However, the first proposal to use the clausal form of logic for representing computer programs was made by Cordell Green (1969). This used an axiomatization of a subset of LISP, together with a representation of an input-output relation, to compute the relation by simulating the execution of the program in LISP. Foster and Elcock's Absys (1969), on the other hand, employed a combination of equations and lambda calculus in an assertional programming language which places no constraints on the order in which operations are performed.

Logic programming in its present form can be traced back to debates in the late 1960s and early 1970s about declarative versus procedural representations of knowledge in Artificial Intelligence. Advocates of declarative representations were notably working at Stanford, associated with John McCarthy, Bertram Raphael and Cordell Green, and in Edinburgh, with John Alan Robinson (an academic visitor from Syracuse University), Pat Hayes, and Robert Kowalski. Advocates of procedural representations were mainly centered at MIT, under the leadership of Marvin Minsky and Seymour Papert.

Although it was based on the proof methods of logic, Planner, developed at MIT, was the first language to emerge within this proceduralist paradigm 1969. Planner featured pattern-directed invocation of procedural plans from goals (i.e. goal-reduction or backward chaining) and from assertions (i.e. forward chaining). The most influential implementation of Planner was the subset of Planner, called Micro-Planner, implemented by Gerry Sussman, Eugene Charniak and Terry Winograd. It was used to implement Winograd's natural-language understanding program SHRDLU, which was a landmark at that time. To cope with the very limited memory systems at the time, Planner used a backtracking control structure so that only one possible computation path had to be stored at a time. Planner gave rise to the programming languages QA-4, Popler, Conniver, QLISP, and the concurrent language Ether.

Hayes and Kowalski in Edinburgh tried to reconcile the logic-based declarative approach to knowledge representation with Planner's procedural approach. Hayes (1973) developed an equational language, Golux, in which different procedures could be obtained by altering the behavior of the theorem prover. Kowalski, on the other hand, showed how SL-resolution treats implications as goal-reduction procedures. Kowalski collaborated with Colmerauer in Marseille, who developed these ideas in the design and implementation of the programming language Prolog. Prolog gave rise to the programming languages ALF, Fril, Gdel, Mercury, Oz, Ciao, Visual Prolog, XSB, and Prolog, as well as a variety of concurrent logic programming languages (see Shapiro (1989) for a survey), constraint logic programming languages and datalog.

The Association for Logic Programming was founded to promote Logic Programming in 1986.

==Prolog==

The programming language Prolog was developed in 1972 by Alain Colmerauer. It emerged from a collaboration between Colmerauer in Marseille and Robert Kowalski in Edinburgh. Colmerauer was working on natural language understanding, using logic to represent semantics and using resolution for question-answering. During the summer of 1971, Colmerauer and Kowalski discovered that the clausal form of logic could be used to represent formal grammars and that resolution theorem provers could be used for parsing. They observed that some theorem provers, like hyper-resolution, behave as bottom-up parsers and others, like SL-resolution (1971), behave as top-down parsers.

It was in the following summer of 1972, that Kowalski, again working with Colmerauer, developed the procedural interpretation of implications. This dual declarative/procedural interpretation later became formalised in the Prolog notation

:H :- B1, , Bn.

which can be read (and used) both declaratively and procedurally. It also became clear that such clauses could be restricted to definite clauses or Horn clauses, where H, B1, , Bn are all atomic predicate logic formulae, and that SL-resolution could be restricted (and generalised) to LUSH or SLD-resolution. Kowalski's procedural interpretation and LUSH were described in a 1973 memo, published in 1974.

Colmerauer, with Philippe Roussel, used this dual interpretation of clauses as the basis of Prolog, which was implemented in the summer and autumn of 1972. The first Prolog program, also written in 1972 and implemented in Marseille, was a French question-answering system. The use of Prolog as a practical programming language was given great momentum by the development of a compiler by David Warren in Edinburgh in 1977. Experiments demonstrated that Edinburgh Prolog could compete with the processing speed of other symbolic programming languages such as Lisp. Edinburgh Prolog became the de facto standard and strongly influenced the definition of ISO standard Prolog.

==Negation as failure==

For most practical applications, as well as for applications that require non-monotonic reasoning in artificial intelligence, Horn clause logic programs need to be extended to normal logic programs, with negative conditions. A clause in a normal logic program has the form:

:H :- A1, , An, not B1, , not Bn. 

and is read declaratively as a logical implication:

:H if A1 and  and An and not B1 and  and not Bn.

where H and all the Ai and Bi are atomic formulas. The negation in the negative literals not Bi is commonly referred to as "negation as failure", because in most implementations, a negative condition not Bi is shown to hold by showing that the positive condition Bi fails to hold.

Micro-Planner had a construct, called "thnot", which when applied to an expression returns the value true if (and only if) the evaluation of the expression fails. An equivalent operator is normally built-in in modern Prolog's implementations. It is normally written as not(''Goal'') or \+ ''Goal'', where ''Goal'' is some goal (proposition) to be proved by the program. This operator differs from negation in first-order logic: a negation such as \+ X == 1 fails when the variable X has been bound to the atom 1, but it succeeds in all other cases, including when X is unbound. This makes Prolog's reasoning non-monotonic: X = 1, \+ X == 1 always fails, while \+ X == 1, X = 1 can succeed, binding X to 1, depending on whether X was initially bound (note that standard Prolog executes goals in left-to-right order).

The logical status of negation as failure was unresolved until Keith Clark showed that, under certain natural conditions, it is a correct (and sometimes complete) implementation of classical negation with respect to the completion of the program. Completion amounts roughly to regarding the set of all the program clauses with the same predicate on the left hand side, say

:H :- Body1.
: 
:H :- Bodyk.

as a definition of the predicate

:H iff (Body1 or  or Bodyk)

where "iff" means "if and only if". Writing the completion also requires explicit use of the equality predicate and the inclusion of a set of appropriate axioms for equality. However, the implementation of negation by failure needs only the if-halves of the definitions without the axioms of equality.

The notion of completion is closely related to McCarthy's circumscription semantics for default reasoning, and to the closed world assumption.

As an alternative to the completion semantics, negation as failure can also be interpreted epistemically, as in the stable model semantics of answer set programming. In this interpretation not(Bi) means literally that Bi is not known or not believed. The epistemic interpretation has the advantage that it can be combined very simply with classical negation, as in "extended logic programming", to formalise such phrases as "the contrary can not be shown", where "contrary" is classical negation and "can not be shown" is the epistemic interpretation of negation as failure.

==Problem solving==
In the simplified, propositional case in which a logic program and a top-level atomic goal contain no variables, backward reasoning determines an and-or tree, which constitutes the search space for solving the goal. The top-level goal is the root of the tree. Given any node in the tree and any clause whose head matches the node, there exists a set of child nodes corresponding to the sub-goals in the body of the clause. These child nodes are grouped together by an "and". The alternative sets of children corresponding to alternative ways of solving the node are grouped together by an "or".

Any search strategy can be used to search this space. Prolog uses a sequential, last-in-first-out, backtracking strategy, in which only one alternative and one sub-goal is considered at a time. Other search strategies, such as parallel search, intelligent backtracking, or best-first search to find an optimal solution, are also possible.

In the more general case, where sub-goals share variables, other strategies can be used, such as choosing the subgoal that is most highly instantiated or that is sufficiently instantiated so that only one procedure applies. Such strategies are used, for example, in concurrent logic programming.

The fact that there are alternative ways of executing a logic program has been characterised by the slogan

:Algorithm = Logic + Control

where "Logic" represents a logic program and "Control" represents different theorem-proving strategies. 

==Knowledge representation==
The fact that Horn clauses can be given a procedural interpretation and, vice versa, that goal-reduction procedures can be understood as Horn clauses + backward reasoning means that logic programs combine declarative and procedural representations of knowledge. The inclusion of negation as failure means that logic programming is a kind of non-monotonic logic.

Despite its simplicity compared with classical logic, this combination of Horn clauses and negation as failure has proved to be surprisingly expressive. For example, it has been shown to correspond, with some further extensions, quite naturally to the semi-formal language of legislation. It is also a natural language for expressing common-sense laws of cause and effect, as in the situation calculus and event calculus.

==Abductive logic programming==
Abductive Logic Programming is an extension of normal Logic Programming that allows some predicates, declared as abducible predicates, to be incompletely defined. Problem solving is achieved by deriving hypotheses expressed in terms of the abducible predicates as solutions of problems to be solved. These problems can be either observations that need to be explained (as in classical abductive reasoning) or goals to be achieved (as in normal logic programming). It has been used to solve problems in Diagnosis, Planning, Natural Language and Machine Learning. It has also been used to interpret Negation as Failure as a form of abductive reasoning.

==Metalogic programming==
Because mathematical logic has a long tradition of distinguishing between object language and metalanguage, logic programming also allows metalevel programming. The simplest metalogic program is the so-called "vanilla" meta-interpreter:

 solve(true).
 solve((A,B)):- solve(A),solve(B).
 solve(A):- clause(A,B),solve(B).

where true represents an empty conjunction, and clause(A,B) means there is an object-level clause of the form A :- B.

Metalogic programming allows object-level and metalevel representations to be combined, as in natural language. It can also be used to implement any logic that is specified by means of inference rules.

==Constraint logic programming==

Constraint logic programming combines Horn clause logic programming with constraint solving. It extends Horn clauses by allowing some predicates, declared as constraint predicates, to occur as literals in the body of clauses. A constraint logic program is a set of clauses of the form:

:H :- C1, , Cn B1, , Bn.

where H and all the Bi are atomic formulas, and the Ci are constraints. Declaratively, such clauses are read as ordinary logical implications:

:H if C1 and  and Cn and B1 and  and Bn.

However, whereas the predicates in the heads of clauses are defined by the constraint logic program, the predicates in the constraints are predefined by some domain-specific model-theoretic structure or theory.

Procedurally, subgoals whose predicates are defined by the program are solved by goal-reduction, as in ordinary logic programming, but constraints are checked for satisfiability by a domain-specific constraint-solver, which implements the semantics of the constraint predicates. An initial problem is solved by reducing it to a satisfiable set of constraints. 

Constraint logic programming has been used to solve problems in such fields as civil engineering, mechanical engineering, digital circuit verification, automated timetabling, air traffic control, and finance. It is closely related to abductive logic programming.

==Concurrent logic programming==

Concurrent logic programming integrates concepts of logic programming with concurrent programming. Its development was given a big impetus in the 1980s by its choice for the systems programming language of the Japanese Fifth Generation Project (FGCS). 

A concurrent logic program is a set of guarded Horn clauses of the form:

::H :- G1, , Gn | B1, , Bn.

The conjunction G1,  , Gn is called the guard of the clause, and | is the commitment operator. Declaratively, guarded Horn clauses are read as ordinary logical implications:

::H if G1 and  and Gn and B1 and  and Bn.

However, procedurally, when there are several clauses whose heads H match a given goal, then all of the clauses are executed in parallel, checking whether their guards G1,  , Gn hold. If the guards of more than one clause hold, then a committed choice is made to one of the clauses, and execution proceedes with the subgoals B1, , Bn of the chosen clause. These subgoals can also be executed in parallel. Thus concurrent logic programming implements a form of "don't care nondeterminism", rather than "don't know nondeterminism".

Arguably, concurrent logic programming is based on message passing and consequently is subject to the same indeterminacy as other concurrent message-passing systems, such as Actors (see Indeterminacy in concurrent computation). Carl Hewitt has argued that, concurrent logic programming is not based on logic in his sense that computational steps cannot be logically deduced and Agha, 1988. However, in concurrent logic programming, any result of a terminating computation is a logical consequence of the program, and any partial result of a partial computation is a logical consequence of the program and the residual goal (process network). Consequently, the indeterminacy of computations implies that not all logical consequences of the program can be deduced.

==Concurrent constraint logic programming==

Concurrent constraint logic programming combines concurrent logic programming and constraint logic programming, using constraints to control concurrency. A clause can contain a guard, which is a set of constraints that may block the applicability of the clause. When the guards of several clauses are satisfied, concurrent constraint logic programming makes a committed choice to the use of only one.

==Inductive logic programming==

Inductive logic programming is concerned with generalizing positive and negative examples in the context of background knowledge: machine learning of logic programs. Recent work in this area, combining logic programming, learning and probability, has given rise to the new field of statistical relational learning and probabilistic inductive logic programming.

==Higher-order logic programming==
Several researchers have extended logic programming with higher-order programming features derived from higher-order logic, such as predicate variables. Such languages include the Prolog extensions HiLog and Prolog.

==Linear logic programming==
Basing logic programming within linear logic has resulted in the design of logic programming languages that are considerably more expressive than those based on classical logic. Horn clause programs can only represent state change by the change in arguments to predicates. In linear logic programming, one can use the ambient linear logic to support state change. Some early designs of logic programming languages based on linear logic include LO & Pareschi, 1991, Lolli & Miller, 1994, ACL & Yonezawa, 1994, and Forum 1996. Forum provides a goal-directed interpretation of all of linear logic.

== Object-oriented logic programming ==
F-logic extends logic programming with objects and the frame syntax. A number of systems are based on F-logic, including Flora-2, FLORID, and a highly scalable commercial system Ontobroker.

== Transaction logic programming ==
Transaction logic is an extension of logic programming with a logical theory of state-modifying updates. It has both a model-theoretic semantics and a procedural one. An implementation of a subset of Transaction logic is available in the Flora-2 system. Other prototypes are also available.

==See also==
*Boolean satisfiability problem
*Constraint logic programming
*Datalog
*Functional programming
*Inductive logic programming
*Fuzzy logic
*Logic in computer science (includes Formal methods)
*Logic programming languages
*Programming paradigm
*R++
*Reasoning system
*Satisfiability

==References==

===General introductions===

* Chitta Baral and Michael Gelfond. Logic programming and knowledge representation Journal of Logic Programming. 1994, Vol. 19, 73-148.
* Robert Kowalski. The Early Years of Logic Programming CACM. January 1988.
* J. W. Lloyd. Foundations of Logic Programming (2nd edition). Springer-Verlag 1987.

===Other sources===

* Fisher Black. A deductive question answering system Harvard University. Thesis. 1964.
* J.M. Foster and E.W. Elcock. ABSYS 1: An Incremental Compiler for Assertions: an Introduction, Machine Intelligence 4, Edinburgh U Press, 1969, pp. 423429
* Cordell Green. Application of Theorem Proving to Problem Solving IJCAI 1969.
* Pat Hayes. Computation and Deduction. In Proceedings of the 2nd MFCS Symposium. Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences, 1973, pp. 105118.
* Carl Hewitt. Planner: A Language for Proving Theorems in Robots IJCAI 1969.
* Joshua Hodas and Dale Miller. Logic Programming in a Fragment of Intuitionistic Linear Logic, Information and Computation, 1994, 110(2), 327-365.
* Naoki Kobayashi and Akinori Yonezawa. Asynchronous communication model based on linear logic, Formal Aspects of Computing, 1994, 279-294.
* Robert Kowalski and Donald and Kuehner, Linear Resolution with Selection Function Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 2, 1971, pp. 22760.
* Robert Kowalski Predicate Logic as a Programming Language Memo 70, Department of Artificial Intelligence, Edinburgh University. 1973. Also in Proceedings IFIP Congress, Stockholm, North Holland Publishing Co., 1974, pp. 569574.
*John McCarthy. Programs with common sense Symposium on Mechanization of Thought Processes. National Physical Laboratory. Teddington, England. 1958.
*D. Miller, G. Nadathur, F. Pfenning, A. Scedrov. Uniform proofs as a foundation for logic programming, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, vol. 51, pp 125157, 1991.
*Ehud Shapiro (Editor). Concurrent Prolog MIT Press. 1987.
*Ehud Shapiro. The family of concurrent logic programming languages ACM Computing Surveys. September 1989.
*James Slagle. Experiments with a Deductive Question-Answering Program CACM. December 1965.
*Shunichi Uchida and Kazuhiro Fuchi Proceedings of the FGCS Project Evaluation Workshop Institute for New Generation Computer Technology (ICOT). 1992.

==Further reading==

*Carl Hewitt. Procedural Embedding of Knowledge In Planner IJCAI 1971.
*Carl Hewitt. The repeated demise of logic programming and why it will be reincarnated What Went Wrong and Why: Lessons from AI Research and Applications. Technical Report SS-06-08. AAAI Press. March 2006.
*Evgeny Dantsin, Thomas , Georg Gottlob, Andrei Voronkov: Complexity and expressive power of logic programming. ACM Comput. Surv. 33(3): 374-425 (2001)
*Ulf Nilsson and Jan Maluszynski, Logic, Programming and Prolog

==External links==
*Logic Programming Virtual Library entry
*Bibliographies on Logic Programming
*Association for Logic Programming (ALP)
*Theory and Practice of Logic Programming journal
*Logic programming in C++ with Castor
*Logic programming in Oz
*Prolog Development Center 
*Racklog: Logic Programming in Racket

 


[[Lake Tana]]

Lake Tana (also spelled T'ana, , , ; an older variant is Tsana, Ge'ez  n; sometimes called "Dembiya" after the region to the north of the lake) is the source of the Blue Nile and is the largest lake in Ethiopia. Located in Amhara Region in the north-western Ethiopian Highlands, the lake is approximately 84 kilometers long and 66 kilometers wide, with a maximum depth of 15 meters, and an elevation of 1,788 meters. Lake Tana is fed by the Lesser Abay, Reb and Gumara rivers; and its surface area ranges from 3,000 to 3,500 km, depending on season and rainfall. The lake level has been regulated since the construction of the control weir where the lake discharges into the Blue Nile. This controls the flow to the Blue Nile Falls (Tis Abbai) and hydro-power station.

== Overview ==
Lake Tana seen from SPOT satellite
Orthodox priest in a papyrus boat on his way to one of the monasteries
Beginning of the Blue Nile River by its outlet from Lake Tana
The lake has a number of islands, whose numbers vary depending on the level of the lake; it has fallen about 6 ft in the last 400 years. According to Manoel de Almeida (a Portuguese missionary in the early 17th century), there were 21 islands, seven to eight of which had monasteries on them "formerly large, but now much diminished." When James Bruce visited the area in the later 18th century, he noted that the locals counted 45 inhabited islands, but stated he believed that "the number may be about eleven." A 20th-century geographer named 37 islands, of which he believed 19 have or had monasteries or churches on them. C.F. Beckham and G.W.B. Huntingford, Some Records of Ethiopia, 1593-1646, (series 2, no. 107; London: Hakluyt Society, 1954), p. 35 and note. 

Remains of ancient Ethiopian emperors and treasures of the Ethiopian Church are kept in the isolated island monasteries (including Kebran Gabriel, Ura Kidane Mehret, Narga Selassie, Daga Estifanos, Medhane Alem of Rema, Kota Maryam and Mertola Maryam). On the island of Tana Qirqos is a rock shown to Paul B. Henze, on which he was told the Virgin Mary had rested on her journey back from Egypt; he was also told that Frumentius, who introduced Christianity to Ethiopia, is "allegedly buried on Tana Cherqos." Paul B. Henze, Layers of Time: A History of Ethiopia (New York: Palgrave, 2000), p.73. The body of Yekuno Amlak is interred in the monastery of St. Stephen on Daga Island; other Emperors whose tombs are on Daga include Dawit I, Zara Yaqob, Za Dengel and Fasilides. Other important islands in Lake Tana include Dek, Mitraha, Gelila Zakarias, Halimun, and Briguida.

The monasteries are believed to have been built over earlier religious sites. They include the fourteenth-century Debre Maryam, and the eighteenth-century Narga Selassie, Tana Qirqos (said to have housed the Ark of the Covenant before it was moved to Axum), and Ura Kidane Mehret, known for its regalia. A ferry service links Bahir Dar with Gorgora via Dek Island and various lakeshore villages.

== Formation ==
The Lake has been formed by volcanic activity, blocking the course of inflowing rivers in the early Pleistocene times circa 5 million years ago. springer.com 

== Current situation of the lake ==
The Lake was originally much larger than it is today. Seven large permanent rivers feed the lake as well as 40 small seasonal rivers. The main tributaries to the lake are Gilgel Abbay (Little Nile River), and the Megech, Gumara and Rib rivers. springer.com 

==Fauna==
300px
Since there are no inflows that link the lake to other large waterways and the main outflow, the Blue Nile, is obstructed by the Blue Nile Falls, the lake supports a highly distinctive fish fauna, which generally is related to species from the Nile Basin. Freshwater Ecoregions of the World (2008). Lake Tana. Accessed 24 January 2012 About 70% of the fish species in the lake are endemic. This includes one of only two known cyprinid species flocks (the other, from Lake Lanao in the Philippines, has been decimated by introduced species), which consists of fifteen relatively large, up to 1 m long, Labeobarbus barbs. de Graaf, Dejen, Sibbing and Osse (2000). Barbus tanapelagius, A New Species from Lake Tana (Ethiopia): its Morphology and Ecology. Environmental Biology of Fishes 59 (1): 1-9 Eight of these are piscivorous and an important prey is the small Barbus tanapelagius, another endemic of the lake. (B. humilis and B. pleurogramma also occur in Lake Tana, but neither is endemic.) de Graaf, Megens, Samallo, Sibbing (2007). ",Evolutionary origin of Lake Tana's (Ethiopia) small Barbus species: indications of rapid ecological divergence and speciation," Animal Biology 57(1): 39-48 Other noteworthy endemic species are Afronemacheilus abyssinicus, which is the only African stone loach, and the tana subspecies of the Nile tilapia. 

Lake Tana supports a large fishing industry, mainly based on the Labeobarbus barbs (formerly in genus Barbus), Nile tilapia and sharptooth catfish (a large catfish that is widespread in Africa). According to the Ethiopian Department of Fisheries and Aquaculture, 1,454 tonnes of fish are landed each year at Bahir Dar, which the department estimates is 15% of its sustainable amount. "Information on Fisheries Management in the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia", Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO), January 2003 

Among other fauna, the lake supports relatively few invertebrates: There are fifteen species of molluscs, including one endemic, and also an endemic freshwater sponge. Numerous wetland birds, such as the great white pelican and African darter, reside at Lake Tana. It is an important resting and feeding ground for many Palearctic migrant waterbirds. There are no crocodiles, but the African softshell turtle has been recorded near the Blue Nile outflow from the lake. Largen and Spawls (2010). The Amphibians and Reptiles of Ethiopia and Eritrea. ISBN 978-3-89973-466-9 

== References ==

== External links ==

*Lake Tana project at Aberystwyth University
*Photographs of the lake
*Unesco plan for Lake T'ana
*LakeNet Profile
* Pictures from Lake Tana and the Monasteries

 
Tana
Tana


[[Lola Graham]]

Lola Glenn Graham was born in Melbourne, Australia on 23 September 1918. She first came to public attention after winning a musical competition at age six by playing the piano. In 1930 she was employed by Melbourne radio station 3?? and continued to work in radio for most of her life. She also worked extensively in live musical theatre as a band member and accompanist. Her repertoire included working with such artists as Barry Humphries. She married Fred Menhennitt on 23 February 1957 and had two sons. She died on 2 January 1992 after a long battle with cancer.



[[Liquid-crystal display]]

 Reflective twisted nematic liquid crystal display.

A liquid-crystal display (LCD) is a flat panel display, electronic visual display, or video display that uses the light modulating properties of liquid crystals. Liquid crystals do not emit light directly.

LCDs are available to display arbitrary images (as in a general-purpose computer display) or fixed images which can be displayed or hidden, such as preset words, digits, and 7-segment displays as in a digital clock. They use the same basic technology, except that arbitrary images are made up of a large number of small pixels, while other displays have larger elements.

LCDs are used in a wide range of applications including computer monitors, televisions, instrument panels, aircraft cockpit displays, and signage. They are common in consumer devices such as video players, gaming devices, clocks, watches, calculators, and telephones, and have replaced cathode ray tube (CRT) displays in most applications.
They are available in a wider range of screen sizes than CRT and plasma displays, and since they do not use phosphors, they do not suffer image burn-in. LCDs are, however, susceptible to image persistence. 

The LCD screen is more energy efficient and can be disposed of more safely than a CRT. Its low electrical power consumption enables it to be used in battery-powered electronic equipment. It is an electronically modulated optical device made up of any number of segments filled with liquid crystals and arrayed in front of a light source (backlight) or reflector to produce images in color or monochrome. Liquid crystals were first discovered in 1888. 
 
By 2008, annual sales of televisions with LCD screens exceeded sales of CRT units worldwide, and the CRT became obsolete for most purposes.

==Overview==

Each pixel of an LCD typically consists of a layer of molecules aligned between two transparent electrodes, and two polarizing filters (parallel and perpendicular), the axes of transmission of which are (in most of the cases) perpendicular to each other. Without the liquid crystal between the polarizing filters, light passing through the first filter would be blocked by the second (crossed) polarizer.

Before an electric field is applied, the orientation of the liquid-crystal molecules is determined by the alignment at the surfaces of electrodes. In a twisted nematic device (still the most common liquid-crystal device), the surface alignment directions at the two electrodes are perpendicular to each other, and so the molecules arrange themselves in a helical structure, or twist. This induces the rotation of the polarization of the incident light, and the device appears gray. If the applied voltage is large enough, the liquid crystal molecules in the center of the layer are almost completely untwisted and the polarization of the incident light is not rotated as it passes through the liquid crystal layer. This light will then be mainly polarized perpendicular to the second filter, and thus be blocked and the pixel will appear black. By controlling the voltage applied across the liquid crystal layer in each pixel, light can be allowed to pass through in varying amounts thus constituting different levels of gray.

LCD with top polarizer removed from device and placed on top, such that the top and bottom polarizers are parallel.
The optical effect of a twisted nematic device in the voltage-on state is far less dependent on variations in the device thickness than that in the voltage-off state. Because of this, these devices are usually operated between crossed polarizers such that they appear bright with no voltage (the eye is much more sensitive to variations in the dark state than the bright state). These devices can also be operated between parallel polarizers, in which case the bright and dark states are reversed. The voltage-off dark state in this configuration appears blotchy, however, because of small variations of thickness across the device.

Both the liquid crystal material and the alignment layer material contain ionic compounds. If an electric field of one particular polarity is applied for a long period of time, this ionic material is attracted to the surfaces and degrades the device performance. This is avoided either by applying an alternating current or by reversing the polarity of the electric field as the device is addressed (the response of the liquid crystal layer is identical, regardless of the polarity of the applied field).

Displays for a small number of individual digits and/or fixed symbols (as in digital watches and pocket calculators) can be implemented with independent electrodes for each segment. In contrast full alphanumeric and/or variable graphics displays are usually implemented with pixels arranged as a matrix consisting of electrically connected rows on one side of the LC layer and columns on the other side, which makes it possible to address each pixel at the intersections. The general method of matrix addressing consists of sequentially addressing one side of the matrix, for example by selecting the rows one-by-one and applying the picture information on the other side at the columns row-by-row. For details on the various matrix addressing schemes see Passive-matrix and active-matrix addressed LCDs.

==History==

* In 1888, Friedrich Reinitzer (18581927) discovered the liquid crystalline nature of cholesterol extracted from carrots (that is, two melting points and generation of colors) and published his findings at a meeting of the Vienna Chemical Society on May 3, 1888 (F. Reinitzer: Beitrge zur Kenntniss des Cholesterins, Monatshefte fr Chemie (Wien) 9, 421441 (1888)). Tim Sluckin: Ueber die Natur der kristallinischen Flssigkeiten und flssigen Kristalle (About the Nature of Crystallised Liquids and Liquid Crystals), Bunsen-Magazin, 7.Jahrgang, 5/2005 

* In 1904, Otto Lehmann published his work "Flssige Kristalle" (Liquid Crystals).

* In 1911, Charles Mauguin first experimented with liquid crystals confined between plates in thin layers.

* In 1922, Georges Friedel described the structure and properties of liquid crystals and classified them in 3 types (nematics, smectics and cholesterics).

* In 1927, Vsevolod Frederiks devised the electrically switched light valve, called the Fredericksz transition, the essential effect of all LCD technology.

* In 1936, the Marconi Wireless Telegraph company patented the first practical application of the technology, "The Liquid Crystal Light Valve".

* In 1962, the first major English language publication on the subject "Molecular Structure and Properties of Liquid Crystals", by Dr. George W. Gray. 

* In 1962, Richard Williams of RCA found that liquid crystals had some interesting electro-optic characteristics and he realized an electro-optical effect by generating stripe-patterns in a thin layer of liquid crystal material by the application of a voltage. This effect is based on an electro-hydrodynamic instability forming what are now called "Williams domains" inside the liquid crystal. R. Williams, "Domains in liquid crystals," J. Phys. Chem., vol. 39, pp. 382388, July 1963 

* In 1964, George H. Heilmeier, then working at the RCA laboratories on the effect discovered by Williams achieved the switching of colors by field-induced realignment of dichroic dyes in a homeotropically oriented liquid crystal. Practical problems with this new electro-optical effect made Heilmeier continue to work on scattering effects in liquid crystals and finally the achievement of the first operational liquid-crystal display based on what he called the dynamic scattering mode (DSM). Application of a voltage to a DSM display switches the initially clear transparent liquid crystal layer into a milky turbid state. DSM displays could be operated in transmissive and in reflective mode but they required a considerable current to flow for their operation. G. H. Heilmeier, L. A. Zanoni, and L. A. Barton, "Dynamic scattering: A new electrooptic effect in certain classes of nematic liquid crystals," Proc. IEEE, vol. 56, pp. 11621171, July 1968 George H. Heilmeier was inducted in the National Inventors Hall of Fame National Inventors Hall of Fame (Retrieved 2014-04-25) and credited with the invention of LCDs. Heilmeier's work is an IEEE Milestone. 

* In the late 1960s, pioneering work on liquid crystals was undertaken by the UK's Royal Radar Establishment at Malvern, England. The team at RRE supported ongoing work by George William Gray and his team at the University of Hull who ultimately discovered the cyanobiphenyl liquid crystals, which had correct stability and temperature properties for application in LCDs.

* On December 4, 1970, the twisted nematic field effect in liquid crystals was filed for patent by Hoffmann-LaRoche in Switzerland, (Swiss patent No. 532 261) with Wolfgang Helfrich and Martin Schadt (then working for the Central Research Laboratories) listed as inventors. Hoffmann-La Roche then licensed the invention to the Swiss manufacturer Brown, Boveri & Cie who produced displays for wristwatches during the 1970s and also to Japanese electronics industry, which soon produced the first digital quartz wrist watches with TN-LCDs and numerous other products. James Fergason, while working with Sardari Arora and Alfred Saupe at Kent State University Liquid Crystal Institute, filed an identical patent in the United States on April 22, 1971. In 1971 the company of Fergason ILIXCO (now LXD Incorporated) produced the first LCDs based on the TN-effect, which soon superseded the poor-quality DSM types due to improvements of lower operating voltages and lower power consumption.

* In 1972, the first active-matrix liquid-crystal display panel was produced in the United States by T Peter Brody's team at Westinghouse, in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Brody, T.P., "Birth of the Active Matrix", Information Display, Vol. 13, No. 10, 1997, pp. 2832. 

* In 1983, researchers at Brown, Boveri & Cie (BBC), Switzerland, invented the super-twisted nematic (STN) structure for passive matrix addressed LCDs. H. Amstutz et al. were listed as inventors in the corresponding patent applications filed in Switzerland on July 7, 1983, and October 28, 1983. Patents were granted in Switzerland CH 665491, Europe EP 0131216, European Patent No. EP 0131216: Amstutz H., Heimgartner D., Kaufmann M.,Scheffer T.J., "Flssigkristallanzeige," Oct. 28, 1987. and many more countries.

* In 1990, under different titles inventors conceived electrooptical effects as alternatives to twisted nematic field effect LCDs (TN- and STN- LCDs). One approach was to use interdigital electrodes on one glass substrate only to produce an electric field essentially parallel to the glass substrates (Abstract). : R. Soref, Liquid crystal electric field sensing measurement and display device, filed June 28, 1973. To take full advantage of the properties of this In Plane Switching (IPS) technology further work was needed. After thorough analysis, details of advantageous embodiments are filed in Germany by Guenter Baur et al. and patented in various countries (Abstract). : G. Baur, W. Fehrenbach, B. Staudacher, F. Windscheid, R. Kiefer, Liquid crystal switching elements having a parallel electric field and betao which is not 0 or 90 degrees, filed Jan 9, 1990. The Fraunhofer Institute in Freiburg, where the inventors worked, assigns these patents to Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, a supplier of LC substances.

* In 1992, shortly thereafter, engineers at Hitachi work out various practical details of the IPS technology to interconnect the thin-film transistor array as a matrix and to avoid undesirable stray fields in between pixels (Abstract). : K. Kondo, H. Terao, H. Abe, M. Ohta, K. Suzuki, T. Sasaki, G. Kawachi, J. Ohwada, Liquid crystal display device, filed Sep 18, 1992 and Jan 20, 1993. Hitachi also improves the viewing angle dependence further by optimizing the shape of the electrodes (Super IPS).

* NEC and Hitachi become early manufacturers of active-matrix addressed LCDs based on the IPS technology. This is a milestone for implementing large-screen LCDs having acceptable visual performance for flat-panel computer monitors and television screens.

* In 1996, Samsung developed the optical patterning technique that enables multi-domain LCD. Multi-domain and In Plane Switching subsequently remain the dominant LCD designs through 2010. 

* In the fourth quarter of 2007, LCD televisions surpassed CRTs in worldwide sales for the first time. 

* LCD TVs was projected to account 50% of the 200 million TVs to be shipped globally in 2008, according to Display Bank. 

* In October 2011, Toshiba announced 2560  1600 pixels on an 6.1-inch LCD panel, suitable for use in a tablet computer, especially for Chinese character display.

The origins and the complex history of liquid-crystal displays from the perspective of an insider during the early days were described by Joseph A. Castellano in Liquid Gold: The Story of Liquid Crystal Displays and the Creation of an Industry. Liquid Gold: The Story of Liquid Crystal Displays and the Creation of an Industry, Joseph A. Castellano, 2005 World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd., ISBN 981-238-956-3. 
Another report on the origins and history of LCD from a different perspective until 1991 has been published by Hiroshi Kawamoto, available at the IEEE History Center. The History of Liquid-Crystal Displays, Hiroshi Kawamoto, Proceedings of the IEEE, 90, No. 4 (April 2002), pp. 460500, 
A description of Swiss contributions to LCD developments, written by Peter J. Wild, can be looked up as IEEE First-Hand History. 

==Illumination==
Since LCD panels produce no light of their own, they require external light to produce a visible image. In a "transmissive" type of LCD, this light is provided at the back of the glass "stack" and is called the backlight. While passive-matrix displays are usually not backlit (e.g. calculators, wristwatches), active-matrix displays almost always are. Explanation of different LCD monitor technologies, "Monitor buying guide - CNET Reviews", Eric Franklin, Retrieved September 2012. Explanation of different LCD monitor backlight technologies, "Monitor LED Backlighting", TFT Central. Retrieved September 2012. 

The common implementations of LCD backlight technology are:

*CCFL: 18 parallel CCFLs as backlight for a 42-inch LCD TV The LCD panel is lit either by two cold cathode fluorescent lamps placed at opposite edges of the display or an array of parallel CCFLs behind larger displays. A diffuser then spreads the light out evenly across the whole display. For many years, this technology had been used almost exclusively. Unlike white LEDs, most CCFLs have an even-white spectral output resulting in better color gamut for the display. However, CCFLs are less energy efficient than LEDs and require a somewhat costly inverter to convert whatever DC voltage the device uses (usually 5 or 12 V) to ~1000 V needed to light a CCFL. Explanation of CCFL backlighting details, "Design News - Features - How to Backlight an LCD", Randy Frank, Retrieved January 2013. The thickness of the inverter transformers also limit how thin the display can be made.
*EL-WLED: The LCD panel is lit by a row of white LEDs placed at one or more edges of the screen. A light diffuser is then used to spread the light evenly across the whole display. As of 2012, this design is the most popular one in desktop computer monitors. It allows for the thinnest displays. Some LCD monitors using this technology have a feature called "Dynamic Contrast" where the backlight is dimmed to the brightest color that appears on the screen, allowing the 1000:1 contrast ratio of the LCD panel to be scaled to different light intensities, resulting in the "30000:1" contrast ratios seen in the advertising on some of these monitors. Since computer screen images usually have full white somewhere in the image, the backlight will usually be at full intensity, making this "feature" mostly a marketing gimmick.
*WLED array: The LCD panel is lit by a full array of white LEDs placed behind a diffuser behind the panel. LCD displays that use this implementation will usually have the ability to dim the LEDs in the dark areas of the image being displayed, effectively increasing the contrast ratio of the display. As of 2012, this design gets most of its use from upscale, larger-screen LCD televisions.
*RGB-LED: Similar to the WLED array, except the panel is lit by a full array of RGB LEDs. While displays lit with white LEDs usually have a poorer color gamut than CCFL lit displays, panels lit with RGB LEDs have very wide color gamuts. This implementation is most popular on professional graphics editing LCD displays. As of 2012, LCD displays in this category usually cost more than $1000.

Today, most LCD screens are being designed with an LED backlight instead of the traditional CCFL backlight.

==Connection to other circuits==
A pink elastomeric connector mating an LCD panel to circuit board traces, shown next to a centimeter-scale ruler. (The conductive and insulating layers in the black stripe are very small, click on the image for more detail.)
LCD panels typically use thinly-coated metallic conductive pathways on a glass substrate to form the cell circuitry to operate the panel. It is usually not possible to use soldering techniques to directly connect the panel to a separate copper-etched circuit board.

Instead, interfacing is accomplished using either adhesive plastic ribbon with conductive traces glued to the edges of the LCD panel, or with an elastomeric connector, which is a strip of rubber or silicone with alternating layers of conductive and insulating pathways, pressed between contact pads on the LCD and mating contact pads on a circuit board.

==Passive and active-matrix==
Prototype of a passive-matrix STN-LCD with 540x270 pixels, Brown Boveri Research, Switzerland, 1984

Monochrome passive-matrix LCDs were standard in most early laptops (although a few used plasma displays) and the original Nintendo Game Boy until the mid-1990s, when color active-matrix became standard on all laptops. The commercially unsuccessful Macintosh Portable (released in 1989) was one of the first to use an active-matrix display (though still monochrome).

Passive-matrix LCDs are still used today for applications less demanding than laptops and TVs. In particular, these are used on portable devices where less information content needs to be displayed, lowest power consumption (no backlight) and low cost are desired, and/or readability in direct sunlight is needed.

Displays having a passive-matrix structure are employing super-twisted nematic STN (invented by Brown Boveri Switzerland; scientific details were published T.J. Scheffer and J. Nehring,"A new highly multiplexable LCD," Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 48, no. 10, pp. 10211023, Nov. 1984. ) or double-layer STN (DSTN) technology (the latter of which addresses a color-shifting problem with the former), and color-STN (CSTN) in which color is added by using an internal filter.

STN LCDs have been optimized for passive-matrix addressing. They exhibit a sharper threshold of the contrast-vs-voltage characteristic than the original TN LCDs. This is important, because pixels are subjected to partial voltages even while not selected. Crosstalk between activated and non-activated pixels has to be handled properly by keeping the RMS voltage of non-activated pixels below the threshold voltage, P. J. Wild, Matrix-addressed liquid crystal projection display, Digest of Technical Papers, International Symposium, Society for Information Display, June 1972, pp. 6263. while activated pixels are subjected to voltages above threshold. P. M. Alt, P. Pleshko Scanning limitations of liquid-crystal displays, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. ED-21, pp. 146155, Feb. 1974. STN LCDs have to be continuously refreshed by alternating pulsed voltages of one polarity during one frame and pulses of opposite polarity during the next frame. Individual pixels are addressed by the corresponding row and column circuits. This type of display is called passive-matrix addressed, because the pixel must retain its state between refreshes without the benefit of a steady electrical charge. As the number of pixels (and, correspondingly, columns and rows) increases, this type of display becomes less feasible. Slow response times and poor contrast are typical of passive-matrix addressed LCDs with too many pixels.

How an LCD works using an active-matrix structure

New zero-power (bistable) LCDs do not require continuous refreshing. Rewriting is only required for picture information changes. Potentially, passive-matrix addressing can be used with these new devices, if their write/erase characteristics are suitable.

High-resolution color displays, such as modern LCD computer monitors and televisions, use an active-matrix structure. A matrix of thin-film transistors (TFTs) is added to the electrodes in contact with the LC layer. Each pixel has its own dedicated transistor, allowing each column line to access one pixel. When a row line is selected, all of the column lines are connected to a row of pixels and voltages corresponding to the picture information are driven onto all of the column lines. The row line is then deactivated and the next row line is selected. All of the row lines are selected in sequence during a refresh operation. Active-matrix addressed displays look brighter and sharper than passive-matrix addressed displays of the same size, and generally have quicker response times, producing much better images.

==Active-matrix technologies==
A Casio 1.8 in color TFT LCD, used in the Sony Cyber-shot DSC-P93A digital compact cameras

===Twisted nematic (TN)===

Twisted nematic displays contain liquid crystals that twist and untwist at varying degrees to allow light to pass through. When no voltage is applied to a TN liquid crystal cell, polarized light passes through the 90-degrees twisted LC layer. In proportion to the voltage applied, the liquid crystals untwist changing the polarization and blocking the light's path. By properly adjusting the level of the voltage almost any gray level or transmission can be achieved.

===In-plane switching (IPS)===
In-plane switching is an LCD technology that aligns the liquid crystals in a plane parallel to the glass substrates. In this method, the electrical field is applied through opposite electrodes on the same glass substrate, so that the liquid crystals can be reoriented (switched) essentially in the same plane, although fringe fields inhibit a homogeneous reorientation. This requires two transistors for each pixel instead of the single transistor needed for a standard thin-film transistor (TFT) display. Before LG Enhanced IPS was introduced in 2009, the additional transistors resulted in blocking more transmission area, thus requiring a brighter backlight and consuming more power, making this type of display less desirable for notebook computers. Currently Panasonic is using an enhanced version eIPS for their large size LCD-TV products as well as Hewlett-Packard in its WebOS based TouchPad tablet and their Chromebook 11.

====IPS LCD vs AMOLED====
LG claimed the smartphone LG Optimus Black (IPS LCD (LCD NOVA)) has the brightness up to 700 nits, while the competitor has only IPS LCD with 518 nits and double an active-matrix OLED (AMOLED) display with 305 nits. LG also claimed the NOVA display to be 50 percent more efficient than regular LCDs and to consume only 50 percent of the power of AMOLED displays when producing white on screen. When it comes to contrast ratio, AMOLED display still performs best due to its underlying technology, where the black levels are displayed as pitch black and not as dark gray. On August 24, 2011, Nokia announced the Nokia 701 and also made the claim of the world's brightest display at 1000 nits. The screen also had Nokia's Clearblack layer, improving the contrast ratio and bringing it closer to that of the AMOLED screens.

===Super In-plane switching (S-IPS)===
Super-IPS was later introduced after in-plane switching with even better response times and color reproduction.
 

 This pixel-layout is found in S-IPS LCDs. A chevron-shape is used to widen the viewing-cone (range of viewing directions with good contrast and low color shift)

===Advanced fringe field switching (AFFS)===
Known as fringe field switching (FFS) until 2003, 

 
advanced fringe field switching is similar to IPS or S-IPS offering superior performance and color gamut with high luminosity. AFFS was developed by Hydis Technologies Co., Ltd, Korea (formally Hyundai Electronics, LCD Task Force). 
 

AFFS-applied notebook applications minimize color distortion while maintaining a wider viewing angle for a professional display. Color shift and deviation caused by light leakage is corrected by optimizing the white gamut which also enhances white/gray reproduction.

In 2004, Hydis Technologies Co., Ltd licensed AFFS to Japan's Hitachi Displays. Hitachi is using AFFS to manufacture high-end panels. In 2006, HYDIS licensed AFFS to Sanyo Epson Imaging Devices Corporation.

Shortly thereafter, Hydis introduced a high-transmittance evolution of the AFFS display, called HFFS (FFS+).

Hydis introduced AFFS+ with improved outdoor readability in 2007. AFFS panels are mostly utilized in the cockpits of latest commercial aircraft displays.

===Vertical alignment (VA)===
Vertical-alignment displays are a form of LCDs in which the liquid crystals naturally align vertically to the glass substrates. When no voltage is applied, the liquid crystals remain perpendicular to the substrate, creating a black display between crossed polarizers. When voltage is applied, the liquid crystals shift to a tilted position, allowing light to pass through and create a gray-scale display depending on the amount of tilt generated by the electric field. It has a deeper-black background, a higher contrast ratio, a wider viewing angle, and better image quality at extreme temperatures over traditional twisted-nematic displays. http://www.nxp.com/documents/user_manual/UM10764.pdf 

===Blue phase mode===

Blue phase mode LCDs have been shown as engineering samples early in 2008, but they are not in mass-production yet. The physics of blue phase mode LCDs suggest that very short switching times (~1 ms) can be achieved, so time sequential color control can possibly be realized and expensive color filters would be obsolete.

==Quality control==
Close-up photo of an LCD television screen. Blue, red and green pixels are discernible. The image portrays a man in suit and tie
Some LCD panels have defective transistors, causing permanently lit or unlit pixels which are commonly referred to as stuck pixels or dead pixels respectively. Unlike integrated circuits (ICs), LCD panels with a few defective transistors are usually still usable. Manufacturers' policies for the acceptable number of defective pixels vary greatly. At one point, Samsung held a zero-tolerance policy for LCD monitors sold in Korea. As of 2005, though, Samsung adheres to the less restrictive ISO 13406-2 standard. Other companies have been known to tolerate as many as 11 dead pixels in their policies. Dead pixel policies are often hotly debated between manufacturers and customers. To regulate the acceptability of defects and to protect the end user, ISO released the ISO 13406-2 standard. However, not every LCD manufacturer conforms to the ISO standard and the ISO standard is quite often interpreted in different ways.

LCD panels are more likely to have defects than most ICs due to their larger size. For example, a 300 mm SVGA LCD has 8 defects and a 150 mm wafer has only 3 defects. However, 134 of the 137 dies on the wafer will be acceptable, whereas rejection of the whole LCD panel would be a 0% yield. In recent years, quality control has been improved. An SVGA LCD panel with 4 defective pixels is usually considered defective and customers can request an exchange for a new one. Some manufacturers, notably in South Korea where some of the largest LCD panel manufacturers, such as LG, are located, now have "zero defective pixel guarantee", which is an extra screening process which can then determine "A" and "B" grade panels. Many manufacturers would replace a product even with one defective pixel. Even where such guarantees do not exist, the location of defective pixels is important. A display with only a few defective pixels may be unacceptable if the defective pixels are near each other.

LCD panels also have defects known as clouding (or less commonly mura), which describes the uneven patches of changes in luminance. It is most visible in dark or black areas of displayed scenes. Sony XBR Mura 

==Zero-power (bistable) displays==

The zenithal bistable device (ZBD), developed by QinetiQ (formerly DERA), can retain an image without power. The crystals may exist in one of two stable orientations ("Black" and "White") and power is only required to change the image. ZBD Displays is a spin-off company from QinetiQ who manufacture both grayscale and color ZBD devices.

Kent Displays has also developed a "no power" display that uses polymer stabilized cholesteric liquid crystal (ChLCD). In 2009 Kent demonstrated the use of a ChLCD to cover the entire surface of a mobile phone, allowing it to change colors, and keep that color even when power is cut off. 

In 2004 researchers at the University of Oxford demonstrated two new types of zero-power bistable LCDs based on Zenithal bistable techniques. 

Several bistable technologies, like the 360 BTN and the bistable cholesteric, depend mainly on the bulk properties of the liquid crystal (LC) and use standard strong anchoring, with alignment films and LC mixtures similar to the traditional monostable materials. Other bistable technologies, e.g. BiNem technology, are based mainly on the surface properties and need specific weak anchoring materials.

==Specifications==
Important factors to consider when evaluating an LCD:

* Resolution versus range: Fundamentally resolution is the granularity (or number of levels) with which a performance feature of the display is divided. Resolution is often confused with range or the total end-to-end output of the display. Each of the major features of a display has both a resolution and a range that are tied to each other but very different. Frequently the range is an inherent limitation of the display while the resolution is a function of the electronics that make the display work.

* Spatial performance: LCDs come in only one size for a variety of applications and a variety of resolutions within each of those applications. LCD spatial performance is also sometimes described in terms of a "dot pitch". The size (or spatial range) of an LCD is always described in terms of the diagonal distance from one corner to its opposite. This is an historical remnant from the early days of CRT television when CRT screens were manufactured on the bottoms of glass bottles, a direct extension of cathode ray tubes used in oscilloscopes. The diameter of the bottle determined the size of the screen. Later, when televisions went to a more square format, the square screens were measured diagonally to compare with the older round screens. "The Standard TV" pp. 3942 

The spatial resolution of an LCD is expressed by the number of columns and rows of pixels (e.g., 1024768). Each pixel is usually composed 3 sub-pixels, a red, a green, and a blue one. This had been one of the few features of LCD performance that was easily understood and not subject to interpretation. However there are newer schemes that share sub-pixels among pixels and to add additional colors of sub-pixels. So going forward, spatial resolution may now be more subject to interpretation.

One external factor to consider in evaluating display resolution is the resolution of the viewer's eyes. Assuming 20/20 vision, the resolution of the eyes is about one minute of arc. In practical terms that means for an older standard definition TV set the ideal viewing distance was about 8 times the height (not diagonal) of the screen away. At that distance the individual rows of pixels merge into a solid. If the viewer were closer to the screen than that, they would be able to see the individual rows of pixels. When observed from farther away, the image of the rows of pixels still merge, but the total image becomes smaller as the distance increases. For an HDTV set with slightly more than twice the number of rows of pixels, the ideal viewing distance is about half what it is for a standard definition set. The higher the resolution, the closer the viewer can sit or the larger the set can usefully be sitting at the same distance as an older standard definition display.

For a computer monitor or some other LCD that is being viewed from a very close distance, resolution is often expressed in terms of dot pitch or pixels per inch. This is consistent with the printing industry (another form of a display). Magazines, and other premium printed media are often at 300 dots per inch. As with the distance discussion above, this provides a very solid looking and detailed image. LCDs, particularly on mobile devices, are frequently much less than this as the higher the dot pitch, the more optically inefficient the display and the more power it burns. Running the LCD is frequently half, or more, of the power consumed by a mobile device.

An additional consideration in spatial performance are viewing cone and aspect ratio. The Aspect ratio is the ratio of the width to the height (for example, 4:3, 5:4, 16:9 or 16:10). Older, standard definition TVs were 4:3. Newer High Definition televisions (HDTV) are 16:9, as are most new notebook computers. Movies are often filmed in much different (wider) aspect ratios, which is why there will frequently still be black bars at the top and bottom of an HDTV screen.

The Viewing Angle of an LCD may be important depending on its use or location. The viewing angle is usually measured as the angle where the contrast of the LCD falls below 10:1. At this point, the colors usually start to change and can even invert, red becoming green and so forth. Viewing angles for LCDs used to be very restrictive however, improved optical films have been developed that give almost 180 degree viewing angles from left to right. Top to bottom viewing angles may still be restrictive, by design, as looking at an LCD from an extreme up or down angle is not a common usage model and these photons are wasted. Manufacturers commonly focus the light in a left to right plane to obtain a brighter image here.

* Temporal/timing performance: Contrary to spatial performance, temporal performance is a feature where smaller is better. Specifically, the range is the pixel response time of an LCD, or how quickly a sub-pixel's brightness changes from one level to another. For LCD monitors, this is measured in btb (black to black) or gtg (gray to gray). These different types of measurements make comparison difficult. LCD Monitor Parameters: Objective and Subjective Analysis Temporal Resolution Further, this number is almost never published in sales advertising.

Refresh rate or the temporal resolution of an LCD is the number of times per second in which the display draws the data it is being given. Since activated LCD pixels do not flash on/off between frames, LCD monitors exhibit no refresh-induced flicker, no matter how low the refresh rate. Contemporary LCD Monitor Parameters: Objective and Subjective Analysis (page 3) High-end LCD televisions now feature up to 240 Hz refresh rate, which requires advanced digital processing to insert additional interpolated frames between the real images to smooth the image motion. However, such high refresh rates may not be actually supported by pixel response times and the result can be visual artifacts that distort the image in unpleasant ways.

Temporal performance can be further taxed if it is a 3D display. 3D displays work by showing a different series of images to each eye, alternating from eye to eye. Thus a 3D display must display twice as many images in the same period of time as a conventional display, and consequently the response time of the LCD is more important. 3D LCDs with marginal response times will exhibit image smearing.

These artifacts are most noticeable in a person's black and white vision (rod cells) than in color vision (cone cells). Thus they will be more likely to see flicker or any sort of temporal distortion in a display image by not looking directly at the display, because their eyes' rod cells are mostly grouped at the periphery of their vision.

* Color performance: There are many terms to describe color performance of an LCD. They include color gamut which is the range of colors that can be displayed and color depth which is the color resolution or the resolution or fineness with which the color range is divided. Although color gamut can be expressed as three pairs of numbers, the XY coordinates within color space of the reddest red, greenest green, and bluest blue, it is usually expressed as a ratio of the total area within color space that a display can show relative to some standard such as saying that a display was "120% of NTSC". NTSC is the National Television Standards Committee, the old standard definition TV specification. Color gamut is a relatively straight forward feature. However with clever optical techniques that are based on the way humans see color, termed color stretch, "Image Post-processing in an Entertainment LCD" colors can be shown that are outside of the nominal range of the display. In any case, color range is rarely discussed as a feature of the display as LCDs are designed to match the color ranges of the content that they are intended to show. Having a color range that exceeds the content is a useless feature. "Measuring Color-Reproduction Quality on TVs and Monitors" 

* Color depth or color support is sometimes expressed in bits, either as the number of bits per sub-pixel or the number of bits per pixel. This can be ambiguous as an 8-bit color LCD can be 8 total bits spread between red, green, and blue or 8 bits each for each color in a different display. Further, LCDs sometimes use a technique called dithering which is time averaging colors to get intermediate colors such as alternating between two different colors to get a color in between. This doubles the number of colors that can be displayed; however this is done at the expense of the temporal performance of the display. Dithering is commonly used on computer displays where the images are mostly static and the temporal performance is unimportant.

When color depth is reported as color support, it is usually stated in terms of number of colors the LCD can show. The number of colors is the translation from the base 2-bit numbers into common base-10. For example, 8-bit color is 2 to the 8th power, which is 256 colors. 24-bit color is 2 to the 24th power, or 256 x 256 x 256, a total of 16,777,216 colors. The color resolution of the human eye depends on both the range of colors being sliced and the number of slices; but for most common displays the limit is about 28-bit color. LCD TVs commonly display more than that as the digital processing can introduce color distortions and the additional levels of color are needed to ensure true colors.

There are additional aspects to LCD color and color management, such as white point and gamma correction, which describe what color white is and how the other colors are displayed relative to white. LCD televisions also frequently have facial recognition software, which recognizes that an image on the screen is a face and both adjust the color and the focus differently from the rest of the image. These adjustments can have important effects on the consumer, but are not easily quantifiable; people like what they like and everyone does not like the same thing. There is no substitute for looking at the LCD one is going to buy before buying it. Portrait film, another form of display, has similar adjustments built into it. Many years ago, Kodak had to overcome initial rejection of its portrait film in Japan because of these adjustments. In the U.S., people generally prefer a more colorful facial image than in reality (higher color saturation). In Japan, consumers generally prefer a less saturated image. The film that Kodak initially sent to Japan was biased in the wrong direction for Japanese consumers. Television monitors have their built-in biases as well.

* Brightness and contrast ratio: Contrast ratio is the ratio of the brightness of a full-on pixel to a full-off pixel and, as such, would be directly tied to brightness if not for the invention of the blinking backlight (or burst dimming). The LCD itself is only a light valve and does not generate light; the light comes from a backlight that is either a fluorescent tube or a set of LEDs. The blinking backlight was developed to improve the motion performance of LCDs by turning the backlight off while the liquid crystals were in transition from one image to another. However, a side benefit of the blinking backlight was infinite contrast. The contrast reported on most LCDs is what the LCD is qualified at, not its actual performance. In any case, there are two large caveats to contrast ratio as a measure of LCD performance.

The first caveat is that contrast ratios are measured in a completely dark room. In actual use, the room is never completely dark, as one will always have the light from the LCD itself. Beyond that, there may be sunlight coming in through a window or other room lights that reflect off of the surface of the LCD and degrades the contrast. As a practical matter, the contrast of an LCD, or any display, is governed by the amount of surface reflections, not by the performance of the display.

The second caveat is that the human eye can only image a contrast ratio of a maximum of about 200:1. Black print on a white paper is about 1520:1. That is why viewing angles are specified to the point where they fall below 10:1. A 10:1 image is not great, but is discernible.

Brightness is usually stated as the maximum output of the LCD. In the CRT era, Trinitron CRTs had a brightness advantage over the competition, so brightness was commonly discussed in TV advertising. With current LCD technology, brightness, though important, is usually similar from maker to maker and consequently is not discussed much, except for laptop LCDs and other displays that will be viewed in bright sunlight. In general, brighter is better, but there is always a trade-off between brightness and battery life in a mobile device.

== Advantages and disadvantages ==

===Advantages===
*Very compact and light.
*Low power consumption. Depending on the set display brightness and content being displayed, the older CCFT backlit models typically use 3050% of the power a CRT monitor of the same size viewing area would use, and the modern LED backlit models typically use 1025% of the power a CRT monitor would use. Tom's Hardware: Power Consumption Benchmark Results for CRT versus TFT LCD "Benchmark Results: Different Brightness Testing" 
*Very little heat emitted during operation, due to low power consumption.
*No geometric distortion.
*The possible ability to have little or no flicker depending on backlight technology.
*Usually no refresh-rate flicker, because the LCD pixels hold their state between refreshes (which are usually done at 200 Hz or faster, regardless of the input refresh rate).
*Is very thin compared to a CRT monitor, which allows the monitor to be placed farther back from the user, reducing close-focusing related eye-strain.
*Razor sharp image with no bleeding/smearing when operated at native resolution.
*Emits much less undesirable electromagnetic radiation than a CRT monitor (in the extremely low frequency range). "Rad Meters: Electromagnetic radiation from CRT, LCD, Plasma and LED screens and TVs", Retrieved March 2013 "Simple and Effective Protection from Computer Radiation", See the "Computer monitor radiation" section. Retrieved March 2013. 
*Can be made in almost any size or shape.
*No theoretical resolution limit.
*Can be made to large sizes (more than 24 inches) lightly and relatively inexpensively.
*Masking effect: the LCD grid can mask the effects of spatial and grayscale quantization, creating the illusion of higher image quality. M. dZmura, T. P. Janice Shen, Wei Wu, Homer Chen, and Marius Vassiliou (1998), Contrast Gain Control for Color Image Quality, IS&T/SPIE Conference on Human Vision and Electronic Imaging III, San Jose, California, January 1998, SPIE Vol. 3299, 194-201. 
*Unconstrained by geographical (hemispheric) location of device with respect to Earth's magnetic field.
*As an inherently digital device, the LCD can natively display digital data from a DVI or HDMI connection without requiring conversion to analog.
*Many LCD monitors are powered by an external 12 V power supply, which means that (with a proper cable) they can also be run directly on one of the computer's 12 V power supply outputs, removing the overhead and quiescent power consumption of the monitor's own power supply. This can increase the power efficiency, especially if the computer has a high-efficiency PFC power supply. This is also convenient because the monitor will power on when the computer is turned on, and will power off when the computer sleeps or is shutdown.

===Disadvantages===
*Limited viewing angle, causing color, saturation, contrast and brightness to vary, even within the intended viewing angle, by variations in posture.
*Uneven backlighting in some (mostly older) monitors, causing brightness distortion, especially toward the edges.
*Black levels may appear unacceptably bright because individual liquid crystals cannot completely block all light from passing through.
*Display motion blur on moving objects caused by slow response times (>8 ms) and eye-tracking on a sample-and-hold display, unless a strobing backlight is used. However, this strobing can cause eye-strain, as is noted next:
*As of 2012, most implementations of LCD backlighting use PWM to dim the display, Explanation of why pulse width modulated backlighting is used, and its side-effects, "Pulse Width Modulation on LCD monitors", TFT Central. Retrieved June 2012. which makes the screen flicker more acutely (this does not mean visibly) than a CRT monitor at 85 Hz refresh rate would (this is because the entire screen is strobing on and off rather than a CRT's phosphor sustained dot which continually scans across the display, leaving some part of the display always lit), causing severe eye-strain for some people. Discussions of severe eye-strain with the new MacBook Pro, "Eye strain from LED backlighting in MacBook Pro", Apple Support Communities. Retrieved June 2012. A discussion of LCD monitor eye-strain, "Is a LED monitor better for eyes than a LCD?", SuperUser. Retrieved June 2012. Unfortunately, many of these people don't know that their eye-strain is being caused by the invisible strobe effect of PWM. An enlightened user requests Dell to improve their LCD backlights, "Request to Dell for higher backlight PWM frequency", Dell Support Community. Retrieved June 2012. This problem is worse on many of the new LED backlit monitors, because the LEDs have a faster turn-on/turn-off time than a CCFL lamp.
*Only one native resolution. Displaying any other resolution either requires a video scaler, causing blurriness and jagged edges; or running the display at native resolution using , causing the image either not to fill the screen (letterboxed display), or to run off the lower right edge of the screen.
*Fixed bit depth, many cheaper LCDs are only able to display 262,000 colors. 8-bit S-IPS panels can display 16 million colors and have significantly better black level, but are expensive and have slower response time.
*Low refresh rate. All but a few high-end monitors support no higher than 60 or 75 Hz; while this does not cause visible flicker due to the LCD panel's high internal refresh rate, the low input refresh rate still limits the maximum frame-rate that can be displayed, negatively impacting gaming and 3D graphics.
*Input lag, because the LCD's A/D converter waits for each frame to be completely outputted before drawing it to the LCD panel. Many LCD monitors do post-processing before displaying the image in an attempt to compensate for poor color fidelity, which adds an additional lag. Further, a video scalar must be used when displaying non-native resolutions, which adds yet more lag. Scaling and post processing are usually done in a single chip on modern monitors, but each function that chip performs adds some delay. Some displays have a "Gaming " mode which disables all or most processing to reduce perceivable input lag. http://besttvforgaming.net/why-does-reducing-input-lag-improve-gaming/ 
*Dead or stuck pixels may occur during manufacturing or through use.
*Subject to burn-in effect, although the cause differs from CRT and the effect may not be permanent, a static image can cause burn-in in a matter of hours.
*In a constant-on situation, thermalization may occur, in which part of the screen has overheated and looks discolored compared to the rest of the screen.
*Loss of brightness and much slower response times in low temperature environments. In sub-zero environments, LCD screens may cease to function without the use of supplemental heating.
*Loss of contrast in high temperature environments.
*Not usually designed to allow easy replacement of the backlight.
*Poor display in direct sunlight, often completely unviewable. Transflective LCDs provide a large improvement by reflecting natural light, but are dimmer when relying on the backlight and so they have only been adopted for specific outdoor uses.
*Cannot be used with light guns/pens.
*Hard to read when wearing polarized sunglasses.

==See also==
*LCD classification
*LCD projector
*List of liquid-crystal-display manufacturers

==References==

==External links==

* LCD Monitor Teardown  engineerguyvideo
* History and Physical Properties of Liquid Crystals by Nobelprize.org
* Definitions of basic terms relating to low-molar-mass and polymer liquid crystals (IUPAC Recommendations 2001)
* An intelligible introduction to liquid crystals from Case Western Reserve University
* Liquid Crystal Physics tutorial from the Liquid Crystals Group, University of Colorado
* Molecular Crystals and Liquid Crystals a journal by Taylor and Francis
* Hot-spot detection techniques for ICs
* PixPerAn, software for testing motion blur (ghosting) on a monitor

===General information===
* Development of Liquid Crystal Displays: Interview with George Gray, Hull University, 2004  Video by the Vega Science Trust.
* Timothy J. Sluckin History of Liquid Crystals, a presentation and extracts from the book Crystals that Flow: Classic papers from the history of liquid crystals.
* David Dunmur & Tim Sluckin (2011) Soap, Science, and Flat-screen TVs: a history of liquid crystals, Oxford University Press ISBN 978-0-19-954940-5 .
* 
* Overview of 3LCD technology, Presentation Technology
* LCD Phase and Clock Adjustment, Techmind offers a free test screen to get a better LCD picture quality than the LCDs "auto-tune" function.
*Interfacing Alphanumeric LCD to Microcontroller
*Animations explaining operation of LCD panels

 

[[Latency (engineering)]]

Latency is a time interval between the stimulation and response, or, from a more general point of view, as a time delay between the cause and the effect of some physical change in the system being observed. http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/latency Latency is physically a consequence of the limited velocity with which any physical interaction can propagate. This velocity is always lower than or equal to the speed of light. Therefore every physical system that has spatial dimensions different from zero will experience some sort of latency, regardless of the nature of stimulation that it has been exposed to.

The precise definition of latency depends on the system being observed and the nature of stimulation. In communications, the lower limit of latency is determined by the medium being used for communications. In reliable two-way communication systems, latency limits the maximum rate that information can be transmitted, as there is often a limit on the amount of information that is "in-flight" at any one moment. In the field of humanmachine interaction, perceptible latency has a strong effect on user satisfaction and usability.

==Communication latency==

===Packet-switched networks===

Network latency in a packet-switched network is measured either one-way (the time from the source sending a packet to the destination receiving it), or round-trip delay time (the one-way latency from source to destination plus the one-way latency from the destination back to the source). Round-trip latency is more often quoted, because it can be measured from a single point. Note that round trip latency excludes the amount of time that a destination system spends processing the packet. Many software platforms provide a service called ping that can be used to measure round-trip latency. Ping performs no packet processing; it merely sends a response back when it receives a packet (i.e. performs a no-op), thus it is a first rough way of measuring latency. Ping cannot perform accurate measurements, Don't misuse ping! principally because it uses the ICMP protocol that is used only for diagnostic or control purposes, and differs from real communication protocols such as TCP. Furthermore routers and ISP's might apply different traffic shaping policies to different protocols. Network Protocols Discussion / Traffic Shaping Strategies Basic QoS part 1  Traffic Policing and Shaping on Cisco IOS Router 

For more accurate measurements it is better to use specific software (for example: lft, paketto, hping, superping.d, NetPerf, IPerf)

However, in a non-trivial network, a typical packet will be forwarded over many links via many gateways, each of which will not begin to forward the packet until it has been completely received. In such a network, the minimal latency is the sum of the minimum latency of each link, plus the transmission delay of each link except the final one, plus the forwarding latency of each gateway. In practice, this minimal latency is further augmented by queuing and processing delays. Queuing delay occurs when a gateway receives multiple packets from different sources heading towards the same destination. Since typically only one packet can be transmitted at a time, some of the packets must queue for transmission, incurring additional delay. Processing delays are incurred while a gateway determines what to do with a newly received packet. A new and emergent behavior called bufferbloat can also cause increased latency that is an order of magnitude or more. The combination of propagation, serialization, queuing, and processing delays often produces a complex and variable network latency profile.

Latency limits total bandwidth in reliable two-way communication systems as described by the bandwidth-delay product.

===Fibre optics===
Latency is largely a function of the speed of light, which is 299,792,458 meters/second in vacuum. This would equate to a latency of 3.33 microseconds for every kilometer of path length. The index of refraction of most fibre optic cables is about 1.5, meaning that light travels about 1.5 times as fast in a vacuum as it does in the cable. This works out to about 4.9 s of latency for every kilometer. In shorter metro networks, the latency performance rises a bit more due to building risers and cross-connects and can bring the latency as high as 5 s per kilometer.

It follows that to calculate latency of a connection, one has to know the distance traveled by the fibre, which is rarely a straight line, since it has to traverse geographic contours and obstacles, such as roads and railway tracks, as well as other rights-of-way. Due to imperfections in the fibre, light degrades as it is transmitted through it. For distances of greater than 100 kilometers, either amplifiers or regenerators need to be deployed. Passive amplifiers typically add less latency than regenerators, at the cost of compounding attenuation, though in both cases it can be highly variable, and so needs to be taken into account. In particular, legacy spans are more likely to make use of higher latency regenerators.

===Satellite transmission===
This is illustrated when a news presenter in a studio talks with a reporter in a distant place. The signal travels from the newsreader via communication satellite situated in geosynchronous orbit to the reporter and then goes all the way back to geosynchronous orbit and then to the studio, resulting in a journey of over one hundred thousand kilometers . This full hop time lag is easily noticeable. Even though the signal travels at the speed of light, it still requires about half a second to travel that distance (not including the much smaller latencies inside the communications equipment).

Low-Earth orbit is sometimes used to cut this delay, at the expense of more complicated satellite tracking on the ground and requiring more satellites in the satellite constellation to ensure continuous coverage.

==Audio latency==

Audio latency is the delay between when an audio signal enters and when it emerges from a system. Potential contributors to latency in an audio system include analog-to-digital conversion, buffering, digital signal processing, transmission time, digital-to-analog conversion and the speed of sound in air.

==Operational latency==
Any individual workflow within a system of workflows can be subject to some type of operational latency. It may even be the case that an individual system may have more than one type of latency, depending on the type of participant or goal-seeking behavior. This is best illustrated by the following two examples involving air travel.

===Consumer view===
From the point of view of a passenger, latency can be described as follows. Suppose John Doe flies from London to New York. The latency of his trip is the time it takes him to go from his house in England to the hotel he is staying at in New York. This is independent of the throughput of the London-New York air link &ndash; whether there were 100 passengers a day making the trip or 10000, the latency of the trip would remain the same.

===Producer view===
From the point of view of flight operations personnel, latency can be entirely different. Consider the staff at the London and New York airports. Only a limited number of planes are able to make the transatlantic journey, so when one lands they must prepare it for the return trip as quickly as possible. It might take, for example:
* 35 minutes to clean a plane
* 15 minutes to refuel a plane
* 10 minutes to load the passengers
* 30 minutes to load the cargo

Assuming the above are done one after another, minimum plane turnaround time is:
:35+15+10+30 = 90

However, cleaning, refueling and loading the cargo can be done at the same time. Passengers can be loaded after cleaning is complete. The reduced latency, then, is:
:35 + 10 = 45
:15
:30
:Minimum latency = 45

The people involved in the turnaround are interested only in the time it takes for their individual tasks. When all of the tasks are done at the same time, however, it is possible to reduce the latency to the length of the longest task. If some steps have prerequisites, it becomes more difficult to perform all steps in parallel. In the example above, the requirement to clean the plane before loading passengers results in a minimum latency longer than any single task.

==Mechanical latency==
Any mechanical process encounters limitations modeled by Newtonian physics. The behavior of disk drives provides an example of mechanical latency. Here, it is the time needed for the data encoded on a platter to rotate from its current position to a position adjacent to the read-write head as well as the seek time required for the actuator arm for the read-write head to be positioned above the appropriate track. This is also known as rotational latency and seek time since the basic term latency is also applied to the time required by a computer's electronics and software to perform polling, interrupts, and direct memory access.

==Computer hardware and operating system latency==

Computers run sets of instructions called a process. In operating systems, the execution of the process can be postponed if other processes are also executing. In addition, the operating system can schedule when to perform the action that the process is commanding. For example, suppose a process commands that a computer card's voltage output be set high-low-high-low and so on at a rate of 1000 Hz. The operating system may choose to adjust the scheduling of each transition (high-low or low-high) based on an internal clock. The latency is the delay between the process instruction commanding the transition and the hardware actually transitioning the voltage from high to low or low to high.

On Microsoft Windows, it appears that the timing of commands to hardware is not exact. Empirical data suggest that Windows (using the Windows sleep timer which accepts millisecond sleep times) will schedule on a 1024 Hz clock and will delay 24 of 1024 transitions per second to make an average of 1000 Hz for the update rate. This can have serious ramifications for discrete-time algorithms that rely on fairly consistent timing between updates such as those found in control theory. The sleep function or similar windows API were at no point designed for accurate timing purposes. Certain multimedia-oriented API routines like timeGetTime() and its siblings provide better timing consistency. However, consumer- and server-grade Windows ( those based on NT kernel) were not to be real-time operating systems. Drastically more accurate timings could be achieved by using dedicated hardware extensions and control-loop cards.

Linux may have the same problems with scheduling of hardware I/O. The problem in Linux is mitigated by support for posix real-time extensions, and the possibility of using a kernel with the PREEMPT_RT patch applied.

On embedded systems, the real-time execution of instructions is often supported by the low-level embedded operating system.

==Latency in simulators and simulation==
In simulation applications, 'latency' refers to the time delay, normally measured in milliseconds (1/1,000 sec), between initial input and an output clearly discernible to the simulator trainee or simulator subject. Latency is sometimes also called transport delay.

* Some authorities distinguish between latency and transport delay by using the term 'latency' in the sense of the extra time delay of a system over and above the reaction time of the vehicle being simulated, but this requires a detailed knowledge of the vehicle dynamics and can be controversial.

* Importance of Motion and Visual Latencies. In simulators with both visual and motion systems, it is particularly important that the latency of the motion system not be greater than of the visual system, or symptoms of simulator sickness may result. This is because in the real world, motion cues are those of acceleration and are quickly transmitted to the brain, typically in less than 50 milliseconds; this is followed some milliseconds later by a perception of change in the visual scene. The visual scene change is essentially one of change of perspective and/or displacement of objects such as the horizon, which takes some time to build up to discernible amounts after the initial acceleration which caused the displacement. A simulator should therefore reflect the real-world situation by ensuring that the motion latency is equal to or less than that of the visual system and not the other way round.

==See also==
* Comparison of latency and bandwidth
* Interrupt latency
* Lead time
* Liquid schedule
* Memory latency
* Response time (technology)
* Responsiveness
* Throughput
* Jitter

==Notes==

==References==

* 
* 



[[History of public transport authorities in London]]

London Transport badge on a 1950s "RT" Type Bus

The history of public transport authorities in London details the various organisations that have been responsible for the public transport network in and around London, England from 1933 until 2000 and have used the London Transport brand. Their responsibilities have encompassed the buses, coaches, trams and the London Underground. The period began with the creation of the London Passenger Transport Board, which covered the County of London and adjacent counties within a 30-mile (48-km) radius. This area later came under the control of the London Transport Executive and then the London Transport Board. The area of responsibility was reduced to that of the Greater London administrative area in 1970 when the Greater London Council, and then London Regional Transport took over responsibility. Since 2000, the Greater London Authority has been the transport authority and the executive agency has been called Transport for London; ending the 67-year use of the London Transport name.

==Background==
Prior to 1933, the ownership and management of the transport system in London was distributed among a large number of independent and separate organisations. The Underground railway system had been developed and was owned by the Underground Electric Railways Company of London (UERL) and the Metropolitan Railway. Tram and Trolleybus networks were owned by various local authorities and public companies and buses were owned by numerous companies. Many of these services were in competition with one another leading to wasteful duplication. The London County Council managed tram operations within the County of London, but its responsibility did not extend to the bus or tram routes that ran outside its area; or to the railways, which also extended into neighbouring counties. A Royal Commission on London Government in the 1920s did not permit the London County Council to extend its area of responsibility and an ad hoc London Traffic Area was created to regulate motor traffic in the wider London region. In the 1930s another ad hoc solution was sought to improve the control and coordination of public transport.

==London's transport authorities==

===1933-1948: London Passenger Transport Board===
London Passenger Transport Area (County of London in grey)

The London Passenger Transport Board (LPTB) was the transport authority from 1 July 1933 to 31 December 1947. Day & Reed 2008, p. 112. It unified services in the London area for the first time. The London Passenger Transport Act 1933 removed responsibility for 167.17 mi of tram route from the London County Council, three county boroughs and a number of other local authorities in the Greater London area. It brought the UERL lines under the same control, and took over supervision of buses from the Metropolitan Police. The area of responsibility of the LPTB was far greater than the current Greater London boundaries and was known as the London Passenger Transport Area. The period saw massive expansion of the tube network and was directly responsible for the expansion of the suburbs. The extensive New Works Programme was halted by World War II, with some projects abandoned and others completed after the end of hostilities. The 'roundel symbol' designed in 1918 was adopted by London Passenger Transport Board and the London Transport brand and architectural style was perfected during this period. The iconic tube map designed in 1931, was published in 1933. 

===1948-1963: London Transport Executive===

The London Transport Executive (LTE) was the transport authority from 1 January 1948 to 31 December 1962. Day & Reed 2008, p. 150. London Transport was taken into public ownership and became part of the British Transport Commission, which brought London Transport and British Railways under the same control for the first and last time. The period saw the start of direct recruitment from the Caribbean and the repair and replacement of stock and stations damaged during the war as well as completion of delayed projects such as the Central Line eastern extension. The Routemaster bus was introduced in 1956. Trams were withdrawn in 1952 and trolleybuses in 1962.

===1963-1970: London Transport Board===

The London Transport Board was the transport authority from 1 January 1963 to 31 December 1969 Day & Reed 2008, p. 163. It reported directly to the Minister of Transport, ending its direct association with the management of British Railways. During this period many of Britains unprofitable railways were closed down, as most routes in the capital were widely used the Beeching Axe had little effect. However, during this period there was little investment in public transport and the motor car increased in popularity. During this period the Victoria Line was opened - although work had started in the early 1960s - and the AEC Merlin single-deck bus was introduced.

===1970-1984: London Transport Executive===
London Transport sign at Becontree Heath

The Greater London Council was the transport authority from 1 January 1970 to 28 June 1984 and the executive agency was called the London Transport Executive. Day & Reed 2008, p. 172. The legislation creating the Greater London Council (GLC) was already passed in 1963 when the London Transport Board was created. However, control did not pass to the new authority until 1 January 1970. The GLC broadly controlled only those services within the boundaries of Greater London. The (green painted) country buses and Green Line Coaches had been passed in 1969 to a new company, London Country Bus Services, which in 1970 became part of the National Bus Company. The period is perhaps the most controversial in London's transport history and there was a severe lack of funding from central government and staff shortages.

The inter-modal zonal ticketing system currently used by Transport for London originated in this period. Following the Greater London Council election in 1981, the incoming Labour administration simplified fares in Greater London by introducing four new bus fare zones and two central London Underground zones, named City and West End, where flat fares applied for the first time. This was accompanied by a cut in prices of about a third and was marketed as the Fares Fair campaign. Following successful legal action against it, on 21 March 1982 London Buses fares were subsequently doubled and London Underground fares increased by 91%. The two central area zones were retained and the fares to all other stations were restructured to be graduated at three-mile intervals. In 1983, a third revision of fares was undertaken, and a new inter-modal Travelcard season ticket was launched covering five new numbered zones; representing an overall cut in prices of around 25%. The One Day Travelcard was launched in 1984 and on weekdays was only sold for travel after 09.30. 

===1984-2000: London Regional Transport===

London Regional Transport was the transport authority from 29 June 1984 to 2 July 2000. Day & Reed 2008, p. 189. The GLC was abolished in 1986 with responsibility for public transport removed two years earlier in 1984. The new authority, London Regional Transport (LRT), again came under direct state control, reporting to the Secretary of State for Transport. The London Regional Transport Act contained provision for setting up subsidiary companies to run the Underground and bus services and in 1985 London Underground Limited (LUL), a wholly owned subsidiary of London Regional Transport, was set up to manage the tube network. In 1988 ten individual line business units were created to manage the network. London Buses Limited was constituted to progress the privatisation of London bus services. London Transport was converted to a route operating contract tendering authority, and the former bus operating interests and assets of London Transport were split into 12 business units under the banner London Buses. The 12 units competed for contracts with private operators from 1984, and were all sold off by 1994/5 becoming private operators themselves.

Further amendments to the fare system were made during this period, including inclusion of the separately managed British Rail services. In January 1985 the Capitalcard season ticket was launched, offering validity on British Rail as well as London Underground and London Buses. It was priced around 10-15% higher than the Travelcard. In June 1986 the One Day Capitalcard was launched. The Capitalcard brand ended in January 1989 when the Travelcard gained validity on British Rail. In January 1991 Zone 5 was split to create a new Zone 6. The Docklands Light Railway was opened on 31 August 1987 and was included in the zonal Travelcard ticketing scheme.

===2000 onwards: Transport for London===

Transport for London branding uses the 'roundel' as a continuation of the London Transport brand style
The Greater London Authority, a replacement authority for the GLC, was set up in 2000 with a transport executive called Transport for London (TfL) that took control from 3 July 2000. It is the first London transport authority since 1933 not to be commonly called London Transport. The London Underground did not pass to TfL until after a Private Finance Initiative (PFI) agreement for maintenance was completed in 2003.

==See also==
*List of heads of public transport authorities in London
*Transport in London

==References==
;Notes

;Bibliography
*

==External links==

*Transport for London
*TfL Group Archives and Records Management
*London Transport Museum
*London Transport Museum Photographic Collection



[[Light]]

The Sun is Earth's primary source of light. About 44% of the sun's electromagnetic radiation that reaches the ground is in the visible light range.

Light is radiant energy, usually referring to electromagnetic radiation that is visible to the human eye, and is responsible for the sense of sight. CIE (1987). International Lighting Vocabulary. Number 17.4. CIE, 4th edition. ISBN 978-3-900734-07-7.By the International Lighting Vocabulary, the definition of light is: Any radiation capable of causing a visual sensation directly. Visible light is usually defined as having a wavelength in the range of 400 nanometres (nm), or 400&times;10&minus;9 m, to 700 nanometres  between the infrared, with longer wavelengths and the ultraviolet, with shorter wavelengths. These numbers do not represent the absolute limits of human vision, but the approximate range within which most people can see reasonably well under most circumstances. Various sources define visible light as narrowly as 420 to 680 to as broadly as 380 to 800 nm. Under ideal laboratory conditions, people can see infrared up to at least 1050 nm, children and young adults ultraviolet down to about 310 to 313 nm. 

Primary properties of visible light are intensity, propagation direction, frequency or wavelength spectrum, and polarisation, while its speed in a vacuum, 299,792,458 meters per second, is one of the fundamental constants of nature. Visible light, as with all types of electromagnetic radiation (EMR), is experimentally found to always move at this speed in vacuum.

In common with all types of EMR, visible light is emitted and absorbed in tiny "packets" called photons, and exhibits properties of both waves and particles. This property is referred to as the waveparticle duality. The study of light, known as optics, is an important research area in modern physics.

In physics, the term light sometimes refers to electromagnetic radiation of any wavelength, whether visible or not. This article focuses on visible light. See the electromagnetic radiation article for the general term.

==Speed of light==

The speed of light in a vacuum is defined to be exactly 299,792,458 m/s (approximately 186,282 miles per second). The fixed value of the speed of light in SI units results from the fact that the metre is now defined in terms of the speed of light. All forms of electromagnetic radiation move at exactly this same speed in vacuum.

Different physicists have attempted to measure the speed of light throughout history. Galileo attempted to measure the speed of light in the seventeenth century. An early experiment to measure the speed of light was conducted by Ole Rmer, a Danish physicist, in 1676. Using a telescope, Rmer observed the motions of Jupiter and one of its moons, Io. Noting discrepancies in the apparent period of Io's orbit, he calculated that light takes about 22 minutes to traverse the diameter of Earth's orbit. However, its size was not known at that time. If Rmer had known the diameter of the Earth's orbit, he would have calculated a speed of 227,000,000 m/s.

Another, more accurate, measurement of the speed of light was performed in Europe by Hippolyte Fizeau in 1849. Fizeau directed a beam of light at a mirror several kilometers away. A rotating cog wheel was placed in the path of the light beam as it traveled from the source, to the mirror and then returned to its origin. Fizeau found that at a certain rate of rotation, the beam would pass through one gap in the wheel on the way out and the next gap on the way back. Knowing the distance to the mirror, the number of teeth on the wheel, and the rate of rotation, Fizeau was able to calculate the speed of light as 313,000,000 m/s.

Lon Foucault used an experiment which used rotating mirrors to obtain a value of 298,000,000 m/s in 1862. Albert A. Michelson conducted experiments on the speed of light from 1877 until his death in 1931. He refined Foucault's methods in 1926 using improved rotating mirrors to measure the time it took light to make a round trip from Mt. Wilson to Mt. San Antonio in California. The precise measurements yielded a speed of 299,796,000 m/s. 

The effective velocity of light in various transparent substances containing ordinary matter, is less than in vacuum. For example the speed of light in water is about 3/4 of that in vacuum. 

As an extreme example of the nature of light-slowing in matter, two independent teams of physicists were able to bring light to a "complete standstill" by passing it through a Bose-Einstein Condensate of the element rubidium, one team at Harvard University and the Rowland Institute for Science in Cambridge, Mass., and the other at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, also in Cambridge. However, the popular description of light being "stopped" in these experiments refers only to light being stored in the excited states of atoms, then re-emitted at an arbitrary later time, as stimulated by a second laser pulse. During the time it had "stopped" it had ceased to be light.

==Electromagnetic spectrum and visible light==

Electromagnetic spectrum with light highlighted
Generally, EM radiation, or EMR (the designation 'radiation' excludes static electric and magnetic and near fields) is classified by wavelength into radio, microwave, infrared, the visible region that we perceive as light, ultraviolet, X-rays and gamma rays.

The behaviour of EMR depends on its wavelength. Higher frequencies have shorter wavelengths, and lower frequencies have longer wavelengths. When EMR interacts with single atoms and molecules, its behaviour depends on the amount of energy per quantum it carries.

EMR in the visible light region consists of quanta (called photons) that are at the lower end of the energies that are capable of causing electronic excitation within molecules, which lead to changes in the bonding or chemistry of the molecule. At the lower end of the visible light spectrum, EMR becomes invisible to humans (infrared) because its photons no longer have enough individual energy to cause a lasting molecular change (a change in conformation) in the visual molecule retinal in the human retina, which change triggers the sensation of vision.

There exist animals that are sensitive to various types of infrared, but not by means of quantum-absorption. Infrared sensing in snakes depends on a kind of natural thermal imaging, in which tiny packets of cellular water are raised in temperature by the infrared radiation. EMR in this range causes molecular vibration and heating effects, which is how these animals detect it.

Above the range of visible light, ultraviolet light becomes invisible to humans, mostly because it is absorbed by the cornea below 360 nanometers and the internal lens below 400. Furthermore, the rods and cones located in the retina of the human eye cannot detect the very short (below 360 nm.) ultraviolet wavelengths, and are in fact damaged by ultraviolet. Many animals with eyes that do not require lenses (such as insects and shrimp) are able to detect ultraviolet, by quantum photon-absorption mechanisms, in much the same chemical way that humans detect visible light.

800px

==Optics==

The study of light and the interaction of light and matter is termed optics. The observation and study of optical phenomena such as rainbows and the aurora borealis offer many clues as to the nature of light.

===Refraction===

An example of refraction of light. The straw appears bent, because of refraction of light as it enters liquid from air.
A cloud illuminated by sunlight

Refraction is the bending of light rays when passing through a surface between one transparent material and another. It is described by Snell's Law:

:

where is the angle between the ray and the surface normal in the first medium, is the angle between the ray and the surface normal in the second medium, and n1 and n2 are the indices of refraction, n = 1 in a vacuum and n > 1 in a transparent substance.

When a beam of light crosses the boundary between a vacuum and another medium, or between two different media, the wavelength of the light changes, but the frequency remains constant. If the beam of light is not orthogonal (or rather normal) to the boundary, the change in wavelength results in a change in the direction of the beam. This change of direction is known as refraction.

The refractive quality of lenses is frequently used to manipulate light in order to change the apparent size of images. Magnifying glasses, spectacles, contact lenses, microscopes and refracting telescopes are all examples of this manipulation.

==Light sources== 

There are many sources of light. The most common light sources are thermal: a body at a given temperature emits a characteristic spectrum of black-body radiation. A simple thermal source is sunlight, the radiation emitted by the chromosphere of the Sun at around 6,000 Kelvin peaks in the visible region of the electromagnetic spectrum when plotted in wavelength units http://thulescientific.com/LYNCH%20&%20Soffer%20OPN%201999.pdf and roughly 44% of sunlight energy that reaches the ground is visible. Another example is incandescent light bulbs, which emit only around 10% of their energy as visible light and the remainder as infrared. A common thermal light source in history is the glowing solid particles in flames, but these also emit most of their radiation in the infrared, and only a fraction in the visible spectrum. The peak of the blackbody spectrum is in the deep infrared, at about 10 micrometer wavelength, for relatively cool objects like human beings. As the temperature increases, the peak shifts to shorter wavelengths, producing first a red glow, then a white one, and finally a blue-white colour as the peak moves out of the visible part of the spectrum and into the ultraviolet. These colours can be seen when metal is heated to "red hot" or "white hot". Blue-white thermal emission is not often seen, except in stars (the commonly seen pure-blue colour in a gas flame or a welder's torch is in fact due to molecular emission, notably by CH radicals (emitting a wavelength band around 425 nm, and is not seen in stars or pure thermal radiation).

Atoms emit and absorb light at characteristic energies. This produces "emission lines" in the spectrum of each atom. Emission can be spontaneous, as in light-emitting diodes, gas discharge lamps (such as neon lamps and neon signs, mercury-vapor lamps, etc.), and flames (light from the hot gas itselfso, for example, sodium in a gas flame emits characteristic yellow light). Emission can also be stimulated, as in a laser or a microwave maser.

Deceleration of a free charged particle, such as an electron, can produce visible radiation: cyclotron radiation, synchrotron radiation, and bremsstrahlung radiation are all examples of this. Particles moving through a medium faster than the speed of light in that medium can produce visible Cherenkov radiation.

Certain chemicals produce visible radiation by chemoluminescence. In living things, this process is called bioluminescence. For example, fireflies produce light by this means, and boats moving through water can disturb plankton which produce a glowing wake.

Certain substances produce light when they are illuminated by more energetic radiation, a process known as fluorescence. Some substances emit light slowly after excitation by more energetic radiation. This is known as phosphorescence.

Phosphorescent materials can also be excited by bombarding them with subatomic particles. Cathodoluminescence is one example. This mechanism is used in cathode ray tube television sets and computer monitors.

A city illuminated by artificial lighting
Certain other mechanisms can produce light:
* Bioluminescence
* Cherenkov radiation
* Electroluminescence
* Scintillation
* Sonoluminescence
* triboluminescence

When the concept of light is intended to include very-high-energy photons (gamma rays), additional generation mechanisms include:
* Particleantiparticle annihilation
* Radioactive decay

==Units and measures==

Light is measured with two main alternative sets of units: radiometry consists of measurements of light power at all wavelengths, while photometry measures light with wavelength weighted with respect to a standardised model of human brightness perception. Photometry is useful, for example, to quantify Illumination (lighting) intended for human use. The SI units for both systems are summarised in the following tables.

The photometry units are different from most systems of physical units in that they take into account how the human eye responds to light. The cone cells in the human eye are of three types which respond differently across the visible spectrum, and the cumulative response peaks at a wavelength of around 555 nm. Therefore, two sources of light which produce the same intensity (W/m2) of visible light do not necessarily appear equally bright. The photometry units are designed to take this into account, and therefore are a better representation of how "bright" a light appears to be than raw intensity. They relate to raw power by a quantity called luminous efficacy, and are used for purposes like determining how to best achieve sufficient illumination for various tasks in indoor and outdoor settings. The illumination measured by a photocell sensor does not necessarily correspond to what is perceived by the human eye, and without filters which may be costly, photocells and charge-coupled devices (CCD) tend to respond to some infrared, ultraviolet or both.

==Light pressure==

Light exerts physical pressure on objects in its path, a phenomenon which can be deduced by Maxwell's equations, but can be more easily explained by the particle nature of light: photons strike and transfer their momentum. Light pressure is equal to the power of the light beam divided by c, the speed of light. Due to the magnitude of c, the effect of light pressure is negligible for everyday objects. For example, a one-milliwatt laser pointer exerts a force of about 3.3 piconewtons on the object being illuminated; thus, one could lift a U.S. penny with laser pointers, but doing so would require about 30 billion 1-mW laser pointers. However, in nanometre-scale applications such as NEMS, the effect of light pressure is more significant, and exploiting light pressure to drive NEMS mechanisms and to flip nanometre-scale physical switches in integrated circuits is an active area of research. See, for example, nano-opto-mechanical systems research at Yale University. 

At larger scales, light pressure can cause asteroids to spin faster, acting on their irregular shapes as on the vanes of a windmill. The possibility of making solar sails that would accelerate spaceships in space is also under investigation. 

Although the motion of the Crookes radiometer was originally attributed to light pressure, this interpretation is incorrect; the characteristic Crookes rotation is the result of a partial vacuum. P. Lebedev, Untersuchungen ber die Druckkrfte des Lichtes, Ann. Phys. 6, 433 (1901). This should not be confused with the Nichols radiometer, in which the (slight) motion caused by torque (though not enough for full rotation against friction) is directly caused by light pressure. 

==Historical theories about light, in chronological order==

===Classical Greece and Hellenism===

In the fifth century BC, Empedocles postulated that everything was composed of four elements; fire, air, earth and water. He believed that Aphrodite made the human eye out of the four elements and that she lit the fire in the eye which shone out from the eye making sight possible. If this were true, then one could see during the night just as well as during the day, so Empedocles postulated an interaction between rays from the eyes and rays from a source such as the sun.

In about 300 BC, Euclid wrote Optica, in which he studied the properties of light. Euclid postulated that light travelled in straight lines and he described the laws of reflection and studied them mathematically. He questioned that sight is the result of a beam from the eye, for he asks how one sees the stars immediately, if one closes one's eyes, then opens them at night. Of course if the beam from the eye travels infinitely fast this is not a problem.

In 55 BC, Lucretius, a Roman who carried on the ideas of earlier Greek atomists, wrote:

"The light & heat of the sun; these are composed of minute atoms which, when they are shoved off, lose no time in shooting right across the interspace of air in the direction imparted by the shove."  On the nature of the Universe

Despite being similar to later particle theories, Lucretius's views were not generally accepted.

Ptolemy (c. 2nd century) wrote about the refraction of light in his book Optics. 

===Classical India===

In ancient India, the Hindu schools of Samkhya and Vaisheshika, from around the early centuries CE developed theories on light. According to the Samkhya school, light is one of the five fundamental "subtle" elements (tanmatra) out of which emerge the gross elements. The atomicity of these elements is not specifically mentioned and it appears that they were actually taken to be continuous.

On the other hand, the Vaisheshika school gives an atomic theory of the physical world on the non-atomic ground of ether, space and time. (See Indian atomism.) The basic atoms are those of earth (prthivi), water (pani), fire (agni), and air (vayu) Light rays are taken to be a stream of high velocity of tejas (fire) atoms. The particles of light can exhibit different characteristics depending on the speed and the arrangements of the tejas atoms.
The Vishnu Purana refers to sunlight as "the seven rays of the sun".

The Indian Buddhists, such as Dignga in the 5th century and Dharmakirti in the 7th century, developed a type of atomism that is a philosophy about reality being composed of atomic entities that are momentary flashes of light or energy. They viewed light as being an atomic entity equivalent to energy.

===Descartes===
Ren Descartes (15961650) held that light was a mechanical property of the luminous body, rejecting the "forms" of Ibn al-Haytham and Witelo as well as the "species" of Bacon, Grosseteste, and Kepler. Theories of light, from Descartes to Newton A. I. Sabra CUP Archive,1981 pg 48 ISBN 0-521-28436-8, ISBN 978-0-521-28436-3 In 1637 he published a theory of the refraction of light that assumed, incorrectly, that light travelled faster in a denser medium than in a less dense medium. Descartes arrived at this conclusion by analogy with the behaviour of sound waves. Although Descartes was incorrect about the relative speeds, he was correct in assuming that light behaved like a wave and in concluding that refraction could be explained by the speed of light in different media.

Descartes is not the first to use the mechanical analogies but because he clearly asserts that light is only a mechanical property of the luminous body and the transmitting medium, Descartes' theory of light is regarded as the start of modern physical optics. 

===Particle theory===

Pierre Gassendi.
Pierre Gassendi (15921655), an atomist, proposed a particle theory of light which was published posthumously in the 1660s. Isaac Newton studied Gassendi's work at an early age, and preferred his view to Descartes' theory of the plenum. He stated in his Hypothesis of Light of 1675 that light was composed of corpuscles (particles of matter) which were emitted in all directions from a source. One of Newton's arguments against the wave nature of light was that waves were known to bend around obstacles, while light travelled only in straight lines. He did, however, explain the phenomenon of the diffraction of light (which had been observed by Francesco Grimaldi) by allowing that a light particle could create a localised wave in the aether.

Newton's theory could be used to predict the reflection of light, but could only explain refraction by incorrectly assuming that light accelerated upon entering a denser medium because the gravitational pull was greater. Newton published the final version of his theory in his Opticks of 1704. His reputation helped the particle theory of light to hold sway during the 18th century. The particle theory of light led Laplace to argue that a body could be so massive that light could not escape from it. In other words it would become what is now called a black hole. Laplace withdrew his suggestion later, after a wave theory of light became firmly established as the model for light (as has been explained, neither a particle or wave theory is fully correct). A translation of Newton's essay on light appears in The large scale structure of space-time, by Stephen Hawking and George F. R. Ellis.

The fact that light could be polarized was for the first time qualitatevily explained by Newton using the particle theory. tienne-Louis Malus in 1810 created a mathematical particle theory of polarization. Jean-Baptiste Biot in 1812 showed that this theory explained all known phenomena of light polarization. At that time the polarization was considered as the prove of the particle theory.

===Wave theory===
To explain the origin of colors, Robert Hooke (1635-1703) developed a "pulse theory" and compared the spreading of light to that of waves in water in his 1665 Micrographia ("Observation XI"). In 1672 Hooke suggested that light's vibrations could be perpendicular to the direction of propagation. Christiaan Huygens (1629-1695) worked out a mathematical wave theory of light in 1678, and published it in his Treatise on light in 1690. He proposed that light was emitted in all directions as a series of waves in a medium called the Luminiferous ether. As waves are not affected by gravity, it was assumed that they slowed down upon entering a denser medium. Fokko Jan Dijksterhuis, Lenses and Waves: Christiaan Huygens and the Mathematical Science of Optics in the 17th Century, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2004, ISBN 1-4020-2697-8 

Thomas Young's sketch of the two-slit experiment showing the diffraction of light. Young's experiments supported the theory that light consists of waves.

The wave theory predicted that light waves could interfere with each other like sound waves (as noted around 1800 by Thomas Young). Young showed by means of a diffraction experiment that light behaved as waves. He also proposed that different colours were caused by different wavelengths of light, and explained colour vision in terms of three-coloured receptors in the eye.

Another supporter of the wave theory was Leonhard Euler. He argued in Nova theoria lucis et colorum (1746) that diffraction could more easily be explained by a wave theory.

In 1815 Ampere gave Fresnel an idea that the polarization of light can be explained by the wave theory if light were a transverse wave. 

Later, Augustin-Jean Fresnel independently worked out his own wave theory of light, and presented it to the Acadmie des Sciences in 1817. Simon Denis Poisson added to Fresnel's mathematical work to produce a convincing argument in favour of the wave theory, helping to overturn Newton's corpuscular theory. By the year 1821, Fresnel was able to show via mathematical methods that polarisation could be explained only by the wave theory of light and only if light was entirely transverse, with no longitudinal vibration whatsoever.

The weakness of the wave theory was that light waves, like sound waves, would need a medium for transmission. The existence of the hypothetical substance luminiferous aether proposed by Huygens in 1678 was cast into strong doubt in the late nineteenth century by the MichelsonMorley experiment.

Newton's corpuscular theory implied that light would travel faster in a denser medium, while the wave theory of Huygens and others implied the opposite. At that time, the speed of light could not be measured accurately enough to decide which theory was correct. The first to make a sufficiently accurate measurement was Lon Foucault, in 1850. His result supported the wave theory, and the classical particle theory was finally abandoned, only to partly re-emerge in the 20th century.

===Electromagnetic theory as explanation for all types of visible light and all EM radiation===

A linearly polarised light wave frozen in time and showing the two oscillating components of light; an electric field and a magnetic field perpendicular to each other and to the direction of motion (a transverse wave).

In 1845, Michael Faraday discovered that the plane of polarisation of linearly polarised light is rotated when the light rays travel along the magnetic field direction in the presence of a transparent dielectric, an effect now known as Faraday rotation. This was the first evidence that light was related to electromagnetism. In 1846 he speculated that light might be some form of disturbance propagating along magnetic field lines. Faraday proposed in 1847 that light was a high-frequency electromagnetic vibration, which could propagate even in the absence of a medium such as the ether.

Faraday's work inspired James Clerk Maxwell to study electromagnetic radiation and light. Maxwell discovered that self-propagating electromagnetic waves would travel through space at a constant speed, which happened to be equal to the previously measured speed of light. From this, Maxwell concluded that light was a form of electromagnetic radiation: he first stated this result in 1862 in On Physical Lines of Force. In 1873, he published A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism, which contained a full mathematical description of the behaviour of electric and magnetic fields, still known as Maxwell's equations. Soon after, Heinrich Hertz confirmed Maxwell's theory experimentally by generating and detecting radio waves in the laboratory, and demonstrating that these waves behaved exactly like visible light, exhibiting properties such as reflection, refraction, diffraction, and interference. Maxwell's theory and Hertz's experiments led directly to the development of modern radio, radar, television, electromagnetic imaging, and wireless communications.

In the quantum theory, photons are seen as wave packets of the waves described in the classical theory of Maxwell. The quantum theory was needed to explain effects even with visual light that Maxwell's classical theory could not (such as spectral lines).

===Quantum theory===
In 1900 Max Planck, attempting to explain black body radiation suggested that although light was a wave, these waves could gain or lose energy only in finite amounts related to their frequency. Planck called these "lumps" of light energy "quanta" (from a Latin word for "how much"). In 1905, Albert Einstein used the idea of light quanta to explain the photoelectric effect, and suggested that these light quanta had a "real" existence. In 1923 Arthur Holly Compton showed that the wavelength shift seen when low intensity X-rays scattered from electrons (so called Compton scattering) could be explained by a particle-theory of X-rays, but not a wave theory. In 1926 Gilbert N. Lewis named these liqht quanta particles photons.

Eventually the modern theory of quantum mechanics came to picture light as (in some sense) both a particle and a wave, and (in another sense), as a phenomenon which is neither a particle nor a wave (which actually are macroscopic phenomena, such as baseballs or ocean waves). Instead, modern physics sees light as something that can be described sometimes with mathematics appropriate to one type of macroscopic metaphor (particles), and sometimes another macroscopic metaphor (water waves), but is actually something that cannot be fully imagined. As in the case for radio waves and the X-rays involved in Compton scattering, physicists have noted that electromagnetic radiation tends to behave more like a classical wave at lower frequencies, but more like a classical particle at higher frequencies, but never completely loses all qualities of one or the other. Visible light, which occupies a middle ground in frequency, can easily be shown in experiments to be describable using either a wave or particle model, or sometimes both.

==See also==

==Notes==

==References==

==External links==
*
*
*

 



[[Lipid]]

Structures of some common lipids. At the top are cholesterol and oleic acid. Stryer et al., p. 328. The middle structure is a triglyceride composed of oleoyl, stearoyl, and palmitoyl chains attached to a glycerol backbone. At the bottom is the common phospholipid, phosphatidylcholine. 
Lipids are a group of naturally occurring molecules that include fats, waxes, sterols, fat-soluble vitamins (such as vitamins A, D, E, and K), monoglycerides, diglycerides, triglycerides, phospholipids, and others. The main biological functions of lipids include storing energy, signaling, and acting as structural components of cell membranes. Lipids have applications in the cosmetic and food industries as well as in nanotechnology. 

Lipids may be broadly defined as hydrophobic or amphiphilic small molecules; the amphiphilic nature of some lipids allows them to form structures such as vesicles, liposomes, or membranes in an aqueous environment. Biological lipids originate entirely or in part from two distinct types of biochemical subunits or "building-blocks": ketoacyl and isoprene groups. Using this approach, lipids may be divided into eight categories: fatty acids, glycerolipids, glycerophospholipids, sphingolipids, saccharolipids, and polyketides (derived from condensation of ketoacyl subunits); and sterol lipids and prenol lipids (derived from condensation of isoprene subunits). 

Although the term lipid is sometimes used as a synonym for fats, fats are a subgroup of lipids called triglycerides. Lipids also encompass molecules such as fatty acids and their derivatives (including tri-, di-, monoglycerides, and phospholipids), as well as other sterol-containing metabolites such as cholesterol. Although humans and other mammals use various biosynthetic pathways to both break down and synthesize lipids, some essential lipids cannot be made this way and must be obtained from the diet.

==Categories of lipids==
===Fatty acids===
Fatty acids, or fatty acid residues when they form part of a lipid, are a diverse group of molecules synthesized by chain-elongation of an acetyl-CoA primer with malonyl-CoA or methylmalonyl-CoA groups in a process called fatty acid synthesis. They are made of a hydrocarbon chain that terminates with a carboxylic acid group; this arrangement confers the molecule with a polar, hydrophilic end, and a nonpolar, hydrophobic end that is insoluble in water. The fatty acid structure is one of the most fundamental categories of biological lipids, and is commonly used as a building-block of more structurally complex lipids. The carbon chain, typically between four and 24 carbons long, may be saturated or unsaturated, and may be attached to functional groups containing oxygen, halogens, nitrogen, and sulfur. If a fatty acid contains a double bond, there is the possibility of either a cis or trans geometric isomerism, which significantly affects the molecule's configuration. Cis-double bonds cause the fatty acid chain to bend, an effect that is compounded with more double bonds in the chain. Three double bonds in 18-carbon linolenic acid, the most abundant fatty-acyl chains of plant thylakoid membranes, render these membranes highly fluid despite environmental low-temperatures, YashRoy R.C. (1987) 13-C NMR studies of lipid fatty acyl chains of chloroplast membranes. Indian Journal of Biochemistry and Biophysics, vol. 24(6), pp. 177-178.https://www.researchgate.net/publication/230822408_13-C_NMR_studies_of_lipid_fatty_acyl_chains_of_chloroplast_membranes?ev=prf_pub and also makes linolenic acid give dominating sharp peaks in high resolution 13-C NMR spectra of chlorplasts. This in turn plays an important role in the structure and function of cell membranes. Devlin, pp. 19395. Most naturally occurring fatty acids are of the cis configuration, although the trans form does exist in some natural and partially hydrogenated fats and oils. 

Examples of biologically important fatty acids include the eicosanoids, derived primarily from arachidonic acid and eicosapentaenoic acid, that include prostaglandins, leukotrienes, and thromboxanes. Docosahexaenoic acid is also important in biological systems, particularly with respect to sight. Other major lipid classes in the fatty acid category are the fatty esters and fatty amides. Fatty esters include important biochemical intermediates such as wax esters, fatty acid thioester coenzyme A derivatives, fatty acid thioester ACP derivatives and fatty acid carnitines. The fatty amides include N-acyl ethanolamines, such as the cannabinoid neurotransmitter anandamide. 

===Glycerolipids===
Glycerolipids are composed of mono-, di-, and tri-substituted glycerols, the most well-known being the fatty acid triesters of glycerol, called triglycerides. The word "triacylglycerol" is sometimes used synonymously with "triglyceride". In these compounds, the three hydroxyl groups of glycerol are each esterified, typically by different fatty acids. Because they function as an energy store, these lipids comprise the bulk of storage fat in animal tissues. The hydrolysis of the ester bonds of triglycerides and the release of glycerol and fatty acids from adipose tissue are the initial steps in metabolising fat. van Holde and Mathews, p. 63031. 

Additional subclasses of glycerolipids are represented by glycosylglycerols, which are characterized by the presence of one or more sugar residues attached to glycerol via a glycosidic linkage. Examples of structures in this category are the digalactosyldiacylglycerols found in plant membranes and seminolipid from mammalian sperm cells. 

===Glycerophospholipids===
Glycerophospholipids, usually referred to as phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and cell signaling. Neural tissue (including the brain) contains relatively high amounts of glycerophospholipids, and alterations in their composition has been implicated in various neurological disorders. Glycerophospholipids may be subdivided into distinct classes, based on the nature of the polar headgroup at the sn-3 position of the glycerol backbone in eukaryotes and eubacteria, or the sn-1 position in the case of archaebacteria. Phosphatidylethanolamine Examples of glycerophospholipids found in biological membranes are phosphatidylcholine (also known as PC, GPCho or lecithin), phosphatidylethanolamine (PE or GPEtn) and phosphatidylserine (PS or GPSer). In addition to serving as a primary component of cellular membranes and binding sites for intra- and intercellular proteins, some glycerophospholipids in eukaryotic cells, such as phosphatidylinositols and phosphatidic acids are either precursors of or, themselves, membrane-derived second messengers. van Holde and Mathews, p. 844. Typically, one or both of these hydroxyl groups are acylated with long-chain fatty acids, but there are also alkyl-linked and 1Z-alkenyl-linked (plasmalogen) glycerophospholipids, as well as dialkylether variants in archaebacteria. 

===Sphingolipids===

Sphingolipids are a complicated family of compounds Merrill AH, Sandhoff K. (2002). "Sphingolipids: metabolism and cell signaling", Ch. 14 in New Comprehensive Biochemistry: Biochemistry of Lipids, Lipoproteins, and Membranes, Vance, D.E. and Vance, J.E., eds. Elsevier Science, NY, ISBN 0121822125. that share a common structural feature, a sphingoid base backbone that is synthesized de novo from the amino acid serine and a long-chain fatty acyl CoA, then converted into ceramides, phosphosphingolipids, glycosphingolipids and other compounds. The major sphingoid base of mammals is commonly referred to as sphingosine. Ceramides (N-acyl-sphingoid bases) are a major subclass of sphingoid base derivatives with an amide-linked fatty acid. The fatty acids are typically saturated or mono-unsaturated with chain lengths from 16 to 26 carbon atoms. Devlin, pp. 42122. Sphingomyelin Stryer et al., p. 330. The major phosphosphingolipids of mammals are sphingomyelins (ceramide phosphocholines), whereas insects contain mainly ceramide phosphoethanolamines and fungi have phytoceramide phosphoinositols and mannose-containing headgroups. The glycosphingolipids are a diverse family of molecules composed of one or more sugar residues linked via a glycosidic bond to the sphingoid base. Examples of these are the simple and complex glycosphingolipids such as cerebrosides and gangliosides.

===Sterol lipids===
Sterol lipids, such as cholesterol and its derivatives, are an important component of membrane lipids, along with the glycerophospholipids and sphingomyelins. The steroids, all derived from the same fused four-ring core structure, have different biological roles as hormones and signaling molecules. The eighteen-carbon (C18) steroids include the estrogen family whereas the C19 steroids comprise the androgens such as testosterone and androsterone. The C21 subclass includes the progestogens as well as the glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids. Stryer et al., p. 749. The secosteroids, comprising various forms of vitamin D, are characterized by cleavage of the B ring of the core structure. Other examples of sterols are the bile acids and their conjugates, which in mammals are oxidized derivatives of cholesterol and are synthesized in the liver. The plant equivalents are the phytosterols, such as -sitosterol, stigmasterol, and brassicasterol; the latter compound is also used as a biomarker for algal growth. The predominant sterol in fungal cell membranes is ergosterol. 

===Prenol lipids===
Prenol lipids are synthesized from the five-carbon-unit precursors isopentenyl diphosphate and dimethylallyl diphosphate that are produced mainly via the mevalonic acid (MVA) pathway. The simple isoprenoids (linear alcohols, diphosphates, etc.) are formed by the successive addition of C5 units, and are classified according to number of these terpene units. Structures containing greater than 40 carbons are known as polyterpenes. Carotenoids are important simple isoprenoids that function as antioxidants and as precursors of vitamin A. Another biologically important class of molecules is exemplified by the quinones and hydroquinones, which contain an isoprenoid tail attached to a quinonoid core of non-isoprenoid origin. Vitamin E and vitamin K, as well as the ubiquinones, are examples of this class. Prokaryotes synthesize polyprenols (called bactoprenols) in which the terminal isoprenoid unit attached to oxygen remains unsaturated, whereas in animal polyprenols (dolichols) the terminal isoprenoid is reduced. 

===Saccharolipids===
Structure of the saccharolipid Kdo2-Lipid A. Glucosamine residues in blue, Kdo residues in red, acyl chains in black and phosphate groups in green.

Saccharolipids describe compounds in which fatty acids are linked directly to a sugar backbone, forming structures that are compatible with membrane bilayers. In the saccharolipids, a monosaccharide substitutes for the glycerol backbone present in glycerolipids and glycerophospholipids. The most familiar saccharolipids are the acylated glucosamine precursors of the Lipid A component of the lipopolysaccharides in Gram-negative bacteria. Typical lipid A molecules are disaccharides of glucosamine, which are derivatized with as many as seven fatty-acyl chains. The minimal lipopolysaccharide required for growth in E. coli is Kdo2-Lipid A, a hexa-acylated disaccharide of glucosamine that is glycosylated with two 3-deoxy-D-manno-octulosonic acid (Kdo) residues. 

===Polyketides===
Polyketides are synthesized by polymerization of acetyl and propionyl subunits by classic enzymes as well as iterative and multimodular enzymes that share mechanistic features with the fatty acid synthases. They comprise a large number of secondary metabolites and natural products from animal, plant, bacterial, fungal and marine sources, and have great structural diversity. Many polyketides are cyclic molecules whose backbones are often further modified by glycosylation, methylation, hydroxylation, oxidation, and/or other processes. Many commonly used anti-microbial, anti-parasitic, and anti-cancer agents are polyketides or polyketide derivatives, such as erythromycins, tetracyclines, avermectins, and antitumor epothilones. 

==Biological functions==
===Membranes===
Eukaryotic cells are compartmentalized into membrane-bound organelles that carry out different biological functions. The glycerophospholipids are the main structural component of biological membranes, such as the cellular plasma membrane and the intracellular membranes of organelles; in animal cells the plasma membrane physically separates the intracellular components from the extracellular environment. The glycerophospholipids are amphipathic molecules (containing both hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions) that contain a glycerol core linked to two fatty acid-derived "tails" by ester linkages and to one "head" group by a phosphate ester linkage. While glycerophospholipids are the major component of biological membranes, other non-glyceride lipid components such as sphingomyelin and sterols (mainly cholesterol in animal cell membranes) are also found in biological membranes. Stryer et al., pp. 329331 In plants and algae, the galactosyldiacylglycerols, Heinz E.(1996). Plant glycolipids: structure, isolation and analysis. in Advances in Lipid Methodology, Vol. 3 pp. 211332 (ed. W.W. Christie, Oily Press, Dundee) ISBN 0951417169 and sulfoquinovosyldiacylglycerol, which lack a phosphate group, are important components of membranes of chloroplasts and related organelles and are the most abundant lipids in photosynthetic tissues, including those of higher plants, algae and certain bacteria.

Plant thylakoid membranes have the largest lipid component of a non-bilayer forming monogalactosyl diglyceride (MGDG), and little phospholipids; despite this unique lipid composition, chloroplast thylakoid membranes have been shown to contain a dynamic lipid-bilayer matrix as revealed by magnetic resonance and electron microscope studies. YashRoy R.C. (1990) Magnetic resonance studies of the dynamic organisation of lipids of chloroplast membranes. Journal of Biosciences, vol. 15(4), pp. 281-288.https://www.researchgate.net/publication/225688482_Magnetic_resonance_studies_of_dynamic_organisation_of_lipids_in_chloroplast_membranes?ev=prf_pub 

Bilayers have been found to exhibit high levels of birefringence, which can be used to probe the degree of order (or disruption) within the bilayer using techniques such as dual polarization interferometry and Circular dichroism.

Self-organization of phospholipids: a spherical liposome, a micelle, and a lipid bilayer.

A biological membrane is a form of lipid bilayer. The formation of lipid bilayers is an energetically preferred process when the glycerophospholipids described above are in an aqueous environment. Stryer et al., pp. 33334. This is known as the hydrophobic effect. In an aqueous system, the polar heads of lipids align towards the polar, aqueous environment, while the hydrophobic tails minimize their contact with water and tend to cluster together, forming a vesicle; depending on the concentration of the lipid, this biophysical interaction may result in the formation of micelles, liposomes, or lipid bilayers. Other aggregations are also observed and form part of the polymorphism of amphiphile (lipid) behavior. Phase behavior is an area of study within biophysics and is the subject of current academic research. Micelles and bilayers form in the polar medium by a process known as the hydrophobic effect. When dissolving a lipophilic or amphiphilic substance in a polar environment, the polar molecules (i.e., water in an aqueous solution) become more ordered around the dissolved lipophilic substance, since the polar molecules cannot form hydrogen bonds to the lipophilic areas of the amphiphile. So in an aqueous environment, the water molecules form an ordered "clathrate" cage around the dissolved lipophilic molecule. 

===Energy storage===
Triglycerides, stored in adipose tissue, are a major form of energy storage both in animals and plants. The adipocyte, or fat cell, is designed for continuous synthesis and breakdown of triglycerides in animals, with breakdown controlled mainly by the activation of hormone-sensitive enzyme lipase. The complete oxidation of fatty acids provides high caloric content, about 9 kcal/g, compared with 4 kcal/g for the breakdown of carbohydrates and proteins. Migratory birds that must fly long distances without eating use stored energy of triglycerides to fuel their flights. Stryer et al., p. 619. 

===Signaling===
In recent years, evidence has emerged showing that lipid signaling is a vital part of the cell signaling. Lipid signaling may occur via activation of G protein-coupled or nuclear receptors, and members of several different lipid categories have been identified as signaling molecules and cellular messengers. These include sphingosine-1-phosphate, a sphingolipid derived from ceramide that is a potent messenger molecule involved in regulating calcium mobilization, cell growth, and apoptosis; diacylglycerol (DAG) and the phosphatidylinositol phosphates (PIPs), involved in calcium-mediated activation of protein kinase C; the prostaglandins, which are one type of fatty-acid derived eicosanoid involved in inflammation and immunity; the steroid hormones such as estrogen, testosterone and cortisol, which modulate a host of functions such as reproduction, metabolism and blood pressure; and the oxysterols such as 25-hydroxy-cholesterol that are liver X receptor agonists. Phosphatidylserine lipids are known to be involved in signaling for the phagocytosis of apoptotic cells and/or pieces of cells. They accomplish this by being exposed to the extracellular face of the cell membrane after the inactivation of flippases which place them exclusively on the cytosolic side and the activation of scramblases, which scramble the orientation of the phospholipids. After this occurs, other cells recognize the phosphatidylserines and phagocytosize the cells or cell fragments exposing them.

===Other functions===
The "fat-soluble" vitamins (A, D, E and K)  which are isoprene-based lipids  are essential nutrients stored in the liver and fatty tissues, with a diverse range of functions. Acyl-carnitines are involved in the transport and metabolism of fatty acids in and out of mitochondria, where they undergo beta oxidation. Polyprenols and their phosphorylated derivatives also play important transport roles, in this case the transport of oligosaccharides across membranes. Polyprenol phosphate sugars and polyprenol diphosphate sugars function in extra-cytoplasmic glycosylation reactions, in extracellular polysaccharide biosynthesis (for instance, peptidoglycan polymerization in bacteria), and in eukaryotic protein N-glycosylation. Cardiolipins are a subclass of glycerophospholipids containing four acyl chains and three glycerol groups that are particularly abundant in the inner mitochondrial membrane. They are believed to activate enzymes involved with oxidative phosphorylation. Lipids also form the basis of steroid hormones. Steroids. Elmhurst.edu. Retrieved on 2013-10-10. 

==Metabolism==
The major dietary lipids for humans and other animals are animal and plant triglycerides, sterols, and membrane phospholipids. The process of lipid metabolism synthesizes and degrades the lipid stores and produces the structural and functional lipids characteristic of individual tissues.

===Biosynthesis===
In animals, when there is an oversupply of dietary carbohydrate, the excess carbohydrate is converted to triglycerides. This involves the synthesis of fatty acids from acetyl-CoA and the esterification of fatty acids in the production of triglycerides, a process called lipogenesis. Stryer et al., p. 634. Fatty acids are made by fatty acid synthases that polymerize and then reduce acetyl-CoA units. The acyl chains in the fatty acids are extended by a cycle of reactions that add the acetyl group, reduce it to an alcohol, dehydrate it to an alkene group and then reduce it again to an alkane group. The enzymes of fatty acid biosynthesis are divided into two groups, in animals and fungi all these fatty acid synthase reactions are carried out by a single multifunctional protein, while in plant plastids and bacteria separate enzymes perform each step in the pathway. The fatty acids may be subsequently converted to triglycerides that are packaged in lipoproteins and secreted from the liver.

The synthesis of unsaturated fatty acids involves a desaturation reaction, whereby a double bond is introduced into the fatty acyl chain. For example, in humans, the desaturation of stearic acid by stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1 produces oleic acid. The doubly unsaturated fatty acid linoleic acid as well as the triply unsaturated -linolenic acid cannot be synthesized in mammalian tissues, and are therefore essential fatty acids and must be obtained from the diet. Stryer et al., p. 643. 

Triglyceride synthesis takes place in the endoplasmic reticulum by metabolic pathways in which acyl groups in fatty acyl-CoAs are transferred to the hydroxyl groups of glycerol-3-phosphate and diacylglycerol. Stryer et al., pp. 73339. 

Terpenes and isoprenoids, including the carotenoids, are made by the assembly and modification of isoprene units donated from the reactive precursors isopentenyl pyrophosphate and dimethylallyl pyrophosphate. These precursors can be made in different ways. In animals and archaea, the mevalonate pathway produces these compounds from acetyl-CoA, while in plants and bacteria the non-mevalonate pathway uses pyruvate and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate as substrates. One important reaction that uses these activated isoprene donors is steroid biosynthesis. Here, the isoprene units are joined together to make squalene and then folded up and formed into a set of rings to make lanosterol. Lanosterol can then be converted into other steroids such as cholesterol and ergosterol. 

===Degradation===
Beta oxidation is the metabolic process by which fatty acids are broken down in the mitochondria and/or in peroxisomes to generate acetyl-CoA. For the most part, fatty acids are oxidized by a mechanism that is similar to, but not identical with, a reversal of the process of fatty acid synthesis. That is, two-carbon fragments are removed sequentially from the carboxyl end of the acid after steps of dehydrogenation, hydration, and oxidation to form a beta-keto acid, which is split by thiolysis. The acetyl-CoA is then ultimately converted into ATP, CO2, and H2O using the citric acid cycle and the electron transport chain.

Hence the Krebs Cycle can start at acetyl-CoA when fat is being broken down for energy if there is little or no glucose available.

The energy yield of the complete oxidation of the fatty acid palmitate is 106 ATP. Stryer et al., pp. 62526. Unsaturated and odd-chain fatty acids require additional enzymatic steps for degradation.

==Nutrition and health==
Most of the fat found in food is in the form of triglycerides, cholesterol, and phospholipids. Some dietary fat is necessary to facilitate absorption of fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, and K) and carotenoids. Bhagavan, p. 903. Humans and other mammals have a dietary requirement for certain essential fatty acids, such as linoleic acid (an omega-6 fatty acid) and alpha-linolenic acid (an omega-3 fatty acid) because they cannot be synthesized from simple precursors in the diet. Both of these fatty acids are 18-carbon polyunsaturated fatty acids differing in the number and position of the double bonds. Most vegetable oils are rich in linoleic acid (safflower, sunflower, and corn oils). Alpha-linolenic acid is found in the green leaves of plants, and in selected seeds, nuts, and legumes (in particular flax, rapeseed, walnut, and soy). Fish oils are particularly rich in the longer-chain omega-3 fatty acids eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA). Bhagavan, p. 388. A large number of studies have shown positive health benefits associated with consumption of omega-3 fatty acids on infant development, cancer, cardiovascular diseases, and various mental illnesses, such as depression, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, and dementia. In contrast, it is now well-established that consumption of trans fats, such as those present in partially hydrogenated vegetable oils, are a risk factor for cardiovascular disease. 

A few studies have suggested that total dietary fat intake is linked to an increased risk of obesity and diabetes. However, a number of very large studies, including the Women's Health Initiative Dietary Modification Trial, an eight-year study of 49,000 women, the Nurses' Health Study and the Health Professionals Follow-up Study, revealed no such links. None of these studies suggested any connection between percentage of calories from fat and risk of cancer, heart disease, or weight gain. The Nutrition Source, a website maintained by the Department of Nutrition at the Harvard School of Public Health, summarizes the current evidence on the impact of dietary fat: "Detailed researchmuch of it done at Harvardshows that the total amount of fat in the diet isn't really linked with weight or disease." 

== See also ==

* Emulsion test
* Essential fatty acid
* Lipid microdomain
* Lipid signaling
* Lipidomics
* Lipoprotein
* Protein-lipid interaction
* Phenolic lipids, a class of natural products composed of long aliphatic chains and phenolic rings that occur in plants, fungi and bacteria

==References==

===Bibliography===

*
*
*
*

==External links==

Introductory
*List of lipid-related web sites
*Nature Lipidomics Gateway  Round-up and summaries of recent lipid research
*Lipid Library  General reference on lipid chemistry and biochemistry
*Cyberlipid.org  Resources and history for lipids.
*Molecular Computer Simulations  Modeling of Lipid Membranes
*Lipids, Membranes and Vesicle Trafficking  The Virtual Library of Biochemistry and Cell Biology

Nomenclature
*IUPAC nomenclature of lipids
*IUPAC glossary entry for the lipid class of molecules

Databases
*LIPID MAPS  Comprehensive lipid and lipid-associated gene/protein databases.
*LipidBank  Japanese database of lipids and related properties, spectral data and references.

General
*ApolloLipids  Provides dyslipidemia and cardiovascular disease prevention and treatment information as well as continuing medical education programs
*National Lipid Association  Professional medical education organization for health care professionals who seek to prevent morbidity and mortality stemming from dyslipidemias and other cholesterol-related disorders.

*


[[Lie algebra]]

In mathematics, Lie algebras (, not ) are algebraic structures which were introduced to study the concept of infinitesimal transformations. The term "Lie algebra" (after Sophus Lie) was introduced by Hermann Weyl in the 1930s. In older texts, the name "infinitesimal group" is used.

Related mathematical concepts include Lie groups and differentiable manifolds.

== Definitions ==

A Lie algebra is a vector space over some field F together with a binary operation called the Lie bracket, which satisfies the following axioms:

* Bilinearity:

::

:for all scalars a, b in F and all elements x, y, z in .

* Alternating on :

::

:for all x in .

* The Jacobi identity:

:: 

:for all x, y, z in .

Note that the bilinearity and alternating properties imply anticommutativity, i.e., , for all elements x, y in , while anticommutativity only implies the alternating property if the field's characteristic is not 2. Humphreys p. 1 

It is customary to express a Lie algebra in lower-case fraktur, like . If a Lie algebra is associated with a Lie group, then the spelling of the Lie algebra is the same as that Lie group. For example, the Lie algebra of SU(n) is written as .

=== Generators and dimension ===
Elements of a Lie algebra are said to be generators of the Lie algebra if the smallest subalgebra of containing them is itself. The dimension of a Lie algebra is its dimension as a vector space over F. The cardinality of a minimal generating set of a Lie algebra is always less than or equal to its dimension.

=== Homomorphisms, subalgebras, and ideals ===
The Lie bracket is not associative in general, meaning that need not equal . Nonetheless, much of the terminology that was developed in the theory of associative rings or associative algebras is commonly applied to Lie algebras. A subspace that is closed under the Lie bracket is called a Lie subalgebra. If a subspace satisfies a stronger condition that

: 

then I is called an ideal in the Lie algebra . Due to the anticommutativity of the commutator, the notions of a left and right ideal in a Lie algebra coincide. A homomorphism between two Lie algebras (over the same base field) is a linear map that is compatible with the respective commutators:

: 

for all elements x and y in . As in the theory of associative rings, ideals are precisely the kernels of homomorphisms, given a Lie algebra and an ideal I in it, one constructs the factor algebra , and the first isomorphism theorem holds for Lie algebras.

Let S be a subset of . The set of elements x such that for all s in S forms a subalgebra called the centralizer of S. The centralizer of itself is called the center of . Similar to centralizers, if S is a subspace, then the set of x such that is in S for all s in S forms a subalgebra called the normalizer of S.

=== Direct sum ===
Given two Lie algebras and , their direct sum is the Lie algebra consisting of the vector space
, of the pairs , with the operation

: 

== Properties ==

=== Admits an enveloping algebra ===

For any associative algebra A with multiplication , one can construct a Lie algebra L(A). As a vector space, L(A) is the same as A. The Lie bracket of two elements of L(A) is defined to be their commutator in A:

: 

The associativity of the multiplication * in A implies the Jacobi identity of the commutator in L(A). For example, the associative algebra of n  n matrices over a field F gives rise to the general linear Lie algebra The associative algebra A is called an enveloping algebra of the Lie algebra L(A). Every Lie algebra can be embedded into one that arises from an associative algebra in this fashion; see universal enveloping algebra.

=== Representation ===
Given a vector space V, let denote the Lie algebra enveloped by the associative algebra of all linear endomorphisms of V. A representation of a Lie algebra on V is a Lie algebra homomorphism
:
A representation is said to be faithful if its kernel is trivial. Every finite-dimensional Lie algebra has a faithful representation on a finite-dimensional vector space (Ado's theorem). 

For example,
:
given by is a representation of on the vector space called the adjoint representation. A derivation on the Lie algebra (in fact on any non-associative algebra) is a linear map that obeys the Leibniz' law, that is,
:
for all x and y in the algebra. For any x, is a derivation; a consequence of the Jacobi identity. Thus, the image of lies in the subalgebra of consisting of derivations on . A derivation that happens to be in the image of is called an inner derivation. If is semisimple, every derivation on is inner.

== Examples ==

=== Vector spaces ===

*Any vector space V endowed with the identically zero Lie bracket becomes a Lie algebra. Such Lie algebras are called abelian, cf. below. Any one-dimensional Lie algebra over a field is abelian, by the antisymmetry of the Lie bracket.

*The real vector space of all n  n skew-hermitian matrices is closed under the commutator and forms a real Lie algebra denoted . This is the Lie algebra of the unitary group U(n).

=== Subspaces ===

* The subspace of the general linear Lie algebra consisting of matrices of trace zero is a subalgebra, Humphreys p.2 the special linear Lie algebra, denoted 

=== Real matrix groups ===

* Any Lie group defines an associated real Lie algebra =Lie(). The definition in general is somewhat technical, but in the case of real matrix groups, it can be formulated via the exponential map, or the matrix exponent. The Lie algebra consists of those matrices for which exp(tX)  G,  real numbers .
:The Lie bracket of is given by the commutator of matrices. As a concrete example, consider the special linear group SL(n,R), consisting of all n  n matrices with real entries and determinant 1. This is a matrix Lie group, and its Lie algebra consists of all n  n matrices with real entries and trace 0,
:This Lie algebra is related to the pseudogroup of diffeomorphisms of .

=== Three dimensions ===

*The three-dimensional Euclidean space R3 with the Lie bracket given by the cross product of vectors becomes a three-dimensional Lie algebra.

*The Heisenberg algebra H3(R) is a three-dimensional Lie algebra generated by elements , and with Lie brackets
:: .
:It is explicitly realized as the space of 3&times;3 strictly upper-triangular matrices, with the Lie bracket given by the matrix commutator,
::

:Any element of the Heisenberg group is thus representable as a product of group generators, i.e., matrix exponentials of these Lie algebra generators, 
::

* The commutation relations between the x, y, and z components of the angular momentum operator in quantum mechanics form a representation of a complex three-dimensional Lie algebra, which is the complexification of the Lie algebra so(3) of the three-dimensional rotation group:
:: 
:: 
:: .

=== Infinite dimensions ===

*An important class of infinite-dimensional real Lie algebras arises in differential topology. The space of smooth vector fields on a differentiable manifold M forms a Lie algebra, where the Lie bracket is defined to be the commutator of vector fields. One way of expressing the Lie bracket is through the formalism of Lie derivatives, which identifies a vector field X with a first order partial differential operator L'X acting on smooth functions by letting L'X(f) be the directional derivative of the function f in the direction of X. The Lie bracket of two vector fields is the vector field defined through its action on functions by the formula:
 
:: 

*A KacMoody algebra is an example of an infinite-dimensional Lie algebra.

*The Moyal algebra is an infinite-dimensional Lie algebra which contains all classical Lie algebras as subalgebras.

== Structure theory and classification ==

Lie algebras can be classified to some extent. In particular, this has an application to the classification of Lie groups.

=== Abelian, nilpotent, and solvable ===
Analogously to abelian, nilpotent, and solvable groups, defined in terms of the derived subgroups, one can define abelian, nilpotent, and solvable Lie algebras.

A Lie algebra is abelian if the Lie bracket vanishes, i.e. = 0, for all x and y in . Abelian Lie algebras correspond to commutative (or abelian) connected Lie groups such as vector spaces or tori and are all of the form meaning an n-dimensional vector space with the trivial Lie bracket.

A more general class of Lie algebras is defined by the vanishing of all commutators of given length. A Lie algebra is nilpotent if the lower central series

:

becomes zero eventually. By Engel's theorem, a Lie algebra is nilpotent if and only if for every u in the adjoint endomorphism

:

is nilpotent.

More generally still, a Lie algebra is said to be solvable if the derived series:

:

becomes zero eventually.

Every finite-dimensional Lie algebra has a unique maximal solvable ideal, called its radical. Under the Lie correspondence, nilpotent (respectively, solvable) connected Lie groups correspond to nilpotent (respectively, solvable) Lie algebras.

=== Simple and semisimple ===
A Lie algebra is "simple" if it has no non-trivial ideals and is not abelian.
A Lie algebra is called semisimple if its radical is zero. Equivalently, is semisimple if it does not contain any non-zero abelian ideals. In particular, a simple Lie algebra is semisimple. Conversely, it can be proven that any semisimple Lie algebra is the direct sum of its minimal ideals, which are canonically determined simple Lie algebras.

The concept of semisimplicity for Lie algebras is closely related with the complete reducibility (semisimplicity) of their representations. When the ground field F has characteristic zero, any finite-dimensional representation of a semisimple Lie algebra is semisimple (i.e., direct sum of irreducible representations.) In general, a Lie algebra is called reductive if the adjoint representation is semisimple. Thus, a semisimple Lie algebra is reductive.

=== Cartan's criterion ===

Cartan's criterion gives conditions for a Lie algebra to be nilpotent, solvable, or semisimple. It is based on the notion of the Killing form, a symmetric bilinear form on defined by the formula
: 
where tr denotes the trace of a linear operator. A Lie algebra is semisimple if and only if the Killing form is nondegenerate. A Lie algebra is solvable if and only if 

=== Classification ===

The Levi decomposition expresses an arbitrary Lie algebra as a semidirect sum of its solvable radical and a semisimple Lie algebra, almost in a canonical way. Furthermore, semisimple Lie algebras over an algebraically closed field have been completely classified through their root systems. However, the classification of solvable Lie algebras is a 'wild' problem, and cannot be accomplished in general.

== Relation to Lie groups ==

Although Lie algebras are often studied in their own right, historically they arose as a means to study Lie groups.

Lie's fundamental theorems describe a relation between Lie groups and Lie algebras. In particular, any Lie group gives rise to a canonically determined Lie algebra (concretely, the tangent space at the identity); and, conversely, for any Lie algebra there is a corresponding connected Lie group (Lie's third theorem; see the BakerCampbellHausdorff formula). This Lie group is not determined uniquely; however, any two connected Lie groups with the same Lie algebra are locally isomorphic, and in particular, have the same universal cover. For instance, the special orthogonal group SO(3) and the special unitary group SU(2) give rise to the same Lie algebra, which is isomorphic to R3 with the cross-product, while SU(2) is a simply-connected twofold cover of SO(3).

Given a Lie group, a Lie algebra can be associated to it either by endowing the tangent space to the identity with the differential of the adjoint map, or by considering the left-invariant vector fields as mentioned in the examples. In the case of real matrix groups, the Lie algebra consists of those matrices for which exp(tX)  G for all real numbers , where exp is the exponential map.

Some examples of Lie algebras corresponding to Lie groups are the following:
* The Lie algebra for the group is the algebra of complex nn matrices
* The Lie algebra for the group is the algebra of complex nn matrices with trace 0
* The Lie algebras for the group and for are both the algebra of real anti-symmetric nn matrices (See matrix: Infinitesimal rotations] for a discussion)
* The Lie algebra for the group is the algebra of skew-Hermitian complex nn matrices while the Lie algebra for is the algebra of skew-Hermitian, traceless complex nn matrices.
In the above examples, the Lie bracket (for and matrices in the Lie algebra) is defined as .

Given a set of generators Ta, the structure constants f abc express the Lie brackets of pairs of generators as linear combinations of generators from the set, i.e., Tb f abc Tc. The structure constants determine the Lie brackets of elements of the Lie algebra, and consequently nearly completely determine the group structure of the Lie group. The structure of the Lie group near the identity element is displayed explicitly by the BakerCampbellHausdorff formula, an expansion in Lie algebra elements X, Y and their Lie brackets, all nested together within a single exponent, exp(tX) exp(tY) exp(tX+tY+ t2 + O(t3) ). 

The mapping from Lie groups to Lie algebras is functorial, which implies that homomorphisms of Lie groups lift to homomorphisms of Lie algebras, and various properties are satisfied by this lifting: it commutes with composition, it maps Lie subgroups, kernels, quotients and cokernels of Lie groups to subalgebras, kernels, quotients and cokernels of Lie algebras, respectively.

The functor L which takes each Lie group to its Lie algebra and each homomorphism to its differential is faithful and exact. It is however not an equivalence of categories: different Lie groups may have isomorphic Lie algebras (for example SO(3) and SU(2) ), and there are (infinite dimensional) Lie algebras that are not associated to any Lie group. 

However, when the Lie algebra is finite-dimensional, one can associate to it a simply connected Lie group having as its Lie algebra. More precisely, the Lie algebra functor L has a left adjoint functor  from finite-dimensional (real) Lie algebras to Lie groups, factoring through the full subcategory of simply connected Lie groups. Adjoint property is discussed in more general context in Hofman & Morris (2007) (e.g., page 130) but is a straightforward consequence of, e.g., Bourbaki (1989) Theorem 1 of page 305 and Theorem 3 of page 310. In other words, there is a natural isomorphism of bifunctors

::

The adjunction (corresponding to the identity on ) is an isomorphism, and the other adjunction is the projection homomorphism from the universal cover group of the identity component of to . It follows immediately that if is simply connected, then the Lie algebra functor establishes a bijective correspondence between Lie group homomorphisms GH and Lie algebra homomorphisms L(G)L(H).

The universal cover group above can be constructed as the image of the Lie algebra under the exponential map. More generally, we have that the Lie algebra is homeomorphic to a neighborhood of the identity. But globally, if the Lie group is compact, the exponential will not be injective, and if the Lie group is not connected, simply connected or compact, the exponential map need not be surjective.

If the Lie algebra is infinite-dimensional, the issue is more subtle. In many instances, the exponential map is not even locally a homeomorphism (for example, in Diff(S1), one may find diffeomorphisms arbitrarily close to the identity that are not in the image of exp). Furthermore, some infinite-dimensional Lie algebras are not the Lie algebra of any group.

The correspondence between Lie algebras and Lie groups is used in several ways, including in the classification of Lie groups and the related matter of the representation theory of Lie groups. Every representation of a Lie algebra lifts uniquely to a representation of the corresponding connected, simply connected Lie group, and conversely every representation of any Lie group induces a representation of the group's Lie algebra; the representations are in one to one correspondence. Therefore, knowing the representations of a Lie algebra settles the question of representations of the group.

As for classification, it can be shown that any connected Lie group with a given Lie algebra is isomorphic to the universal cover mod a discrete central subgroup. So classifying Lie groups becomes simply a matter of counting the discrete subgroups of the center, once the classification of Lie algebras is known (solved by Cartan et al. in the semisimple case).

== Category theoretic definition ==

Using the language of category theory, a Lie algebra can be defined as an object A in Veck, the category of vector spaces over a field k of characteristic not 2, together with a morphism : A  A  A, where  refers to the monoidal product of Veck, such that

*
*

where  (a  b) := b  a and  is the cyclic permutation braiding (id  A,A)  (A,A  id). In diagrammatic form:

:

==See also==

* Adjoint representation of a Lie algebra
* Anyonic Lie algebra
* Chiral Lie algebra
* Differential graded Lie algebra
* Index of a Lie algebra
* Killing form
* Lie algebra cohomology
* Lie algebra representation
* Lie bialgebra
* Lie coalgebra
* Particle physics and representation theory

* Lie superalgebra
* Poisson algebra
* Quantum groups
* Moyal algebra
* Quasi-Frobenius Lie algebra
* Quasi-Lie algebra
* Restricted Lie algebra
* Simplicial Lie algebra
* Symmetric Lie algebra 

== Notes ==
 

==References==
* Beltita, Daniel. Smooth Homogeneous Structures in Operator Theory, CRC Press, 2005. ISBN 978-1-4200-3480-6
* Boza, Luis; Fedriani, Eugenio M. & Nez, Juan. A new method for classifying complex filiform Lie algebras, Applied Mathematics and Computation, 121 (2-3): 169175, 2001
* Bourbaki, Nicolas. "Lie Groups and Lie Algebras - Chapters 1-3", Springer, 1989, ISBN 3-540-64242-0
* Erdmann, Karin & Wildon, Mark. Introduction to Lie Algebras, 1st edition, Springer, 2006. ISBN 1-84628-040-0
* Hall, Brian C. Lie Groups, Lie Algebras, and Representations: An Elementary Introduction, Springer, 2003. ISBN 0-387-40122-9
* Hofman, Karl & Morris, Sidney. "The Lie Theory of Connected Pro-Lie Groups", European Mathematical Society, 2007, ISBN 978-3-03719-032-6
* Humphreys, James E. Introduction to Lie Algebras and Representation Theory, Second printing, revised. Graduate Texts in Mathematics, 9. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1978. ISBN 0-387-90053-5
* Jacobson, Nathan, Lie algebras, Republication of the 1962 original. Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1979. ISBN 0-486-63832-4
* Kac, Victor G. et al. Course notes for MIT 18.745: Introduction to Lie Algebras, math.mit.edu
* O'Connor, J.J. & Robertson, E.F. Biography of Sophus Lie, MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive, www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk
* O'Connor, J.J. & Robertson, E.F. Biography of Wilhelm Killing, MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive, www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk
* Serre, Jean-Pierre. "Lie Algebras and Lie Groups", 2nd edition, Springer, 2006. ISBN 3-540-55008-9
* Steeb, W.-H. Continuous Symmetries, Lie Algebras, Differential Equations and Computer Algebra, second edition, World Scientific, 2007, ISBN 978-981-270-809-0
* Varadarajan, V.S. Lie Groups, Lie Algebras, and Their Representations, 1st edition, Springer, 2004. ISBN 0-387-90969-9

 

[[Lie group]]

In mathematics, a Lie group is a group that is also a differentiable manifold, with the property that the group operations are compatible with the smooth structure. Lie groups are named after Sophus Lie, who laid the foundations of the theory of continuous transformation groups. The term groupes de Lie first appeared in French in 1893 in the thesis of Lies student Arthur Tresse, page 3. 

Lie groups represent the best-developed theory of continuous symmetry of mathematical objects and structures, which makes them indispensable tools for many parts of contemporary mathematics, as well as for modern theoretical physics. They provide a natural framework for analysing the continuous symmetries of differential equations (differential Galois theory), in much the same way as permutation groups are used in Galois theory for analysing the discrete symmetries of algebraic equations. An extension of Galois theory to the case of continuous symmetry groups was one of Lie's principal motivations.

== Overview ==
The circle of center 0 and radius 1 in the complex plane is a Lie group with complex multiplication.
Lie groups are smooth having derivatives of all orders differentiable manifolds and as such can be studied using differential calculus, in contrast with the case of more general topological groups. One of the key ideas in the theory of Lie groups is to replace the global object, the group, with its local or linearized version, which Lie himself called its "infinitesimal group" and which has since become known as its Lie algebra.

Lie groups play an enormous role in modern geometry, on several different levels. Felix Klein argued in his Erlangen program that one can consider various "geometries" by specifying an appropriate transformation group that leaves certain geometric properties invariant. Thus Euclidean geometry corresponds to the choice of the group E(3) of distance-preserving transformations of the Euclidean space R3, conformal geometry corresponds to enlarging the group to the conformal group, whereas in projective geometry one is interested in the properties invariant under the projective group. This idea later led to the notion of a G-structure, where G is a Lie group of "local" symmetries of a manifold. On a "global" level, whenever a Lie group acts on a geometric object, such as a Riemannian or a symplectic manifold, this action provides a measure of rigidity and yields a rich algebraic structure. The presence of continuous symmetries expressed via a Lie group action on a manifold places strong constraints on its geometry and facilitates analysis on the manifold. Linear actions of Lie groups are especially important, and are studied in representation theory.

In the 1940s&ndash;1950s, Ellis Kolchin, Armand Borel, and Claude Chevalley realised that many foundational results concerning Lie groups can be developed completely algebraically, giving rise to the theory of algebraic groups defined over an arbitrary field. This insight opened new possibilities in pure algebra, by providing a uniform construction for most finite simple groups, as well as in algebraic geometry. The theory of automorphic forms, an important branch of modern number theory, deals extensively with analogues of Lie groups over adele rings; p-adic Lie groups play an important role, via their connections with Galois representations in number theory.

== Definitions and examples ==
A real Lie group is a group that is also a finite-dimensional real smooth manifold, in which the group operations of multiplication and inversion are smooth maps. Smoothness of the group multiplication

:

means that  is a smooth mapping of the product manifold GG into G. These two requirements can be combined to the single requirement that the mapping
:
be a smooth mapping of the product manifold into G.

=== First examples ===
* The 22 real invertible matrices form a group under multiplication, denoted by GL(2, R) or by GL2(R):

:: 

: This is a four-dimensional noncompact real Lie group. This group is disconnected; it has two connected components corresponding to the positive and negative values of the determinant.

* The rotation matrices form a subgroup of GL(2, R), denoted by SO(2, R). It is a Lie group in its own right: specifically, a one-dimensional compact connected Lie group which is diffeomorphic to the circle. Using the rotation angle as a parameter, this group can be parametrized as follows:

:: 

:Addition of the angles corresponds to multiplication of the elements of SO(2, R), and taking the opposite angle corresponds to inversion. Thus both multiplication and inversion are differentiable maps.

* The orthogonal group also forms an interesting example of a Lie group.

All of the previous examples of Lie groups fall within the class of classical groups.

=== Related concepts ===
A complex Lie group is defined in the same way using complex manifolds rather than real ones (example: SL(2, C)), and similarly, using an alternate metric completion of Q, one can define a p-adic Lie group over the p-adic numbers. Hilbert's fifth problem asked whether replacing differentiable manifolds with topological or analytic ones can yield new examples. The answer to this question turned out to be negative: in 1952, Gleason, Montgomery and Zippin showed that if G is a topological manifold with continuous group operations, then there exists exactly one analytic structure on G which turns it into a Lie group (see also Hilbert&ndash;Smith conjecture). If the underlying manifold is allowed to be infinite-dimensional (for example, a Hilbert manifold), then one arrives at the notion of an infinite-dimensional Lie group. It is possible to define analogues of many Lie groups over finite fields, and these give most of the examples of finite simple groups. 

The language of category theory provides a concise definition for Lie groups: a Lie group is a group object in the category of smooth manifolds. This is important, because it allows generalization of the notion of a Lie group to Lie supergroups.

== More examples of Lie groups ==

Lie groups occur in abundance throughout mathematics and physics. Matrix groups or algebraic groups are (roughly) groups of matrices (for example, orthogonal and symplectic groups), and these give most of the more common examples of Lie groups.

=== Examples with a specific number of dimensions ===
* The circle group S1 consisting of angles mod 2 under addition or, alternatively, the complex numbers with absolute value 1 under multiplication. This is a one-dimensional compact connected abelian Lie group.
*The 3-sphere S3 forms a Lie group by identification with the set of quaternions of unit norm, called versors. The only other spheres that admit the structure of a Lie group are the 0-sphere S0 (real numbers with absolute value 1) and the circle S1 (complex numbers with absolute value 1). For example, for even n > 1, Sn is not a Lie group because it does not admit a nonvanishing vector field and so a fortiori cannot be parallelizable as a differentiable manifold. Of the spheres only S0, S1, S3, and S7 are parallelizable. The last carries the structure of a Lie quasigroup (a nonassociative group), which can be identified with the set of unit octonions.
*The (3-dimensional) metaplectic group is a double cover of SL(2, R) playing an important role in the theory of modular forms. It is a connected Lie group that cannot be faithfully represented by matrices of finite size, i.e., a nonlinear group.
*The Heisenberg group is a connected nilpotent Lie group of dimension 3, playing a key role in quantum mechanics.
*The Lorentz group is a 6-dimensional Lie group of linear isometries of the Minkowski space.
*The Poincar group is a 10-dimensional Lie group of affine isometries of the Minkowski space.
*The group U(1)&times;SU(2)&times;SU(3) is a Lie group of dimension 1+3+8=12 that is the gauge group of the Standard Model in particle physics. The dimensions of the factors correspond to the 1 photon + 3 vector bosons + 8 gluons of the standard model
*The exceptional Lie groups of types G2, F4, E6, E7, E8 have dimensions 14, 52, 78, 133, and 248. Along with the A-B-C-D series of simple Lie groups, the exceptional groups complete the list of simple Lie groups. There is also a Lie group named E7 of dimension 190, but it is not a simple Lie group.

=== Examples with n dimensions ===
*Euclidean space Rn with ordinary vector addition as the group operation becomes an n-dimensional noncompact abelian Lie group.
*The Euclidean group E(n, R) is the Lie group of all Euclidean motions, i.e., isometric affine maps, of n-dimensional Euclidean space Rn.
*The orthogonal group O(n, R), consisting of all n  n orthogonal matrices with real entries is an n(n  1)/2-dimensional Lie group. This group is disconnected, but it has a connected subgroup SO(n, R) of the same dimension consisting of orthogonal matrices of determinant 1, called the special orthogonal group (for n = 3, the rotation group SO(3)).
*The unitary group U(n) consisting of n  n unitary matrices (with complex entries) is a compact connected Lie group of dimension n2. Unitary matrices of determinant 1 form a closed connected subgroup of dimension n2  1 denoted SU(n), the special unitary group.
*Spin groups are double covers of the special orthogonal groups, used for studying fermions in quantum field theory (among other things).
* The group GL(n, R) of invertible matrices (under matrix multiplication) is a Lie group of dimension n2, called the general linear group. It has a closed connected subgroup SL(n, R), the special linear group, consisting of matrices of determinant 1 which is also a Lie group.
*The symplectic group Sp(2n, R) consists of all 2n  2n matrices preserving a symplectic form on R2n. It is a connected Lie group of dimension 2n2 + n.
*The group of invertible upper triangular n by n matrices is a solvable Lie group of dimension n(n + 1)/2. (cf. Borel subgroup)
*The A-series, B-series, C-series and D-series, whose elements are denoted by An, Bn, Cn, and Dn, are infinite families of simple Lie groups.

=== Constructions ===
There are several standard ways to form new Lie groups from old ones:
*The product of two Lie groups is a Lie group.
*Any topologically closed subgroup of a Lie group is a Lie group. This is known as Cartan's theorem.
*The quotient of a Lie group by a closed normal subgroup is a Lie group.
*The universal cover of a connected Lie group is a Lie group. For example, the group R is the universal cover of the circle group S1. In fact any covering of a differentiable manifold is also a differentiable manifold, but by specifying universal cover, one guarantees a group structure (compatible with its other structures).

=== Related notions ===
Some examples of groups that are not Lie groups (except in the trivial sense that any group can be viewed as a 0-dimensional Lie group, with the discrete topology), are:

*Infinite-dimensional groups, such as the additive group of an infinite-dimensional real vector space. These are not Lie groups as they are not finite-dimensional manifolds

*Some totally disconnected groups, such as the Galois group of an infinite extension of fields, or the additive group of the p-adic numbers. These are not Lie groups because their underlying spaces are not real manifolds. (Some of these groups are "p-adic Lie groups"). In general, only topological groups having similar local properties to Rn for some positive integer n can be Lie groups (of course they must also have a differentiable structure)

== Early history ==
According to the most authoritative source on the early history of Lie groups (Hawkins, p. 1), Sophus Lie himself considered the winter of 18731874 as the birth date of his theory of continuous groups. Hawkins, however, suggests that it was "Lie's prodigious research activity during the four-year period from the fall of 1869 to the fall of 1873" that led to the theory's creation (ibid). Some of Lie's early ideas were developed in close collaboration with Felix Klein. Lie met with Klein every day from October 1869 through 1872: in Berlin from the end of October 1869 to the end of February 1870, and in Paris, Gttingen and Erlangen in the subsequent two years (ibid, p. 2). Lie stated that all of the principal results were obtained by 1884. But during the 1870s all his papers (except the very first note) were published in Norwegian journals, which impeded recognition of the work throughout the rest of Europe (ibid, p. 76). In 1884 a young German mathematician, Friedrich Engel, came to work with Lie on a systematic treatise to expose his theory of continuous groups. From this effort resulted the three-volume Theorie der Transformationsgruppen, published in 1888, 1890, and 1893. 

Lie's ideas did not stand in isolation from the rest of mathematics. In fact, his interest in the geometry of differential equations was first motivated by the work of Carl Gustav Jacobi, on the theory of partial differential equations of first order and on the equations of classical mechanics. Much of Jacobi's work was published posthumously in the 1860s, generating enormous interest in France and Germany (Hawkins, p. 43). Lie's ide fixe was to develop a theory of symmetries of differential equations that would accomplish for them what variste Galois had done for algebraic equations: namely, to classify them in terms of group theory. Lie and other mathematicians showed that the most important equations for special functions and orthogonal polynomials tend to arise from group theoretical symmetries. Additional impetus to consider continuous groups came from ideas of Bernhard Riemann, on the foundations of geometry, and their further development in the hands of Klein. Thus three major themes in 19th century mathematics were combined by Lie in creating his new theory: the idea of symmetry, as exemplified by Galois through the algebraic notion of a group; geometric theory and the explicit solutions of differential equations of mechanics, worked out by Poisson and Jacobi; and the new understanding of geometry that emerged in the works of Plcker, Mbius, Grassmann and others, and culminated in Riemann's revolutionary vision of the subject.

Although today Sophus Lie is rightfully recognized as the creator of the theory of continuous groups, a major stride in the development of their structure theory, which was to have a profound influence on subsequent development of mathematics, was made by Wilhelm Killing, who in 1888 published the first paper in a series entitled Die Zusammensetzung der stetigen endlichen Transformationsgruppen (The composition of continuous finite transformation groups) (Hawkins, p. 100). The work of Killing, later refined and generalized by lie Cartan, led to classification of semisimple Lie algebras, Cartan's theory of symmetric spaces, and Hermann Weyl's description of representations of compact and semisimple Lie groups using highest weights.

Weyl brought the early period of the development of the theory of Lie groups to fruition, for not only did he classify irreducible representations of semisimple Lie groups and connect the theory of groups with quantum mechanics, but he also put Lie's theory itself on firmer footing by clearly enunciating the distinction between Lie's infinitesimal groups (i.e., Lie algebras) and the Lie groups proper, and began investigations of topology of Lie groups (Borel (2001), ). The theory of Lie groups was systematically reworked in modern mathematical language in a monograph by Claude Chevalley.

==The concept of a Lie group, and possibilities of classification==
Lie groups may be thought of as smoothly varying families of symmetries. Examples of symmetries include rotation about an axis. What must be understood is the nature of 'small' transformations, e.g., rotations through tiny angles, that link nearby transformations. The mathematical object capturing this structure is called a Lie algebra (Lie himself called them "infinitesimal groups"). It can be defined because Lie groups are manifolds, so have tangent spaces at each point.

The Lie algebra of any compact Lie group (very roughly: one for which the symmetries form a bounded set) can be decomposed as a direct sum of an abelian Lie algebra and some number of simple ones. The structure of an abelian Lie algebra is mathematically uninteresting (since the Lie bracket is identically zero); the interest is in the simple summands. Hence the question arises: what are the simple Lie algebras of compact groups? It turns out that they mostly fall into four infinite families, the "classical Lie algebras" An, Bn, Cn and Dn, which have simple descriptions in terms of symmetries of Euclidean space. But there are also just five "exceptional Lie algebras" that do not fall into any of these families. E8 is the largest of these.

== Properties ==
* The diffeomorphism group of a Lie group acts transitively on the Lie group
* Every Lie group is parallelizable, and hence an orientable manifold (there is a bundle isomorphism between its tangent bundle and the product of itself with the tangent space at the identity)

== Types of Lie groups and structure theory ==
Lie groups are classified according to their algebraic properties (simple, semisimple, solvable, nilpotent, abelian), their connectedness (connected or simply connected) and their compactness.
*Compact Lie groups are all known: they are finite central quotients of a product of copies of the circle group S1 and simple compact Lie groups (which correspond to connected Dynkin diagrams).
*Any simply connected solvable Lie group is isomorphic to a closed subgroup of the group of invertible upper triangular matrices of some rank, and any finite-dimensional irreducible representation of such a group is 1-dimensional. Solvable groups are too messy to classify except in a few small dimensions.
*Any simply connected nilpotent Lie group is isomorphic to a closed subgroup of the group of invertible upper triangular matrices with 1's on the diagonal of some rank, and any finite-dimensional irreducible representation of such a group is 1-dimensional. Like solvable groups, nilpotent groups are too messy to classify except in a few small dimensions.
*Simple Lie groups are sometimes defined to be those that are simple as abstract groups, and sometimes defined to be connected Lie groups with a simple Lie algebra. For example, SL(2, R) is simple according to the second definition but not according to the first. They have all been classified (for either definition).
*Semisimple Lie groups are Lie groups whose Lie algebra is a product of simple Lie algebras. They are central extensions of products of simple Lie groups.

The identity component of any Lie group is an open normal subgroup, and the quotient group is a discrete group. The universal cover of any connected Lie group is a simply connected Lie group, and conversely any connected Lie group is a quotient of a simply connected Lie group by a discrete normal subgroup of the center. Any Lie group G can be decomposed into discrete, simple, and abelian groups in a canonical way as follows. Write 
:Gcon for the connected component of the identity
:Gsol for the largest connected normal solvable subgroup
:Gnil for the largest connected normal nilpotent subgroup
so that we have a sequence of normal subgroups
:1  Gnil  Gsol  Gcon  G.
Then
:G/Gcon is discrete
:Gcon/Gsol is a central extension of a product of simple connected Lie groups.
:Gsol/Gnil is abelian. A connected abelian Lie group is isomorphic to a product of copies of R and the circle group S1.
:Gnil/1 is nilpotent, and therefore its ascending central series has all quotients abelian.

This can be used to reduce some problems about Lie groups (such as finding their unitary representations) to the same problems for connected simple groups and nilpotent and solvable subgroups of smaller dimension.

== The Lie algebra associated with a Lie group ==
To every Lie group we can associate a Lie algebra whose underlying vector space is the tangent space of the Lie group at the identity element and which completely captures the local structure of the group. Informally we can think of elements of the Lie algebra as elements of the group that are "infinitesimally close" to the identity, and the Lie bracket is something to do with the commutator of two such infinitesimal elements. Before giving the abstract definition we give a few examples:
* The Lie algebra of the vector space Rn is just Rn with the Lie bracket given by B = 0. (In general the Lie bracket of a connected Lie group is always 0 if and only if the Lie group is abelian.)
* The Lie algebra of the general linear group GL(n, R) of invertible matrices is the vector space M(n, R) of square matrices with the Lie bracket given by B = AB &minus; BA.If G is a closed subgroup of GL(n, R) then the Lie algebra of G can be thought of informally as the matrices m of M(n, R) such that 1 + m is in G, where  is an infinitesimal positive number with 2 = 0 (of course, no such real number  exists). For example, the orthogonal group O(n, R) consists of matrices A with AAT = 1, so the Lie algebra consists of the matrices m with (1 + m)(1 + m)T = 1, which is equivalent to m + mT = 0 because 2 = 0.
*Formally, when working over the reals, as here, this is accomplished by considering the limit as   0; but the "infinitesimal" language generalizes directly to Lie groups over general rings.

The concrete definition given above is easy to work with, but has some minor problems: to use it we first need to represent a Lie group as a group of matrices, but not all Lie groups can be represented in this way, and it is not obvious that the Lie algebra is independent of the representation we use. To get round these problems we give 
the general definition of the Lie algebra of a Lie group (in 4 steps):
#Vector fields on any smooth manifold M can be thought of as derivations X of the ring of smooth functions on the manifold, and therefore form a Lie algebra under the Lie bracket Y = XY &minus; YX, because the Lie bracket of any two derivations is a derivation.
#If G is any group acting smoothly on the manifold M, then it acts on the vector fields, and the vector space of vector fields fixed by the group is closed under the Lie bracket and therefore also forms a Lie algebra.
#We apply this construction to the case when the manifold M is the underlying space of a Lie group G, with G acting on G = M by left translations Lg(h) = gh. This shows that the space of left invariant vector fields (vector fields satisfying Lg*Xh = Xgh for every h in G, where Lg* denotes the differential of Lg) on a Lie group is a Lie algebra under the Lie bracket of vector fields.
#Any tangent vector at the identity of a Lie group can be extended to a left invariant vector field by left translating the tangent vector to other points of the manifold. Specifically, the left invariant extension of an element v of the tangent space at the identity is the vector field defined by v^g = Lg*v. This identifies the tangent space TeG at the identity with the space of left invariant vector fields, and therefore makes the tangent space at the identity into a Lie algebra, called the Lie algebra of G, usually denoted by a Fraktur Thus the Lie bracket on is given explicitly by w = w^e.

This Lie algebra is finite-dimensional and it has the same dimension as the manifold G. The Lie algebra of G determines G up to "local isomorphism", where two Lie groups are called locally isomorphic if they look the same near the identity element.
Problems about Lie groups are often solved by first solving the corresponding problem for the Lie algebras, and the result for groups then usually follows easily. 
For example, simple Lie groups are usually classified by first classifying the corresponding Lie algebras. 

We could also define a Lie algebra structure on Te using right invariant vector fields instead of left invariant vector fields. This leads to the same Lie algebra, because the inverse map on G can be used to identify left invariant vector fields with right invariant vector fields, and acts as &minus;1 on the tangent space Te.

The Lie algebra structure on Te can also be described as follows:
the commutator operation

: (x, y)  xyx&minus;1y&minus;1

on G &times; G sends (e, e) to e, so its derivative yields a bilinear operation on TeG. This bilinear operation is actually the zero map, but the second derivative, under the proper identification of tangent spaces, yields an operation that satisfies the axioms of a Lie bracket, and it is equal to twice the one defined through left-invariant vector fields.

== Homomorphisms and isomorphisms ==
If G and H are Lie groups, then a Lie-group homomorphism f : G  H is a smooth group homomorphism. (It is equivalent to require only that f be continuous rather than smooth.) The composition of two such homomorphisms is again a homomorphism, and the class of all Lie groups, together with these morphisms, forms a category. Two Lie groups are called isomorphic if there exists a bijective homomorphism between them whose inverse is also a homomorphism. Isomorphic Lie groups are essentially the same; they only differ in the notation for their elements.

Every homomorphism f : G  H of Lie groups induces a homomorphism between the corresponding Lie algebras and . The association G is a functor (mapping between categories satisfying certain axioms).

One version of Ado's theorem is that every finite-dimensional Lie algebra is isomorphic to a matrix Lie algebra. For every finite-dimensional matrix Lie algebra, there is a linear group (matrix Lie group) with this algebra as its Lie algebra. So every abstract Lie algebra is the Lie algebra of some (linear) Lie group. 

The global structure of a Lie group is not determined by its Lie algebra; for example, if Z is any discrete subgroup of the center of G then G and G/Z have the same Lie algebra (see the table of Lie groups for examples). 
A connected Lie group is simple, semisimple, solvable, nilpotent, or abelian if and only if its Lie algebra has the corresponding property.

If we require that the Lie group be simply connected, then the global structure is determined by its Lie algebra: for every finite-dimensional Lie algebra over F there is a simply connected Lie group G with as Lie algebra, unique up to isomorphism. Moreover every homomorphism between Lie algebras lifts to a unique homomorphism between the corresponding simply connected Lie groups.

==The exponential map==

The exponential map from the Lie algebra M(n, R) of the general linear group GL(n, R) to GL(n, R) is defined by the usual power series:

:

for matrices A. If G is any subgroup of GL(n, R), then the exponential map takes the Lie algebra of G into G, so we have an exponential map for all matrix groups. 

The definition above is easy to use, but it is not defined for Lie groups that are not matrix groups, and it is not clear that the exponential map of a Lie group does not depend on its representation as a matrix group. We can solve both problems using a more abstract definition of the exponential map that works for all Lie groups, as follows. 

Every vector v in determines a linear map from R to taking 1 to v, which can be thought of as a Lie algebra homomorphism. Because R is the Lie algebra of the simply connected Lie group R, this induces a Lie group homomorphism c : R  G so that
 
:

for all s and t. The operation on the right hand side is the group multiplication in G. The formal similarity of this formula with the one valid for the exponential function justifies the definition

:

This is called the exponential map, and it maps the Lie algebra into the Lie group G. It provides a diffeomorphism between a neighborhood of 0 in and a neighborhood of e in G. This exponential map is a generalization of the exponential function for real numbers (because R is the Lie algebra of the Lie group of positive real numbers with multiplication), for complex numbers (because C is the Lie algebra of the Lie group of non-zero complex numbers with multiplication) and for matrices (because M(n, R) with the regular commutator is the Lie algebra of the Lie group GL(n, R) of all invertible matrices).

Because the exponential map is surjective on some neighbourhood N of e, it is common to call elements of the Lie algebra infinitesimal generators of the group G. The subgroup of G generated by N is the identity component of G.

The exponential map and the Lie algebra determine the local group structure of every connected Lie group, because of the Baker&ndash;Campbell&ndash;Hausdorff formula: there exists a neighborhood U of the zero element of , such that for u, v in U we have

:

where the omitted terms are known and involve Lie brackets of four or more elements. In case u and v commute, this formula reduces to the familiar exponential law exp(u) exp(v) exp(u + v).

The exponential map from the Lie algebra to the Lie group is not always onto, even if the group is connected (though it does map onto the Lie group for connected groups that are either compact or nilpotent). For example, the exponential map of SL(2, R) is not surjective. Also, exponential map is not surjective nor injective for infinite-dimensional (see below) Lie groups modelled on C Frchet space, even from arbitrary small neighborhood of 0 to corresponding neighborhood of 1.

==Infinite-dimensional Lie groups==
Lie groups are often defined to be finite-dimensional, but there are many groups that resemble Lie groups, except for being infinite-dimensional. The simplest way to define infinite-dimensional Lie groups is to model them on Banach spaces, and in this case much of the basic theory is similar to that of finite-dimensional Lie groups. However this is inadequate for many applications, because many natural examples of infinite-dimensional Lie groups are not Banach manifolds. Instead one needs to define Lie groups modeled on more general locally convex topological vector spaces. In this case the relation between the Lie algebra and the Lie group becomes rather subtle, and several results about finite-dimensional Lie groups no longer hold.

Some of the examples that have been studied include:
*The group of diffeomorphisms of a manifold. Quite a lot is known about the group of diffeomorphisms of the circle. Its Lie algebra is (more or less) the Witt algebra, which has a central extension called the Virasoro algebra, used in string theory and conformal field theory. Very little is known about the diffeomorphism groups of manifolds of larger dimension. The diffeomorphism group of spacetime sometimes appears in attempts to quantize gravity.
*The group of smooth maps from a manifold to a finite-dimensional Lie group is an example of a gauge group (with operation of pointwise multiplication), and is used in quantum field theory and Donaldson theory. If the manifold is a circle these are called loop groups, and have central extensions whose Lie algebras are (more or less) Kac&ndash;Moody algebras.
*There are infinite-dimensional analogues of general linear groups, orthogonal groups, and so on. One important aspect is that these may have simpler topological properties: see for example Kuiper's theorem.

==See also==
*Lie subgroup
*E8
*Adjoint representation of a Lie group
*Adjoint endomorphism
* Haar measure
*Homogeneous space
*List of Lie group topics
*List of simple Lie groups
*Moufang polygon
*Riemannian manifold
*Representations of Lie groups
*Table of Lie groups
*Lie algebra
*Symmetry in quantum mechanics
*Lie group action

==References==

==Notes==

==References==
* .
*
* . Chapters 1&ndash;3 ISBN 3-540-64242-0, Chapters 4&ndash;6 ISBN 3-540-42650-7, Chapters 7&ndash;9 ISBN 3-540-43405-4
* .
* 
* .
* Borel's review
* .
* . The 2003 reprint corrects several typographical mistakes.
* .
* .
*Lie Groups. Representation Theory and Symmetric Spaces Wolfgang Ziller, Vorlesung 2010



[[Lake Erie]]

From a high bluff near Leamington, Ontario
Lake Erie United States Geological Survey Hydrological Unit Code: 04-12-02-00 (; ) is the fourth largest lake (by surface area) of the five Great Lakes in North America, and the tenth largest globally Large Lakes of the World. Factmonster.com. or twelfth largest globally if measured in terms of surface area. It is the southernmost, shallowest, and smallest by volume of the Great Lakes Erie, Lake and therefore also has the shortest average water residence time. It is bounded by Ontario to the north, Ohio, and Pennsylvania to the south, New York to the east, and Michigan to the west. The lake is named after the Erie tribe of Native Americans who lived along its southern shore. 

The outflow from the lake provides hydroelectric power to Canada and the U.S. as it spins huge turbines at Niagara Falls. The lake's environmental health has been an ongoing concern for decades, with issues such as overfishing, pollution and more recently algal blooms and eutrophication generating headlines. 

==Geography==
False-color satellite image of Lake Erie in 2007

===Geographic features===

Lake Erie (42.2 N, 81.2W) has a mean elevation of 571 feet (174 m) above sea level. It has a surface area of 9,910 sqmi US Environmental Protection Agency, Great Lakes Factsheet No. 1, Accessed May 4, 2013 with a length of 241 smi and breadth of 57 smi at its widest points.

It is the shallowest of the Great Lakes with an average depth of 10 fathoms 3 feet (62 ft; 19 m) and a maximum depth of 35 fathom For comparison, Lake Superior has an average depth of 80 fathoms 3 feet (483 ft; 147 m), a volume of 2,900 cubic miles (12,100 km3) and shoreline of 2,726 statute miles (4,385 km). Because it is the shallowest, it is also the warmest of the Great Lakes, and in 1999 this almost became a problem for two nuclear power plants which require cool lake water to keep their reactors cool. The warm summer of 1999 caused lake temperatures to come close to the 85 F (29 C) limit necessary to keep the plants cool. Also because of its shallowness, and in spite of being the warmest lake in the summer, it is also the first to freeze in the winter. http://www.glerl.noaa.gov/res/glcfs/glcfs.php?hr=00&ext=ice&type=N&lake=l The shallowest section of Lake Erie is the western basin where depths average only 25 to; as a result, "the slightest breeze can kick up lively waves," according to a New York Times reporter in 2004. The "waves build very quickly", according to other accounts. Sometimes fierce waves springing up unexpectedly have led to dramatic rescues; in one instance, a Cleveland resident trying to measure the dock near his house became trapped but was rescued by a fire department diver from Avon Lake, Ohio:

The Niagara River empties Lake Erie into Lake Ontario. This water has just passed over Niagara Falls.
This area is also known as the "thunderstorm capital of Canada" with "breathtaking" lightning displays. Lake Erie is primarily fed by the Detroit River (from Lake Huron and Lake St. Clair) and drains via the Niagara River and Niagara Falls into Lake Ontario. Navigation downstream is provided by the Welland Canal, part of the Saint Lawrence Seaway. Other major contributors to Lake Erie include the Grand River, the Huron River, the Maumee River, the Sandusky River, the Buffalo River, and the Cuyahoga River. The drainage basin covers 30,140 square miles (78,000 km2).

Point Pelee National Park, the southernmost point of the Canadian mainland, is located on a peninsula extending into the lake. Several islands are found in the western end of the lake; these belong to Ohio except for Pelee Island and eight neighboring islands, which are part of Ontario.

Major cities along the Lake Erie include Buffalo, New York; Erie, Pennsylvania; Toledo, Ohio; Port Stanley, Ontario; Monroe, Michigan; Sandusky, Ohio; and Cleveland, Ohio.

Partial map of the Lake Erie Islands 

===Islands===

Islands tend to be located in the western side of the lake and total 31 in number (13 in Canada, 18 in the U.S.). The island-village of Put-in-Bay on South Bass Island attracts young crowds who sometimes wear "red bucket hats" and are prone to "break off cartwheels in the park" and general merriment. Kelleys Island was depicted by the Chicago Tribune as having charms that were "more subtle" than Put-in-Bay, and offers amenities such as beach lounging, hiking, biking, and "marveling at deep glacial grooves left in limestone." Pelee Island is the largest of Erie's islands, accessible by ferry from Leamington, Ontario and Sandusky, Ohio. The island has a "fragile and unique ecosystem" with plants rarely found in Canada, such as wild hyacinth, yellow horse gentian (Triosteum angustifolium), and prickly pear cactus, as well as two endangered snakes, the blue racer and the Lake Erie water snake. Songbirds migrate to Pelee in spring, and monarch butterflies stop over during the fall. 

===Water levels===
Lake Erie has a lake retention time of 2.6 years, the shortest of all the Great Lakes. Great Lakes; Basic Information: Lake Erie. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. This means that the lake water is renewed from upstream sources every three years. The lake's surface area is 9,910 sqmi. Lake Erie's water level fluctuates with the seasons as in the other Great Lakes. Generally, the lowest levels are in January and February, and the highest in June or July, although there have been exceptions. The average yearly level varies depending on long-term precipitation. Short-term level changes are often caused by seiches that are particularly high when southwesterly winds blow across the length of the lake during storms. These cause water to pile up at the eastern end of the lake. Storm-driven seiches can cause damage onshore. During one storm in November 2003, the water level at Buffalo rose by 7 feet (2.1 m) with waves of 1015 feet (34.5 m) for a rise of 22 feet (6.7 m). Meanwhile, at the western end of the lake, Toledo experienced a similar drop in water level. Lake water is used for drinking purposes. 

* Historic High Water. The lake fluctuates from month to month with the highest lake levels in October and November. The normal high-water mark is 2.00 ft above datum (569.2 ft or 173.5 m). In the summer of 1986, Lake Erie reached its highest level at 5.08 ft above datum. Monthly bulletin of Lake Levels for The Great Lakes; September 2009; U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Detroit District The high water records were set from 1986 (April) through January 1987. Levels ranged from 4.33 to(-) above Chart Datum. 

* Historic Low Water. Lake Erie experiences its lowest levels in the winter. The normal low-water mark is 1.50 ft below datum (569.2 ft or 173.5 m). In the winter of 1934, Lake Erie reached its lowest level at 1.50 ft below datum. Monthly low water records were set from July 1934 through June 1935. During this twelve-month period water levels ranged from 1.50 ft to the Chart Datum. 

==Geology==
Sandy bluffs along Lake Erie in Erie County, Pennsylvania Lake Erie was carved out by glacier ice, and in its current form is less than 4,000 years old, a short time geologically speaking. Before this, the land on which the lake now sits has gone through several complex stages. A large lowland basin formed over two million years ago as a result of an eastern flowing river that existed well before the Pleistocene ice ages. This ancient drainage system was destroyed by the first major glacier in the area, while at the same time deepening and enlarging the lowland allowing water to settle and form a lake. The glaciers were able to carve away more land on the eastern side of the lowland because the bedrock is made of shale which is much softer than the carbonate rocks on the western side. Thus, the eastern side of the modern lake is much deeper than the western portion which averages only 25 ft deep. Lake Erie is the shallowest of the Great Lakes because the ice was so thin and lacked erosion power when it reached that far south.

As many as three glaciers advanced and retreated over the land causing temporary lakes to form in the time periods in between each of them. Because each lake had a different volume of water their shorelines rested at differing elevations. The last of these lakes to form, Lake Warren, existed between about 13,000 and 12,000 years ago. It was deeper than the current Lake Erie, so its shoreline existed about eight miles (13 km) inland from the modern one. The shorelines of these lakes left behind high ground sand ridges that cut through swamps and were used as trails for Indians and later, pioneers. These trails became primitive roads which were eventually paved. U.S. Route 30 west of Delphos and U.S. Route 20 west of Norwalk and east of Cleveland were formed in this manner. One can still see some of these ancient sand dunes that formed in the Oak Openings Region in Northwestern Ohio. There, the sandy dry lake bed soil was not enough to support large trees with the exception of a few species of oaks, forming a rare oak savanna. 

==History==

===Native Americans===
At the time of European contact, there were several groups of Iroquoian cultures living around the shores of the eastern end of the lake. The Erie tribe (from whom the lake takes its name) lived along the southern edge, while the Neutrals (also known as Attawandaron) lived along the northern shore. Near Port Stanley, there is an Indian village dating from the 16th century known as the Southwold Earthworks where as many as 800 Neutral Indians once lived; the archaeological remains include double earth walls winding around the grasscovered perimeter. Europeans named the tribe the Neutral Indians since these people refused to fight with other tribes. Both tribes were conquered and assimilated by their hostile eastern neighbors, the Iroquois Confederacy between A.D. 1651 and 1657, in what is referred to as part of the Beaver Wars. Trigger, Bruce; The Children of Aataentsic (McGill-Queen's University Press, Kingston and Montreal,1987, ISBN 0-7735-0626-8), pp. 789797. 

For decades after those wars, the land around eastern Lake Erie was claimed and utilized by the Iroquois as a hunting ground. As the power of the Iroquois waned during the last quarter of the 17th century, several other, mainly Anishinaabe Native American tribes, displaced them from the territories they claimed on the north shore of the lake. Schmalz, Peter S.; The Ojibwa of Southern Ontario (University of Toronto Press, Toronto, Buffalo, London, 1991, ISBN 0-8020-2736-9), pp. 1334. There was a legend of an Indian woman named Huldah who, despairing over her lost British lover, hurled herself from a high rock from Pelee Island. 

===European exploration and settlement===
The steamship Walk in Water, built in Buffalo, was the first steamship on Lake Erie. Picture circa 1816.
In 1669, the Frenchman Louis Jolliet was the first documented European to sight Lake Erie, although there is speculation that tienne Brl may have come across it in 1615. Ashworth, William (1987). The Late, Great Lakes: An Environmental History, p. 36. Detroit: Wayne State University Press. ISBN 0-8143-1887-8. Lake Erie was the last of the Great Lakes to be explored by Europeans, since the Iroquois who occupied the Niagara River area were in conflict with the French, and they did not allow explorers or traders to pass through. Explorers followed rivers out of Lake Ontario and portaged directly into Lake Huron. British authorities in Canada were nervous about possible expansion by American settlers across Lake Erie, so Colonel Talbot developed the Talbot Trail in 1809 as a way to stimulate settlement to the area; Talbot recruited settlers from Ireland and Scotland and there are numerous places named after him, such as Port Talbot and the Talbot River and Talbotville in southern Ontario. 

Commander Perry's message after the Battle of Lake Erie: "We have met the enemy and they are ours." This 1865 painting by William H. Powell shows Perry transferring to a different ship during the battle.
During the War of 1812, Oliver Hazard Perry captured an entire British fleet in 1813 near Put-in-Bay, Ohio, despite having inferior numbers. American soldiers swept through the Ontario area around Port Rowan burning towns and villages, but spared a gristmill owned by a Canadian mason named John Backhouse, according to one report. Generally, however, despite the two exceptions being the American Revolutionary War and the War of 1812 which involved conflicts between the U.S. and Great Britain, relations between the U.S. and Canada have been remarkably friendly with an "unfortified boundary" and an agreement "that has kept all fleets of war off the Great Lakes." 

In 1837, rebellions broke about between Canadian settlers and the British Colonial government, primarily over political reforms and land allocation issues. Some of the rebels stationed themselves in the U.S. and crossed the ice from Sandusky Bay to Pelee Island wearing "tattered overcoats and worn-out boots", and carrying muskets, pitchforks, and swords, but the islanders had already fled. Later, there was a battle on the ice with the Royal 32nd regiment, with the rebels being driven to retreat. 

At an Ohio history festival, 19th century style brig warship USS Niagara passes the Lorain lighthouse.
Settlers established commercial fisheries on the north coast of the lake around the 1850s. An important business was fishing. In the pre-Civil War years, railways sprouted everywhere, and around 1852 there were railways circling the lake. Maritime traffic picked up, although the lake was usually closed because of ice from December to early April, and ships had to wait for the ice to clear before proceeding. Since slavery had been abolished in Canada in 1833, but was still legal in southern states of the U.S., a Lake Erie crossing was sometimes required for fugitive slaves seeking freedom:

Merchant shippers lacked modern radar and weather forecasting, so vessels were often caught up in intense gales:

There were reports of disasters usually from sea captains passing information to reporters; in 1868, the captain of the Grace Whitney saw a sunken vessel "three men clinging to the masthead" but he could not help because of the gale and high seas. 

A balloonist named John Steiner of Philadelphia made an ambitious trip across the lake in 1857. He was described in the New York Times as an eronaut or aeronaut; powered boats were called propellers; and fast was deemed railroad speed. Here's an account of the day-long voyage over the lake:

In 1885, lake winds were so strong that water levels dropped substantially, sometimes by as much as two feet, so that at ports such as Toledo, watercraft could not load coal or depart the port. 

During the history of the lake as a fishery, there has been marked battling by opposing interest groups. Here's an 1895 newspaper account in which critics of commercial fishing issued dire predictions and calling for government action to solve the problem:

View from the Peace Memorial at Put-in-Bay, Ohio 
Predictions of the lake being over-fished in 1895 were premature, since the fishery has survived commercial and sport fishing, pollution in the middle of the 20th century, invasive species and other ailments, but state and provincial governments, as well as national governments, have played a greater role as time went by. Business boomed; in 1901, the Carnegie Company proposed building a new harbor near Erie in Elk Creek to accommodate shipments from its tube-plant site nearby. In 1913, a memorial to Commodore Perry was built on Put-in-Bay island featuring a Doric column. 

During the Prohibition years from 1919 to 1933, a "great deal of alcohol crossed Erie" along with "mobster corpses" dumped into the Detroit River which sometimes washed up on the beaches of Pelee Island. According to one account, Al Capone hid a "fortune" in the walls of the Middle Island luxury club, but no money was found in it as of 2007 when the building no longer stood. The club had a basement casino with poker tables and slot machines. 

During the 20th century, commercial fishing was prevalent, but so was the boom in manufacturing industry around the lake, and often rivers and streams were used as sewers to flush untreated sewage which ended up in the lake. Sometimes poorly constructed sanitary systems meant that when old mains broke, raw sewage would spill directly into the Cuyahoga and into the lake. A report in Time Magazine in 1969 described the lake as a "gigantic cesspool" since only 3 of 62 beaches were rated "completely safe for swimming". 

By 1975 the popular commercial fish blue pike had been declared extinct, although the declaration may have been premature. By the 1980s, there were about 130 fishing vessels with about 3,000 workers, but commercial fishing was declining rapidly, particularly from the American side.

===Great Lakes Compact===

In 2005, the Great Lakes States of Ohio, Michigan, New York, Pennsylvania, Illinois, Indiana, Wisconsin, Minnesota and the Canadian Province of Ontario endorsed the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence River Basin Sustainable Water Resources Compact (Compact). The Compact was signed into law by President George W. Bush in September 2008. An international water rights policy overseen by the Great Lakes Commission, the Compact aims to prevent diversion of water from Great Lakes to distant states, as well as to set standards for use and conservation. It has support from both political parties, including United States Senator George Voinovich (R-OH) and Governor Jennifer Granholm (D-MI), but is not popular in the southwestern states due to frequent drought conditions and water scarcity.

==Lake environment==

===Weather===

====Lake Erie in winter====
Cold air travels over warm lake water. The air becomes warmer, moister, less dense, so that it rises; when it passes over land, the reduced airspace causes the air to "pile up" resulting in "frictional convergence." This lifts the air even further to where it cools, turning into droplets or snowflakes. The result is enhanced snowfall. 
Tornadoes rarely happen around the immediate Great Lakes region, although this one happened in 1953 in Erie, Michigan near Lake Erie.
Lake Erie in winter
Like the other Great Lakes, Erie produces lake effect snow when the first cold winds of winter pass over the warm waters. When the difference in temperature between the relatively warm surface water and the colder air reaches a threshold value of 18 F to 23 F (-7 C to -3 C), then "lake-effect snow becomes possible:" 

Heavy lake-effect snowfalls can occur when cold air travels 60 mi or longer over a large unfrozen lake. Lake-effect snow makes Buffalo and Erie the eleventh and thirteenth snowiest places in the entire United States respectively, according to data collected from the National Climatic Data Center. Answers: 10 snowiest 'cities' aren't all in New York. Also creating the snow belt from Cleveland to Buffalo. Chris Cappella, USATODAY.com. Since winds blow primarily westtoeast along the main axis of the lake, lake effect snow effects are more pronounced on the eastern parts of the lake such as cities such as Buffalo and Erie. Buffalo typically gets 95 in of snow each winter, and sometimes ten feet (3 m) of snow; the snowiest city is Syracuse, New York, which gets lake effect precipitation from Lake Ontario as well as Lake Erie. A storm around Christmas in 2001 pounded Buffalo with seven feet of snow. 

Lake Erie in winter.
The lake effect ends or its effect is reduced, however, when the lake freezes over. In January 2011, for example, residents of Cleveland were glad when Lake Erie was "90 percent frozen" since it meant that the area had "made it over the hump" in terms of enduring repeated snowfalls which required much shoveling. Being the shallowest of the Great Lakes, it is the most likely to freeze and frequently does. What's the physics behind "lake effect snow"?. the Straight Dope Science Advisory Board. On February 16, 2010, meteorologists reported that the lake had frozen over marking the first time the lake had completely frozen over since the winter of 19951996. Weather News. AccuWeather.com. Retrieved on 2013-07-24. In contrast, Lake Michigan has never completely frozen over since the warmer and deeper portion is in the south, although it came close to being totally frozen during three harsh winters over the past century. When the lake freezes over, this usually shuts down the lake effect snowfall. In past years, lake ice was so thick that it was possible to drive over it or go sailing on iceboats; but in the first decade of the 21st century, the ice has not been thick enough for such activities. Many lake residents take advantage of the ice and travel; some drive to Canada and back. Here's one account of ice life around Put-in-Bay:

====Windy conditions====
Strong winds have caused lake currents to shift sediment on the bottom, leading to "wickedly shifting sandbars" which have been a source of shipwrecks. But winds can have a peaceful purpose as well; there have been proposals to place electricityproducing wind turbines in windy and shallow points in the lake and along the coast, both in the United States and Canada. In 2010, there were plans for GE to develop five wind turbines to generate 20 megawatts of power by 2012 with plans to generate 1,000 megawatts by 2020; one proposal called for "gearless turbines" with 176-foot long blades helped along with magnets. A nonprofit development group near Cleveland was developing plans to construct hundreds of turbines in the lake. A former steel mill site on the eastern edge of the lake in Buffalo, NY has been redeveloped as an urban wind farm in 2007. Known as Steel Winds, the project currently houses 14 turbines capable of generating up to 35 megawatts of electricity. A plan by Samsung to build an offshore wind farm on the north shore of the lake, from Port Maitland to Nanticoke for a distance of 15.5 miles (25 km), but the plan has been met with opposition from residents for a number of reasons. Canadians near Leamington and Kingsville have organized protest groups to thwart attempts to bring wind turbines to the lake; reasons against the turbines include spoiling lake views as well as possible adverse effects regarding drinking water and commercial fishing. Plans to install turbines in Pigeon Bay, south of Leamington were met with opposition as well. The notion that bird and bat migration may be hurt by the wind turbines has been used to argue against the wind turbines. 

====Microclimates====
The lake is also responsible for microclimates that are important to agriculture. Along its north shore is one of the richest areas of Canada's fruit and vegetable production; this southernmost tip, particularly in the area around Leamington, is known as Canada's "tomato capital". The area around Port Rowan in Ontario has special trees which grow because of the "tempering effect of the lake", and species include tulip trees, flowering dogwood, sassafras and sour gum. In this area there are many greenhouses which produce a "variety of tropical plants rarely cultivated so far north", including some species of cacti, because of the lake's tempering effect. Along the southeastern shore in Ohio, Pennsylvania, and New York is an important grape growing region, as are the islands in the lake. Apple orchards are abundant in northeast Ohio to western New York.

====Long term weather patterns====
According to one estimate, 34 to 36 inches of water evaporates each year from the surface of the lake, which allows for rainfall and other precipitation in surrounding areas. There are conflicting reports about the overall effect of global warming on the Great Lakes region, including Lake Erie. One account suggests that climate change is causing greater evaporation of lake water, leading to warmer temperatures as well as ice in winter which is less thick or nonexistent, fueling concerns that "Erie appears to be shrinking" and is the most likely candidate among the five Great Lakes to "turn into a festering mud puddle." In 2010, the Windsor Star reported that the lake experienced "record-breaking temperatures" reaching 81 F (27 C) in mid-August and compared the lake to a "bath tub". But the long term weather patterns are subject to controversy.

===Ecosystems===
A coal-fired power plant in Avon Lake, Ohio located on Lake Erie.
Lake Erie has a complex ecosystem with many species in constant interaction. Human activity, such as pollution and maritime ship traffic, can affect this environment in numerous ways. The interactions between the new species can sometimes have beneficial effects, as well as harmful effects. Some introductions have been seen as beneficial such as the introduction of Pacific salmon. Occasionally there have been mass die-offs of certain species of fish, sometimes for reasons unknown, such as many numbers of rainbow smelt in May 2010. 

====Invasive species====
The lake has been plagued with a number of invasive species, including Zebra and quagga mussels, the goby and the grass carp. One estimate was that there have been 180 invasive species in the Great Lakes, some having traveled in ballast water in international ships. Zebra mussels and gobies have been credited with the increased population and size of smallmouth bass in Lake Erie. 200304 CITGO Bassmaster Northern Open.
BASS Communications  September 3, 2003 In 2008 there were concerns that the "newest invader swarming in the Great Lakes", which was the "bloody-red shrimp", might harm fish populations and promote algae blooms. 

Environmentalists and biologists study lake conditions, such as the Franz Theodore Stone Laboratory on Gibraltar Island near Put-in-Bay which is the oldest "freshwater biological field station" and campus of Ohio State University. In addition, the Great Lakes Institute of the University of Windsor has experts who study issues such as lake sediment pollution and the flow of contaminants such as phosphorus. 

====Eutrophication and the infamous dead zone====
The green scum shown in this image taken in October 2011 is the worst algae bloom Lake Erie has experienced in decades.
An ongoing concern is that "nutrient overloading from fertilizers, human and animal waste", known as eutrophication, in which additional nitrogen and phosphorus enter the lake, will cause plant life to "run wild and multiply like crazy". Since there are fewer wetlands, which are like "Nature's kidneys" by filtering nutrients, as well as greater "channelization of waterways", nutrients in water can cause algal blooms to sprout as well as "low-oxygen dead zones" in a complex interaction of natural forces. As of the 2010s much of the phosphorus in the lake comes from fertilizer applied to no-till soybean and corn fields but washed into streams by heavy rains. The algal blooms result from growth of Microcystis, a toxic blue-green algae that the Zebra mussels which infest the lake don't eat. 

There is a dead zone within the middle of the lake although its exact location varies. Scientists from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration have been studying the lake's blue-green algae blooms, and trying to find ways to predict when they are spreading or where they might hit landfall; typically the blooms arrive late each summer. One account suggests that the seasonal algae blooms in Lake Erie were possibly caused by "runoff from cities, fertilizers, zebra mussels, and livestock near water." A second report focuses on the zebra mussels as being the cause of "big oxygen-poor dead zones" since they filter so much sediment that they have resulted in the growth of algae. One report suggests the oxygen-poor zone began about 1993 in the lake's central basin and becomes more pronounced during summer months, but it is somewhat of a mystery why this happens. Some scientists speculate that the dead zone is a naturally occurring phenomenon. Another report cited Ohio's Maumee River as the main source of polluted runoff of phosphorus from industries, municipalities, tributaries and agriculture, and in 2008, satellite images showed the algal bloom heading toward Pelee Island, and possibly heading to Lake Erie's central basin. There have been two-year $2 million studies trying to understand the "growing zone" which was described as a "10-foot-thick layer of cold water at the bottom", 55 ft in one area, which stretches "100 miles across the lake's center". It kills fish and microscopic creatures of the lake's food chain and fouls the water, and may cause further problems in later years for sport and commercial fishing. 

Algae blooms continued in early 2013 but new farming techniques, climate change and even a change in Lake Eries ecosystem make phosphorus pollution more intractable. Spring Rain, Then Foul Algae in Ailing Lake Erie March 14, 2013 New York Times 

====Snakes====
Northern Watersnake, Nerodia sipedon, is nonvenomous.
The Lake Erie water snake, a subspecies of the northern water snake (Nerodia sipedon), lives in the vicinity of Ohio's Put-in-Bay Harbor, and had been put on the threatened species list. A threatened species is one which may soon become an endangered species. By 2010, the water snake population was over 12,000 snakes. While they have a non-venomous bite, they are a key predator in the lake's aquatic ecosystem since they feed on mudpuppies and walleye and smallmouth bass. The snake was helpful in keeping the population of goby fish in check. They mate from late May through early June and can be found in large mating balls with one female bunched with several males. 

====Asian carp====
There is a concern that Asian carp might enter the Great Lakes region and alter the ecosystem negatively. They have been described as "greedy giants that suck plankton from the water with the brutal efficiency of vacuum cleaners" and scientists worry that they may unravel the "aquatic food web" by crowding out other species. 

====Snakehead fish====
Snakehead fish.
There was concern in 2007 that Snakehead fish could get into the Great Lakes area. Officials warn that if the fish invades, it could "decimate the aquatic food chain". 

====Agriculture and life around the lake====
In 1999, Doppler radar weather sensors detected millions of mayflies heading for Presque Isle in blue and green splotches on the radar in clouds measuring ten miles (16 km) long. These insects were a sign of Lake Erie's move back to health, since the mayflies require clean water to thrive. Biologist Masteller of Penn State Erie declared the bugs to be a "nice nuisance" since they signified the lake's return to health after forty years of absence. Each is an inch and a half long; the three main species of mayflies are Ephemera simulans, Hexagenia rigida and Hexagenia limbata. The insects mate over a 72-hour period from June through September; they fly in masses up to the shore, mate in the air, then females lay up to 8,000 eggs each over the water; the eggs sink back down and the cycle repeats. Sometimes the clouds of mayflies have caused power outages as well as causing roads to become slippery with squashed insects. Since zebra mussels filter extra nutrients from the lake, it allows the mayfly larvae to thrive. 

The Trumpeter Swan (Cygnus buccinator) on Lake Erie.
There have been incidents of birds dying from botulism, in 2000, and in 2002. Birds affected included grebes, common and red-breasted mergansers, loons, diving ducks, ring-billed gulls and herring gulls. One account suggests that bird populations are in trouble, notably the woodland warbler, which had population declines around 60 percent in 2008. Possible causes for declines in bird populations are farming practices, loss of habitats, soil depletion and erosion, and toxic chemicals. In 2006, there were concerns of possible bird flu after two wild swans on the lake were found diseased, but it was learned that they did not contain the deadly H5N1 virus. There were sightings of a magnificent frigatebird, a tropical bird with a two-metre wingspan, over the lake in 2008. 

====Water quality issues and restoration====
Lake Erie infamously became very polluted in the 1960s and 1970s as a result of the quantity of heavy industry situated in cities on its shores, with reports of bacteria-laden beaches and fish contaminated by industrial waste. In the 1970s, patches of the lake were declared dead because of industrial waste as well as sewage from runoffs; as New York Times reporter Denny Lee wrote in 2004, "The lake, after all, is where the Rust Belt meets the water." 

The water quality deteriorated partially due to increasing levels of the nutrient phosphorus in both the water and lake bottom sediments. The resultant high nitrogen levels in the water caused eutrophication, which resulted in algal blooms and Algae masses and fish kills increasingly fouled the shoreline during this period. There were incidents of the oily surfaces of tributary rivers emptying into Lake Erie catching fire: in 1969, Cleveland's Cuyahoga River erupted in flames, chronicled in a Time Magazine article which lamented a tendency to use rivers flowing through major cities as "convenient, free sewers"; the Detroit River caught fire on another occasion. The outlook was gloomy:

These events embarrassed officials and spurred local officials, including Cleveland's director of public utilities, Ben Stefanski, to pursue a massive effort to "scrub the Cuyahoga"; the effort cost $100 million in bonds, according to one estimate. New sewer lines were built. Clevelanders approved a bond issue by 2 to 1 to seriously upgrade Cleveland's sewage system. Federal officials acted as well; the United States Congress passed the Clean Water Act of 1972. Ashworth (1987), pp. 14344. In that year, the United States and Canada established water pollution limits in an International Water Quality Agreement. The controls were effective, but it took several decades to take effect; by 1999, there were signs that large numbers of mayflies were spotted on the lake after a forty-year absence signalling a return to health. The clearing of the water column is also partly due to the introduction and rapid spread of zebra mussels from Europe, which had the effect of covering "the basin floor like shag carpeting" with each creature filtering "a liter of fresh water a day," helping to restore the lake to a cleaner state. The 1972 Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement also significantly reduced the dumping and runoff of phosphorus into the lake. The lake has since become clean enough to allow sunlight to infiltrate its water and produce algae and sea weed, but a dead zone persists in the central Lake Erie Basin during the late summer. The United States Environmental Protection Agency has studied this cyclic phenomenon since 2005. US EPA Lake Erie 'Dead Zone'. There have been instances of beach closings at Presque Isle off the coast of northwestern Pennsylvania because of unexplained E. Coli contaminations, possibly caused by storm water overflows after heavy downpours.
Daybreak with Cleveland skyline.
Sunset from Cleveland pier.
Since the 1970s environmental regulation has led to a great increase in water quality and the return of economically important fish species such as walleye and other biological life. Recovery of Lake Erie Walleye a Success Story. Michigan Department of Natural Resources. There was substantial evidence that the new controls had substantially reduced levels of DDT in the water by 1979. Cleanup efforts were described in 1979 as a notable environmental success story, suggesting that the cumulative effect of legislation, studies, and bans had reversed the effects of pollution: 

Joint U.S.Canadian agreements pushed 600 of 864 major industrial dischargers to meet requirements for keeping the water clean. One estimate was that $5 billion was spent to upgrade plants to treat sewage. The change toward cleaner water has been in a positive direction since the 1970s.

====Other ecosystem related issues====
There was a tentative exploratory plan to capture CO2, compress it to a liquid form, and pump it a half-mile (800 m) beneath Lake Erie's surface underneath the porous rock structure. According to chemical engineer Peter Douglas, there is sufficient storage space beneath Lake Erie to hold between 15 to 50 years of liquid CO2 emissions from the 4,000 megawatt Nanticoke coal plant. But there has been no substantial progress on this issue since 2007.

==Economy==

===Fishing===

====Species of fish====
Summer morning west of Cleveland
Lake Erie is home to one of the world's largest freshwater commercial fisheries. Lake Erie's fish populations are the most abundant of the Great Lakes, partially because of the lake's relatively mild temperatures and plentiful supply of plankton, which is the basic building block of the food chain. The lake's fish population accounts for an estimated 50% of all fish inhabiting the Great Lakes. http://www.politifact.com/ohio/statements/2012/mar/22/marcy-kaptur/rep-marcy-kaptur-says-lake-erie-has-more-native-fi/ The lake is "loaded with superstars" such as steelhead, walleye (American usage) or pickerel (Canadian usage), smallmouth bass, perch, as well as bass, trout, salmon, whitefesh, smelt, and many others. The lake consists of a long list of well established introduced species. Common non-indigenous fish species include the rainbow smelt, alewife, white perch and common carp. Non-native sport fish such as rainbow trout and brown trout are stocked specifically for anglers to catch. Attempts failed to stock coho salmon and its numbers are once again dwindling. Commercial landings are dominated by yellow perch and walleye, with substantial quantities of rainbow smelt and white bass also taken. Anglers target walleye and yellow perch, with some effort directed at rainbow trout. A variety of other species are taken in smaller quantities by both commercial and sport fleets.

Up until the end of the 1950s, the most commonly caught commercial fish (more than 50% of the commercial catch) was a subspecies of the walleye known as the Blue Walleye (sander vitreus glaucus) sometimes erroneously called "blue pike". In the 1970s and 1980s, as pollution in the lake declined, counts of Walleyes which were caught grew from 112,000 in 1975 to 4.1 million in 1985, with estimates of the numbers of Walleyes in the lake at around 33 million in the basin, with many of 8 pounds or more. Not all Walleyes thrived. The combination of overfishing and the eutrophication of the lake by pollution caused the population to collapse, and in the mid-1980s, one species of Walleye called the Blue Walleye was declared extinct. But the Lake Erie Walleye was reportedly having record numbers, even in 1989, according to one report. There have been concerns about rising levels of mercury in Walleye fish; a study by the Canadian Ministry of the Environment noted an "increasing concentration trend" but that limits were within acceptable established by authorities in Pennsylvania. It was recommended, because of PCBs, that persons eat no more than one walleye meal per month. Because of these and other concerns, in 1990, the National Wildlife Federation was on the verge of having a "negative fish consumption advisory" for walleyes and smallmouth bass, which had been the bread-and-butter catch of an $800 million commercial fishing industry. 

The longest fish in Lake Erie is reportedly the sturgeon which can grow to ten feet long and weight 300 pounds, but it is an endangered species and mostly lives on the bottom of the lake. In 2009, there was a confirmed instance of a sturgeon being caught, which was returned to the lake alive, and there are hopes that the population of sturgeons is resurging. 

====Commercial fishing====
Sunset on Lake Erie seen through a fishing net.
Estimates vary about the fishing market for the Great Lakes region. One estimate of the total market for fishing, including commercial as well as sport or recreational fishing, for all of the Great Lakes, was $4 billion annually, in 2007. A second estimate was that the fishing industry was valued at more than $7 billion. 

But since high levels of pollution were discovered in the 1960s and 1970s, there has been continued debate over the desired intensity of commercial fishing. Commercial fishing in Lake Erie has been hurt by the bad economy as well as government regulations which limit the size of their catch; one report suggested that the numbers of fishing boats and employees had declined by two-thirds in recent decades. Another concern had been that pollution in the lake, as well as toxins found inside fish, were working against commercial fishing interests. U.S. fishermen based along Lake Erie "lost their livelihood" over the past few decades described as being "caught in a net of laws and bans", according to the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, and no longer catch fish such as whitefish for markets in New York. Pennsylvania had a special $3 stamp on fishing licenses to help "compensate commercial fishermen for their losses", but this program ended after five years turning Erie's commercial fishing industry into an "artifact." One blamed the commercial fishing ban after a "test of wills" between commercial and recreational fishermen: "One side needed large hauls. The other feared the lake was being emptied." 

Commercial fishing is now predominantly based in Canadian communities, with a much smaller fisherylargely restricted to yellow perchin Ohio. One account suggested that Canadian fishermen are "still at it and making money" and they "know how to fish" by "using the old nets." The Ontario fishery is one of the most intensively managed in the world. However, there are reports that some Canadian commercial fishermen are dissatisfied with fishing quotas, and have sued their government about this matter, and there have been complaints that the legislative body writing the quotas is "dominated by the U.S." and that sport fishing interests are favored at the expense of commercial fishing interests. Cuts of 30 to 45 percent for certain fish were made in 2007. The Lake Erie fishery was one of the first fisheries in the world managed on individual transferable quotas and features mandatory daily catch reporting and intensive auditing of the catch reporting system. Still, the commercial fishery is the target of critics who would like to see the lake managed for the exclusive benefit of sport fishing and the various industries serving the sport fishery. In November 2010, Ontario's oldest and largest fish processor known as Great Lakes Fish Corporation was shut down after operating for a hundred years; 130 workers were laid off and numerous spinoff jobs disappeared, such as jobs at local restaurants and net repair shops. According to one report, the Canadian town of Port Dover is the home of the lake's largest fishing fleet, and the town features miniature golf, dairy bars, French-fry stands, and restaurants serving perch. 

====Government regulation of fishing====
The lake can be thought of as a common asset with multiple purposes including being a fishery. There was direct competition between commercial fishermen and sport fishermen (including charter boats and sales of fishing licenses) throughout the lake's history, with both sides seeking government assistance from either Washington or Ottawa, and trying to make their case in the "court" of public opinion through newspaper reporting. But other groups have entered the political process as well, including environmentalists, lakefront property owners, industry owners and workers seeking cost-effective solutions for sewage, ferry boat operators, even corporations making electric-generating wind turbines.

Management of the fishery is by consensus of all management agencies with an interest in the resource and include the states of New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Michigan and the province of Ontario, and work under the mandate of the Great Lakes Fishery Commission. The commission makes assessments using sophisticated mathematical modeling systems. The Commission has been the focus of considerable recrimination, primarily from angler and charter fishing groups in the U.S. which have had a historical antipathy to commercial fishing interests. This conflict is complex, dating from the 1960s and earlier, with the result in the United States that, in 2011, commercial fishing was mostly eliminated from Great Lakes states. One report suggests that battling between diverse fishing interests began around Lake Michigan and evolved to cover the entire Great Lakes region. Szylvian,K.M. 2004. Transforming Lake Michigan into the 'World's Greatest Fishing Hole': The Environmental Politics of Michigan's Great Lakes Sport Fishing, 19651985. The analysis suggests that in the Lake Erie context, the competition between sport and commercial fishing involves universals and that these conflicts are cultural, not scientific, and therefore not resolvable by reference to ecological data. Berkes, F. 1984. Competition between commercial and sport fishermen: an ecological analysis. Human Ecology 12: 413429. 

====Sport fishing====
The lake also supports a strong sport fishery. While commercial fishing declined, sport fishing has remained. The deep cool waters that spawn the best fishing is in the Canadian side of the lake. As a result, a fishing boat that crosses the international border triggers the security concerns of border crossings and fishermen are advised to have their passport. 

Authorities in 2008 from the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission have tried stocking the lake with brown trout in an effort to build what's called a put-grow-and-take fishery. There was a report that charter boat fishing increased substantially on the American side, from 46 to 638 charter boats in operation in Ohio alone, during a period from 1975 to 1985 as pollution levels declined, and after populations of Walleye increased substantially in the lake. In 1984, Ohio sold 27,000 nonresident fishing permits, and sport fishing was described as big business. In 1992, there were accounts of fishermen catching 8, 10, and 12 pound Walleyes. It is possible to fish off piers in winter for a fish called the burbot, also known by pseudonyms such as eelpout, mudblow, lawyer fish, cusk, or freshwater cod; the burbot make a midwinter spawning run and is reportedly one of "Erie's glacial relics." 

A drill used to bore hole for ice fishing.

====Ice fishing====
In winter when the lake freezes, many fisherman go out on the ice, cut holes, and fish. It is possible to even build bonfires on the ice. 

But venturing on Lake Erie ice can be dangerous. In a freak incident in 2009, warming temperatures and winds of 35 miles per hour and currents pushing eastward dislodged a miles-wide ice floe which broke away from the shore, trapping more than 130 fishermen offshore; one man died while the rest were rescued by helicopters or boats. 

Sour cherry orchard on shorelineat Leamington, Ontario

===Agriculture===
Winery on Middle Bass Island.
The lake's formerly more extensive lakebed creates a favorable environment for agriculture in the bordering areas of Ontario, Ohio, Michigan, Pennsylvania, and New York. The Lake Erie sections of western New York State have a suitable climate for growing grapes, and in Chautauqua County there have been many vineyards and wineries in the area as well as in Erie County in northwestern Pennsylvania. Much grape juice is produced in this region. The Canadian region of Lake Erie's north shore is becoming a more prominent wine region as well; it has been dubbed the Lake Erie North Shore, or LENS region, and includes Pelee Island, and since it is farther north than comparable wine-growing areas in the world, the season is longer in terms of light. A longer growing season due to the lake-moderated temperatures make the risk of early frosts less likely. 

The drainage basin has led to well fertilized soil. The north coast of Ohio is widely referred to as its nursery capital. Lake County Ohio Business and Personal Directory 

===Tourism===

====Diving for shipwrecks====
Lake Erie is a favorite for divers since there are many shipwrecks, perhaps 1,400 to 8,000 according to one estimate, of which about 270 are "confirmed shipwreck locations." Most wrecks are undiscovered but believed to be well preserved and in good condition and at most only 200 ft below the water surface. One report suggests there are more "wrecks per square mile" than any other freshwater location, including wrecks from Native American watercraft. There are efforts to identify shipwreck sites and survey the lake floor to map the location of underwater sites, possibly for further study or exploration. While the lake is relatively warmer than the other Great Lakes, there is a thermocline, meaning that as a diver descends, the water temperature drops about 30 F-change, requiring a wetsuit. One estimate is that Lake Erie has a quarter of all 8,000 estimated shipwrecks in the Great Lakes. They are preserved because the water is cold and salt-free creating "intact time capsules down there". Divers have a policy of not removing or touching anything at the wreck else the "next person won't be able to see it"; when artifacts were removed on occasion, it was met by "outrage" by the diving community. The cold conditions make diving difficult and "strenuous" requiring divers with skill and experience. One charter firm from western New York State takes about 1,500 divers to Lake Erie shipwrecks in a typical season from April through October. 

The Anthony Wayne side-wheel passenger and cargo steamship sank in 1850 but was rediscovered in 2006 by diver Tom Kowalczk about six miles (10 km) north of Vermilion, Ohio. It is believed to be the oldest archaeological steamship wreck in Lake Erie, according to the Great Lakes Historical Society.
In 1991, the 19th-century sidewheeler Atlantic was discovered. It had sunk in a collision with the Ogdensburg, a steamship sometimes referred to as a propeller according to 19th century parlance, in 1852 six miles (10 km) west of Long Point, Ontario and survivors from the Atlantic were saved by the Ogdensburg. One account suggests 130 people drowned while another suggests about 20 drowned. The aftermath of the disaster led to calls for authorities to seize captains of both ships so "that the cause of the collision may be correctly ascertained" as well as calls for more lifeboats and improved life preservers since the earlier ones proved to be "totally useless." There was speculation that the sunken vessel had been a gambling ship, and therefore there might have been money aboard, but most historians were skeptical. In 1998, the shipwreck of the vessel Adventure was the first shipwreck registered with the state of Ohio as an "underwater archaeological site"; when it was discovered that the Adventure's propeller had been removed and given to a junkyard, the propeller was rescued days before being converted to scrap metal and brought back to the dive site and back to its underwater home. In 2003, divers discovered the steamer Canobie near Presque Isle, which sunk in 1921. Other wrecks include the fish tub Neal H. Dow (1910), the Elderado "steamer-cum-barge" (1880), the W. R. Hanna, the Dundee which sank north of Cleveland in 1900, the F. H. Prince, and The Craftsman. In 2007, the wreck of the steamship named after Mad Anthony Wayne was found near Vermilion, Ohio in 50 feet (15 m) of water; the vessel sank in 1850 after its boilers exploded, and 38 people died. The wreck belongs to the state of Ohio and "salvaging it is illegal" but divers can visit it after it is surveyed. Incidentally, the SS Edmund Fitzgerald sank in 1975 in Lake Superior and the disaster was chronicled in Gordon Lightfoot's The Wreck of the Edmund Fitzgerald. In addition, there are wrecks of smaller vessels, with occasional drownings of fishermen. 

The finding of the well-preserved wreck of the Canadian-built British troop transport warship Caledonia, sunk during the War of 1812, has led to accusations about plundering of the site and legal wrangling about whether the vessel should be resurfaced in time for the 2013 war's bicentennial. 

Research into shipwrecks has been organized by the Peachman Lake Erie Shipwreck Research Center, or PLESRC, located on the grounds of the Great Lakes Historical Society. In 2008, the Great Lakes Historical Society announced plans to survey the underwater battle site of the Battle of Lake Erie in preparation for the bicentennial celebration of the battle in 2013. 

====Public parks====
Presque Isle State Park is a peninsula that juts out into Lake Erie from Pennsylvania and is popular during summers with swimmers and beachgoers.
There are numerous public parks around the lake. In western Pennsylvania, a wildlife reserve was established in 1991 in Springfield Township for hiking, fishing, cross-country skiing and walking along the beach. In Ontario, Long Point is a peninsula on the northwest shore near Port Rowan that extends 20 mi into Lake Erie which is a stopover for birds migrating as well as turtles; Long Point Provincial Park is located there and has been designated as a UNESCO Biosphere reserve. In Ontario's Sand Hill Park, east of Port Burwell, there is a 450 ft high dune which requires a very steep climb to the summit to view the lake. In southern Michigan, Sterling State Park offers campgrounds, 1300 acre for hiking, biking, fishing, boating, with a sand beach for sunbathing, swimming, and picnicking. 

====Biking====
The New York Times reporter Donna Marchetti took a bike tour around the Lake Erie perimeter in 1997, traveling 40 mi per day and staying at bed and breakfasts. They went through the cities of Cleveland, Erie, Windsor, Detroit and Toledo as well as resort towns, vineyards, and cornfields. The trip highlights were the "small port towns and rural farmlands of southern Ontario". There are few bike repair shops in Ontario on the route. 

====Islands====
Lichen, moss and grasses on karstic limestone surface on Kelley's Island 
Lake Erie islands tend to be in the westernmost part of the lake and have different characters. Some of them include:
*Kelleys Island has activities such as beach lounging, hiking, biking, and viewing the deep glacial grooves in the bedrock limestone. 
*Pelee Island is reached by ferry from Leamington in Ontario and is the largest of the Lake Erie islands. The island has a unique ecosystem with plants rarely found in Canada such as wild hyacinth, yellow horse gentian, and prickly pear cactus. There are two endangered snakes including the blue racer and the Lake Erie water snake. Songbirds migrate there in spring, and monarch butterflies stop over during the fall. 
*South Bass Island has the island-village of Put-in-Bay, Ohio which attracts young crowds who sometimes are prone to general merriment. It has been described as a party island with scenic rocky cliffs with a year-round population in the hundreds that grows during summer. 

Kite surfing is increasingly popular on the lake.

====Water sports====
Kayaking has become more popular along the lake, particularly in places such as Put-in-Bay, Ohio. There are spectacular views with steep cliffs with exotic wildlife and "100 miles of paddle-friendly shoreline." Long distance swimmers have swum across the lake to set records; for example, a 15-year-old amputee swam the 12 mi stretch across the lake in 2001. In 2008, 14-year-old Jade Scognamillo swam from New York's Sturgeon Point to Ontario's Crystal Beach and completed the 11.9-mile (19.2-km) swim in five hours, 40 minutes and 35 seconds, and also became the youngest swimmer to make the crossing. It is illegal for swimmers younger than 14 to attempt such a crossing. In Port Dover, Ontario, brave swimmers do high-dives at the annual Polar Bear Swim on the beach; in 2011, the water was 32 F, although the air was warmer, which did not deter 14-year-old youth Austin Merrell. Currents can pose a problem, and there have been occasional incidents of drownings. 

====Lighthouses====
Lighthouse on Mohawk Island, Ontario
The West Pierhead Lighthouse in Cleveland, Ohio
The lake is dotted by distinct lighthouses. A lighthouse off the coast of Cleveland, beset with cold lake winter spray, has an unusual artistic icy shape, although sometimes ice prevents the light from being seen by maritime vessels. 

====Vineyards====
There are numerous vineyards around the lake, including ones on Pelee Island which makes wines including pinot noir, riesling and chardonnay. 

====Summer rentals====
People can rent summer houses and cabins near the lake to enjoy the beaches, swimming, as well as be close to activities such as wine tours and fishing and water parks. Presque Isle is a peninsula jutting out into the lake in northwestern Pennsylvania which has nice beaches. Pelee Island is Canada's southernmost point and lies only three miles from Ohio.

====Pleasure cruises====
Pleasure boat operators offer dinner cruises in the Cleveland area on the Cuyahoga River as well as Lake Erie. 

====Folklore====
* Lake Erie Monster. There have been reports of persons spotting a creature akin to the Loch Ness Monster, but there have been no confirmed reports. There were reports in 1990 of people seeing a "large creature moving in the water about 1,000 ft from their boat" described as black in color, about 35 ft long, with a "snakelike head", and moved as fast as a boat. Five other people reported seeing something similar on three separate occasions but there is no scientific evidence of such a creature. There is a beer named after the Lake Erie Monster as well as a hockey team. There were reports of people spotting a sea creature in the 19th century which was sometimes called Bessie or South Bay Bessie. 
Navigating the locks in the Welland Canal 
* Lake Erie Mirage Effect. There have been sporadic reports of people in Cleveland being able to see the Canadian shoreline as if it were immediately offshore, even though Canada is 50 mi from Cleveland. It has been speculated that this is a weather-related phenomenon, working on similar principles to a mirage. 

===Shipping traffic===
Sunset near a Lake Erie shipping port.
The lake has been a "bustling thoroughfare" for maritime vessels for centuries. Ships headed eastward can take the Welland Canal and a series of eight locks descending 326 ft to Lake Ontario which takes about 12 hours, according to one source. Thousands of ships make this journey each year. During the 19th century, ships could enter the Buffalo River and travel the Erie Canal eastward to Albany then south to New York City along the Hudson River. Generally there is heavy traffic on the lake except during the winter months from January through March when ice prevents vessels from traveling safely. In 2007, there was a protest against Ontario's energy policy which allows the shipping of coal in the lake; GreenPeace activists climbed a ladder on a freighter and "locked themselves to the conveyer belt device that helps to unload the ship's cargo"; three activists were arrested and the ship was delayed for more than four hours, and anti-coal messages were painted on the ship. 

The ship traffic in Lake Erie being the highest among the Great Lakes and roughest of the lakes has led to it having the highest number of known shipwrecks in the Great Lakes. There have been other accidents as well; for example, in 2010 according to The Star, crewmen from the freighter Hermann Schoening were sickened by phosphine gas which had been used to fumigate or control pests; rescuers took them by tugboat to receive medical attention. 

===Ports===
Cleveland skyline in winter.
The Port of Cleveland generated over $350 million and over 15 million tons of cargo in a recent year. The port will begin work on a new set of docks with more efficient railway, road, and crane access. The current port facility is unable to handle larger cargo ships, and the cranes needed to lift goods such as steel to truck trailers are insufficient to meet current shipping standards. This project is planned to start in 2010 and will be completed by 2020.

===Ferryboats===
Ferryboats operate in numerous places. But plans to operate a ferryboat between the U.S. port of Erie and the Ontario port of Port Dover ran into a slew of political problems, including security restrictions on both sides as well as additional fees required to hire border inspectors. In particular, Canada was described as having a "sticky set of laws"; the project was abandoned. 

The Great Lakes Circle Tour is a designated scenic road system connecting all of the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence River. Great Lakes Circle Tour One reporter thought the roads on the Canadian side were narrower, sometimes without shoulders, but were less trafficked except for the roads around the Ontario towns of Fort Erie and Port Colborne. Drivers can cross from the United States to the Canadian town of Fort Erie by going over the Peace Bridge. 

===Lake Erie airspace===
Three US Army Golden Knights paratroopers linked in a tri-by-side maneuver descend to the Cleveland International Airshow.
In 2004, debris from a plane carrying 9 people was found off Lake Erie isle. 

===Border crossings===
Since the border between the two nations is largely unpatrolled, it is possible for people to cross undetected from one country to the other, in either direction, by boat. In 2010, Canadian police arrested persons crossing the border illegally from the United States to Canada, near the Ontario town of Amherstburg. 

==See also==

* Bass Islands
* Battle of Lake Erie
* Bessie
* Cedar Point
* Erie Canal
* Lake Erie AVA
* Lake Erie belt
* List of lakes by area
* List of lakes in Ohio
* Maumee Bay

===Great Lakes in general===

* Great Lakes
* Great Lakes Areas of Concern
* Great Lakes census statistical areas
* Great Lakes Commission
* Great Recycling and Northern Development Canal
* Great Storm of 1913
* International Boundary Waters Treaty
* List of cities along the Great Lakes
* Seiche
* Sixty Years' War for control of the Great Lakes
* Third Coast
* Snowbelt

==View==
The Great Lakes

==References==

==Further reading==
* Assel, R.A. (1983). Lake Erie regional ice cover analysis: preliminary results Technical Memorandum ERL GLERL 48. Ann Arbor, MI: U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Environmental Research Laboratories, Great Lakes Environmental Research Laboratory.
* Saylor, J.H. and G.S. Miller. (1983). Investigation of the currents and density structure of Lake Erie Technical Memorandum ERL GLERL 49. Ann Arbor, MI: U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Environmental Research Laboratories, Great Lakes Environmental Research Laboratory.

==External links==

* Lake Erie Islands Directory
* How many Islands are there in Lake Erie?
* EPA's Great Lakes Atlas
* Great Lakes Coast Watch
* Lake Erie Bathymetry  National Geophysical Data Center
* Frozen lighthouse video via Slate Magazine

 

Erie
Erie, Lake
Erie, Lake
Erie, Lake



[[Lake Ontario]]

Lake Ontario () is one of the five Great Lakes of North America. It is bounded on the north and southwest by the Canadian province of Ontario, and on the south and east by the American state of New York. Ontario, Canada's most populous province, was named for the lake. In the Wyandot (Huron) language, ontaro means Lake of Shining Waters. It is the last in the Great Lakes chain and serves as the outlet to the Atlantic Ocean via the St. Lawrence River. Lake Ontario is also the only one of the five Great Lakes not to share a shoreline with the state of Michigan.

==Geography==
Lake Ontario Basin
View from Fort Ontario, Oswego, New York
Historic cannon at Fort Niagara; Toronto across the lake
Lake Ontario is the easternmost of the Great Lakes and the smallest in surface area (7,340 sq mi, 18,960 km2), although it exceeds Lake Erie in volume (393 cu mi, 1,639 km3). It is the 14th largest lake in the world. When its islands are included, the lake has a shoreline that is 712 mi long. As the last lake in the Great Lakes' hydrologic chain, Lake Ontario has the lowest mean surface elevation of the lakes at 243 feet (74 m) above sea level; 326 ft lower than its neighbor upstream. Its maximum length is 193 smi and its maximum width is 53 smi. The lake's average depth is 47 fathoms 1 foot (283 ft; 86 m), with a maximum depth of 133 fathoms 4 feet (802 ft; 244 m). The lake's primary source is the Niagara River, draining Lake Erie, with the St. Lawrence River serving as the outlet. The drainage basin covers 24,720 square miles (64,030 km2). A Report on Water Resources and Local Watershed Management Programs. The State of the New York Lake Ontario Basin (2000) As with all the Great Lakes, water levels change both within the year (owing to seasonal changes in water input) and among years (owing to longer term trends in precipitation). These water level fluctuations are an integral part of lake ecology, and produce and maintain extensive wetlands. Wilcox, D.A, Thompson, T.A., Booth, R.K., and Nicholas, J.R.. 2007. Lake-level variability and water availability in the Great Lakes. U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1311, 25 p. Keddy, P.A. 2010. Wetland Ecology: Principles and Conservation (2nd edition). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. Chapter 2. The lake also has an important freshwater fishery, although it has been negatively affected by factors including over-fishing, water pollution and invasive species. Christie, W. J. (1974). Changes in the fish species composition of the Great Lakes. Journal of the Fisheries Research Board of Canada, 31, 82754. 

Baymouth bars built by prevailing winds and currents have created a significant number of lagoons and sheltered harbors, mostly (but not limited to) Prince Edward County, Ontario and the easternmost shores. Perhaps the best-known example is Toronto Bay, chosen as the site of the Upper Canada (Ontario) capital for its strategic harbour. Other prominent examples include Hamilton Harbour, Irondequoit Bay, Presqu'ile Bay, and Sodus Bay. The bars themselves are the sites of long beaches, such as Sandbanks Provincial Park and Sandy Island Beach State Park. These sand bars are often associated with large wetlands, which support large numbers of plant and animal species, as well as providing important rest areas for migratory birds. Maynard, L., and Wilcox, D.A., 1997, Coastal wetlands of the Great LakesState of the Lakes Ecosystem Conference 1996 background paper: Environment Canada and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, EPA 905R97015b, 99 p. Keddy, P.A. 2010. Wetland Ecology: Principles and Conservation (2nd edition). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.497 p. Presqu'ile, on the north shore of Lake Ontario, is particularly significant in this regard. One unique feature of the lake is the Z-shaped Bay of Quinte which separates Prince Edward County from the Ontario mainland, save for a 2 mi isthmus near Trenton; this feature also supports many wetlands and aquatic plants, as well as associated fisheries.

Major rivers draining into Lake Ontario include the Niagara River; Don River; Humber River; Trent River; the Cataraqui River; the Genesee River; the Oswego River; the Black River; and the Salmon River.

==Geology==
The lake basin was carved out of soft, weak Silurian-age rocks by the Wisconsin ice sheet during the last ice age. The action of the ice occurred along the pre-glacial Ontarian River valley which had approximately the same orientation as today's basin. Material that was pushed southward by the ice sheet left landforms such as drumlins, kames, and moraines, both on the modern land surface and the lake bottom, Origin of drumlins on the floor of Lake Ontario and in upper New York State; Quaternary geology; bridging the gap between East and West  Department of Geology, University of Toronto. Geology.utoronto.ca (November 17, 2011). Retrieved on 2011-11-29. reorganizing the region's entire drainage system. As the ice sheet retreated toward the north, it still dammed the St. Lawrence valley outlet, so that the lake surface was at a higher level. This stage is known as Lake Iroquois. During that time the lake drained through present-day Syracuse, New York into the Mohawk River, thence to the Hudson River and the Atlantic. The shoreline created during this stage can be easily recognized by the (now dry) beaches and wave-cut hills 10 to 25 miles (15 to 40 km) from the present shoreline.

When the ice finally receded from the St. Lawrence valley, the outlet was below sea level, and for a short time the lake became a bay of the Atlantic Ocean, in association with the Champlain Sea. Gradually the land rebounded from the release of the weight of about 6,500 feet (2,000 m) of ice that had been stacked on it. It is still rebounding about 12 inches (30 cm) per century in the St. Lawrence area. Since the ice receded from the area last, the most rapid rebound still occurs there. This means that the lake bed is gradually tilting southward, inundating the south shore and turning river valleys into bays. Both north and south shores experience shoreline erosion, but the tilting amplifies this effect on the south shore, causing loss to property owners.

==History==
Map of Lac de Frontenac (now Lake Ontario), showing Teiaiagon and Lac Taronto (now Lake Simcoe).

Ontario, or 'beautiful great lake' derives its name from the Iroquois / Haudenosaunee first nation which inhabited the area around the lake until about 1700. The lake was a border between the Huron and their vassals and the Iroquois Confederacy in pre-European times. In the 1600s, the Iroquois drove out the Huron from southern Ontario and settled the northern shores of Lake Ontario. When the Iroquois withdrew and the Anishnabeg / Ojibwa / Mississaugas moved in from the north to southern Ontario, they retained the Iroquois name.

The first documented European to reach the lake was tienne Brl in 1615. As was their practice, the French explorers introduced other names for the lake. In 1632 and 1656, the lake was referred to as Lac de St. Louis or Lake St. Louis by Samuel de Champlain and cartographer Nicolas Sanson respectively (likely for Louis XIV of France) Lake Ontario Facts and Figures. Great-lakes.net (February 28, 2005). Retrieved on 2011-11-29. In 1660 Jesuit historian Francis Creuxius coined the name Lacus Ontarius. In a map drawn in the Relation des Jsuites (16621663), the lake bears the legend "Lac Ontario ou des Iroquois" with the name "Ondiara" in smaller type. A French map produced in 1712 (currently in the Canadian Museum of Civilization Museum of Civilization ), created by military engineer Jean-Baptiste de Couagne, identified Lake Ontario as "Lac Frontenac" named after Louis de Buade, Comte de Frontenac et de Palluau. He was a French soldier, courtier, and Governor General of New France from 1672 to 1682 and from 1689 to his death in 1698.

Artifacts which are believed to be of Norse origin have been found in the area of Sodus Bay, indicating possible earlier visits by Europeans, but this remains unproven.

A series of trading posts was established by both the British and French, such as Fort Frontenac (Kingston) in 1673, Fort Oswego in 1722, Fort Rouill (Toronto) in 1750. After the French and Indian War, all forts around the lake were under British control. The United States did not take possession of forts on present-day American territory until the signing of the Jay Treaty in 1794. Permanent, non-military European settlement began during the American Revolution. As the easternmost and nearest lake to the Atlantic seaboard of Canada and the United States, population centres here are among the oldest in the Great Lakes basin, with Kingston, Ontario, formerly the capital of Canada, dating to the 1670s (Fort Frontenac). The lake became a hub of commercial activity following the War of 1812 with canal building on both sides of the border and heavy travel by lake steamers. Steamer activity peaked in the mid-19th century before competition from railway lines.

In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, a type of scow known as a stonehooker was in operation on the north-west shore, particularly around Port Credit and Bronte. Stonehooking was the practice of raking flat fragments of Dundas shale from the shallow lake floor of the area for use in construction, particularly in the growing city of Toronto. Snider, Charles Henry Jeremiah, Townsend, Robert B. Tales from the Great Lakes. Toronto: Dundurn Press Limited, 1995, pp. 25. 

==Ecology and environmental concerns==
Wetlands on a lakeshore.
The Great Lakes watershed is a region of high biodiversity, and Lake Ontario is important for its diversity of birds, fish, reptiles amphibians and plants. Many of these special species are associated with shorelines, particularly sand dunes, lagoons, and wetlands. The importance of wetlands to the lake has been appreciated, and many of the larger wetlands have protected status. However, these wetlands are changing in part because the natural water level fluctuations have been reduced. Many wetland plants are dependent upon low water levels to reproduce. Keddy, P.A. 2010. Wetland Ecology: Principles and Conservation (2nd edition). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 497 p. Chapters 1 and 2. When water levels are stabilized, the area and diversity of the marsh is reduced. This is particularly true of meadow marsh (also known as wet meadow wetlands); for example, in Eel Bay near Alexandria Bay, regulation of lake levels has resulted in large losses of wet meadow. Wilcox, D.A, Thompson, T.A., Booth, R.K., and Nicholas, J.R. 2007. Lake-level variability and water availability in the Great Lakes. U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1311.Box 4 Often this is accompanied by invasion by cattails, which displace many of the native plant species and reduce plant diversity. Eutrophication may accelerate this process by providing nitrogen and phosphorus for the more rapid growth of competitively dominant plants. Keddy, P.A. 2010. Wetland Ecology: Principles and Conservation (2nd edition). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 497 p. Similar effects are occurring on the north shore, in wetlands such as Presqu'ile, which have interdunal wetlands called pannes, with high plant diversity and many unusual plant species. Moore, D. R. J. and Keddy, P. A. (1989). The relationship between species richness and standing crop in wetlands: the importance of scale. Vegetation, 79, 99106. 

Most of the forests around the lake are deciduous forests dominated by trees including maple, oak, beech, ash and basswood. These are classified as part of the Mixedwood Plains Ecozone by Environment Canada, or as the Eastern Great Lakes and Hudson Lowlands by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, or as the Great Lakes Ecoregion by The Nature Conservancy. Deforestation in the vicinity of the lake has had many negative impacts, Williams, M. 1989. Americans and Their Forests: A Historical Geography. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. including loss of forest birds, extinction of native salmon, and increased amounts of sediment flowing into the lake. In some areas more than 90 percent of the forest cover has been removed and replaced by agriculture. Certain tree species, such as hemlock, have also been particularly depleted by past logging activity. Keddy, C.J. 1993. Forest History of Eastern Ontario. A report prepared for the Eastern Ontario Forest Group. Guidelines for restoration stress the importance of maintaining and restoring forest cover, particularly along streams and wetlands. Environment Canada. 2004. How Much Habitat is Enough? A Framework for Guiding Habitat Rehabilitation in Great Lakes Areas of Concern. 2nd ed. 81 p. Keddy, P.A. and C. G.Drummond. 1996. Ecological properties for the evaluation, management, and restoration of temperate deciduous forest ecosystems. Ecological Applications 6: 748762. 

The open water is less-affected by shoreline features, such as wetlands, and more affected by nutrient levels that control the production of algae. Algae are the basis of the open water food web, and the source of primary production that ends up as Lake Trout and Walleye at the top of the open water food web.
Lake Sturgeon were abundant in 1860 and had been driven to near extinction by 1960.

Like the other Great Lakes, Lake Ontario used to have an important commercial fishery. It has been largely destroyed, mostly by over-fishing. Consider the Lake Sturgeon as but one example. Lake sturgeon are huge fishthey can grow up to three meters long and exceed 190 kg in weight. The females mature slowly and require decades to reach sexual maturity. It was once an abundant species in Lake Ontario. "In 1860, this species, taken on incidental catches of other fishes, was killed and dumped back in the lake, piled up on shore to dry and be burned, fed to pigs, or dug into the earth as fertilizer." Scott, W.B. and E.J. Crossman. 1972. Freshwater Fisheries of Canada. Fisheries Research Board of Canada, Department of the Environment, Ottawa. p. 88. It was even stacked like cordwood and used to fuel steamboats. Once its value was realized, "They were taken by every available means from spearing and jigging to set lines of baited or unbaited hooks laid on the bottom to trapnets, poundnets and gillnets." Over 5 million pounds were taken from adjoining Lake Erie in a single year. The fishery collapsed, largely by 1900. They have never recovered. Like most sturgeons, the lake sturgeon is rare now, and is protected in many areas. Populations in the Oswego River are being actively managed for recovery.
Lake Ontario food web

This food web has been damaged not only by over-fishing, and changes in nutrient levels, but also by other types of polluted from industrial chemicals, agricultural fertilizers, untreated sewage, phosphates, such as from laundry detergents, and chemicals. Some pollutant chemicals that have been found in the lake include DDT, benzopyrene and other pesticides; PCBs, aramite, chromium, lead, mirex, mercury, and carbon tetrachloride. The International Joint Commission has identified areas where pollution is particularly intense (point sources) and mapped them as Areas of Concern. A Remedial Action Plan has been developed for each area. Some Lake Ontario areas of concern include the Oswego River and Rochester Embayment on the American side, and Hamilton Harbour and Toronto on the Canadian Side.

By the 1960s and 1970s, the increased pollution caused frequent algal blooms to occur in the summer. These blooms killed large numbers of fish, and left decomposing piles of filamentous algae and dead fish along the shores. Vallentyne, J. R. (1974). The Algal Bowl: Lakes and Man, Miscellaneous Special Publication No. 22. Ottawa, ON: Department of the Environment, Fisheries and Marine Service. At times the blooms became so thick that waves could not break. Fish eating birds such as osprey, bald eagle and cormorant were being poisoned by contaminated fish. Since the 1960s and 1970s, environmental concerns have forced a cleanup of industrial and municipal wastes. Cleanup has been accomplished through better treatment plants, tighter environmental regulations, deindustrialization and increased public awareness. Today, Lake Ontario has recovered some of its pristine quality but regional airshed pollution remains a concern. For example, walleye, a fish species considered as a marker of clean water, are now found. The lake has also become an important sport fishery, although with introduced species (Coho and Chinook salmon) rather than the native species. Bald eagle and osprey populations are also beginning to recover.

Invasive species are a problem for Lake Ontario, particularly lamprey and zebra mussels. Lamprey are being controlled by poisoning in the juvenile stage in the streams where they breed. Zebra mussels in particular are difficult to control, and pose major challenges for the lake and its waterways.

==Climate==
The lake has a natural seiche rhythm of eleven minutes. The seiche effect normally is only about  inches (2 cm) but can be greatly amplified by earth movement, winds, and atmospheric pressure changes.

Because of its great depth, the lake as a whole never freezes in winter, but an ice sheet covering between 10% and 90% of the lake area typically develops, depending on the severity of the winter. Ice sheets typically form along the shoreline and in slack water bays, where the lake is not as deep. During the winters of 1877 and 1878, the ice sheet coverage was up to 95100% in most of the lake. In the winter of 1812, the ice cover was stable enough that the American naval commander stationed at Sackets Harbor feared a British attack from Kingston, over the ice.

When the cold winds of winter pass over the warmer water of the lake, they pick up moisture and drop it as lake-effect snow. Since the prevailing winter winds are from the northwest, the southern and southeastern shoreline of the lake is referred to as the snowbelt. In some winters the area between Oswego and Pulaski may receive twenty or more feet (600 cm) of snowfall. Also impacted by lake-effect snow is the Tug Hill Plateau, an area of elevated land that is about 20 mi east of Lake Ontario, creating ideal conditions for lake-effect snowfall. The "Hill", as it is often referred to, typically receives more snow than any other region in the eastern United States. As a result, Tug Hill is a popular location for winter enthusiasts, such as snow-mobilers and cross-country skiers. Lake-effect snow often extends inland as far as Syracuse, with that city often recording the most winter snowfall accumulation of any large city in the United States. Other cities in the world receive more snow annually, such as Quebec City, which averages 135 in, and Sapporo, Japan, which receives 250 in each year and is often regarded as the snowiest city in the world.
Foggy conditions (particularly in fall) can be created by thermal contrasts and can be an impediment for recreational boaters. In a normal winter, Lake Ontario will be at most one quarter ice-covered, in a mild winter almost completely unfrozen. Lake Ontario has completely frozen over on five recorded occasions: from about January 20 to about March 20, 1830; Kingston Chronicle, January 30, 1830, 2, col. 6 ("For several years past we have not been visited with so much snow as has fallen here within the last fortnight. The storm of Wednesday and yesterday could only be equalled by such visitations as are familiar to our Lower Canada friends. The thermometer has ranged from 10 below, to 20 above 0, for the last ten days. The Lake is firmly frozen, and a cheap and safe style of travelling has revived the intercourse with our brethren of the independent portion of the world"); Republican Compiler , February 23, 1830, p. 2, col. 5 ("At Kingston, Upper Canada, the quantity of snow which had fallen had not been equalled for several years.The Lake (Ontario) was frozen, and crossing had become general"); Perry, Kenneth A, The Fitch Gazetteer: An Annotated Index to the Manuscript History of Washington County, New York, 4 vols. (Bowie, Md.: Heritage Books, 1999), 4:565 ("Kingston, Upper Canada, the deepset snow in several yrs., & Lake Ontario frozen over"); Kingston Chronicle , January 9, 1830, 2, col. 1 ("the Bay was frozen across this morning"); see also Vermont Chronicle, (Bellows Falls, Vt.) Friday, February 19, 1830, p. 31, col D, quoting the Quebec Gazette: "The Lake (Ontario) was frozen, and crossing had become general." in 1874; in 1893; in 1912; and in February 1934.

Lake breezes in spring tend to retard fruit bloom until the frost danger is past, and in the autumn delay the onset of fall frost, particularly on the south shore. Cool onshore winds also retard early bloom of plants and flowers until later in the spring season, protecting them from possible frost damage. Such microclimatic effects have enabled tender fruit production in a continental climate, with the southwest shore supporting a major fruit-growing area. Apples, cherries, pears, plums, and peaches are grown in many commercial orchards around Rochester. Between Stoney Creek and Niagara-on-the-Lake on the Niagara Peninsula is a major fruit-growing and wine-making area. The wine-growing region extends over the international border into Niagara and Orleans counties. Apple varieties that tolerate a more extreme climate are grown on the lake's north shore, around Cobourg.

==Settlements==
Winter scene on Toronto Bay in 1835
Marina in Port Dalhousie, Ontario
Victoria Beach, Cobourg, Ontario
A large conurbation called the Golden Horseshoe occupies the lake's westernmost shores, anchored by the cities of Toronto and Hamilton. Ports on the Canadian side include St. Catharines, Oshawa, Cobourg and Kingston, near the St. Lawrence River outlet. Close to 9 million people or over a quarter of Canada's population lives within the watershed of Lake Ontario. The American shore is largely rural, with the exception of Rochester and the much smaller ports at Oswego and Sackets Harbor. The city of Syracuse is 40 mi inland, connected to the lake by the New York State Canal System. Over 2 million people live in Lake Ontario's American watershed.

A high-speed passenger/vehicle ferry, the Spirit of Ontario I, operated between Toronto and Rochester from June 17, 2004 to January 10, 2006, when the service was cancelled. The Crystal Lynn II, out of Irondequoit, New York has been operating between Irondequoit Bay and Henderson, New York since May 2000, operated by Capt. Bob Tein.

 ; Ontario, Canada * Toronto * Mississauga * Hamilton * Burlington * Oshawa * Kingston * Whitby * Stoney Creek * Grimsby * Oakville * St. Catharines * Port Hope * Cobourg * Brighton * Pickering * Ajax * Belleville * Trenton * Niagara-on-the-Lake ; New York, U.S.A. * Rochester * Greece * Irondequoit * Webster * Oswego * Fair Haven * Sackets Harbor * Cape Vincent * Three Mile Bay * Wilson * Chaumont 

===Ocean and lake navigation===
Fishing at Pierhead Light in Oswego, New York, c. 1900. Fort Ontario behind.
Olcott Light, Olcott, New York
The Great Lakes Waterway connects the lake sidestream to the Atlantic Ocean via the St. Lawrence Seaway, and upstream to the other rivers in the chain via the Welland Canal and to Lake Erie. The Trent-Severn Waterway for pleasure boats connects Lake Ontario at the Bay of Quinte to Georgian Bay (Lake Huron), via Lake Simcoe. The Oswego Canal connects the lake at Oswego to the New York State Canal System, with outlets to the Hudson River, Lake Erie, and Lake Champlain.

The Rideau Canal, also for pleasure boats, connects Lake Ontario at Kingston to the Ottawa River in downtown Ottawa.

===Lighthouses===
* Beach Canal Lighthouse
* Braddock Point Light
* Charlotte-Genesee Lighthouse
* Gibraltar Point Lighthouse
* Oswego Harbor West Pierhead Light
* Sodus Point Light
* Stony Point Light
* Presqui'le Lighthouse
* Thirty Mile Point Light

===Islands===
Nearly all of Lake Ontario's islands are located on the eastern and north-eastern shores, between the Prince Edward County headland and the lake's outlet at Kingston. The Toronto Islands on the north-western shore are the remnants of a sand spit formed by coastal erosion, whereas the mostly larger eastern islands are underlain by the basement rock found throughout the region. Wolfe Island, located near Kingston at the St. Lawrence outlet, is the largest island in the basin. It is accessible by ferry from both Canada and the U.S.
* Toronto Islands  only islands on the western end of the lake
* Association Island
* Galloo Island - and nearby Little Galloo Island, Calf Island, and Stony Island
* Amherst Island
* Simcoe Island
* Garden Island
* Grenadier Island
* Waupoos Island
* Nicholson Island
* Big Island

===Other topics===
Toronto fire boats and police marine unit
The Burlington Bay James N. Allan Skyway at Hamilton, Ontario

The Great Lakes Circle Tour and Seaway Trail are designated scenic road systems connecting all of the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence River. Great Lakes Circle Tour. Great-lakes.net (July 5, 2005). Retrieved on 2011-11-29. As the Seaway Trail is posted on the U.S. side only, Lake Ontario is the only of the five Great Lakes to have no posted bi-national circle tour.

In the 1800s, there were reports of an alleged creature similar to the so-called Loch Ness Monster being sighted in the lake. The creature is described as large with a long neck, green in colour, and generally causes a break in the surface waves. The Morning Post (London, England), Saturday, July 25, 1835; p. 6 "Sea Serpent in Lake Ontario" Glasgow Herald (Glasgow, Scotland), Friday, June 28, 1867 "Another Sea Serpent Sensation: A hideous monster discovered in Lake Ontario" Pinkwater, Daniel. The Monster of Lake Ontario. New York: Houghton Mifflin Publishing, 2010, pp. 4647. 

==Swims across the lake==

As of 2012, nearly 50 people have successfully swum across the lake. The first person who accomplished the feat was Marilyn Bell, who did it in 1954 at the age of 16. Toronto's Marilyn Bell Park is named in her honor. The park opened in 1984, and is located just to the east of the spot where Bell completed her swim. In 1974, Diana Nyad became the first person who swam across the lake against the current (from north to south). On August 19, 2012, 14-year-old Annaleise Carr became the youngest person to swim across the lake. She completed the 32-mile (52-km) crossing from Niagara-on-the-Lake to Marilyn Bell Park in just under 27 hours. 

==Industrialisation==

The government of Ontario, which holds the lakebed rights under the Beds of Navigable Waters Act, currently does not permit off-shore wind power to be generated offshore. "Ontarios off-shore wind turbine moratorium unresolved two years later", Toronto Star, Spears, Feb 15 2013 In Trillium Power Wind Corporation v. Ontario (Natural Resources), Trillium Power Wind Corporation v. Ontario (Natural Resources), 2012 ONSC 5619 (CanLII) the Superior Court of Justice held that Trillium Powersince 2004 an "Applicant of Record" who had invested $35,000 in fees and, when in 2011 the Crown made a policy decision against offshore windfarms, claimed an injury of $2.25 billiondisclosed no reasonable cause of action.

While the Great Lakes once supported an industrial-scale fishery, with record hauls in 1899, overfishing later blighted the industry. Author unknown (1972). The Great Lakes: An Environmental Atlas and Resource Book. Bi-national (U.S. and Canadian) resource book. Today only recreational fishery activities exist.

== Images ==

Image:Late Fall in the Adirondack Mountains.jpg|Satellite image during late autumn
Image:Lake Ontario 3859.jpg|The lake seen from dead end of Dutch St.; Huron, New York (A sparsely populated neighboring town of Wolcott, New York)
Image:Lake Ontario - Sandbanks Provincial Park 2001.jpg|Sandbanks Provincial Park
File:Southwick Beach SP bathers.jpg|Bathers at Southwick Beach State Park, eastern shore of Lake Ontario, New York State
File:SodusouterWood.JPG|Sodus Outer Light, Sodus Bay, New York
File:Toronto harbour.jpg|View of Lake Ontario from Toronto's CN Tower, showing Toronto Harbour, Toronto Islands, and Billy Bishop Toronto City Airport
File:Oakville Harbour Pier (1).JPG|Pier in Oakville, Ontario
File:Passage by Marlene Hilton Moore.jpg|Sculpture at top of Scarborough Bluffs
File:Scarborough bluffs -b.jpg|Scarborough Bluffs

==See also==
*Lake Ontario Waterkeeper
*Glacial Lake Iroquois
*Glacial Lake Admiralty
*Welland Canal
*Engagements on Lake Ontario
*Bay of Quinte
*Niagara River
*St. Lawrence River
*United Empire Loyalist
*Fort Niagara
*Wyandot people
*Iroquois Confederacy
*Ontario Lacus, a hydrocarbon-lake on Saturn's moon Titan named after Lake Ontario
*Iroquois settlement of the northern shores of Lake Ontario

===Great Lakes in general===

*Great Lakes
*Great Lakes Areas of Concern
*Great Lakes census statistical areas
*Great Lakes Commission
*Great Recycling and Northern Development Canal
*Great Storm of 1913
*International Boundary Waters Treaty
*List of cities along the Great Lakes
*Seiche
*Sixty Years' War for control of the Great Lakes
*Third Coast
*Snowbelt

==References==

;Bibliography
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
*Lake Ontario NOAA nautical chart #14820 online
*EPA's Great Lakes Atlas
*Great Lakes Coast Watch
*Lake Ontario Bathymetry

*
Ontario, Lake
Ontario, Lake

Ontario

[[Lake Michigan]]

Lake Michigan is one of the five Great Lakes of North America and the only one located entirely within the United States. The other four Great Lakes are shared by the U.S. and Canada. It is the second largest of the Great Lakes by volume and the third largest by surface area, after Lake Superior and Lake Huron (and is slightly smaller than the U.S. state of West Virginia). To the east, its basin is conjoined with that of Lake Huron through the wide Straits of Mackinac, giving it the same surface elevation as its easterly counterpart; the two are technically a single lake. Lake Michigan is bounded, from west to east, by the U.S. states of Wisconsin, Illinois, Indiana, and Michigan. The word "Michigan" originally referred to the lake itself, and is believed to come from the Ojibwa word mishigami meaning "great water". 

== History ==
Some of the earliest human inhabitants of the Lake Michigan region were the Hopewell Indians. Their culture declined after A.D. 800, and for the next few hundred years the region was the home of peoples known as the Late Woodland Indians. In the early 17th century, when western European explorers made their first forays into the region, they encountered descendants of the Late Woodland Indians: the Chippewa, Menominee, Sauk, Fox, Winnebago, Miami, Ottawa, and Potawatomi. It is believed that the French explorer Jean Nicolet was the first non-Native American to reach Lake Michigan in 1634 or 1638. Bogue, Margaret Beattie (1985). Around the Shores of Lake Michigan: A Guide to Historic Sites, pp. 713. University of Wisconsin Press. ISBN 0-299-10004-9. 

The narrow, open-water Straits of Mackinac join Lake Michigan with Lake Huron sometimes called MichiganHuron (also HuronMichigan). The Straits of Mackinac were an important Native American and fur trade route. Located on the southern side of the Straits is the town of Mackinaw City, Michigan, the site of Fort Michilimackinac, a reconstructed French fort founded in 1715, and on the northern side is St. Ignace, Michigan, site of a French Catholic mission to the Indians, founded in 1671. The eastern end of the Straits was controlled by Fort Mackinac on Mackinac Island, a British colonial and early American military base and fur trade center, founded in 1781.

With the advent of European exploration into the area in the late 17th century, Lake Michigan became part of a line of waterways leading from the Saint Lawrence River to the Mississippi River and thence to the Gulf of Mexico. Bogue (1985), pp. 1416. French coureurs des bois and voyageurs established small ports and trading communities, such as Green Bay, on the lake during the late 17th and early 18th centuries. Shelak, Benjamin J. (2003). Shipwrecks of Lake Michigan p. 3. Big Earth Publishing. ISBN 1-931599-21-1. 

The first person to reach the deep bottom of Lake Michigan was J. Val Klump, a scientist at the University of WisconsinMilwaukee. Klump reached the bottom via submersible as part of a 1985 research expedition. 

In 2007, a row of stones paralleling an ancient shoreline was discovered by Mark Holley, professor of underwater archeology at Northwestern Michigan College. This formation lies 40 feet (12 meters) below the surface of the lake. One of the stones is said to have a carving resembling a mastodon. So far the formation has not been authenticated. 

== Geography ==
Lake Michigan basin
Lake Michigan is the only one of the Great Lakes wholly within the borders of the United States; the others are shared with Canada. It has a surface area of 22400 sqmi, making it the largest lake entirely within one country by surface area (Lake Baikal, in Russia, is larger by water volume), and the fifth largest lake in the world. It is 307 mi long by 118 mi wide with a shoreline 1,640 mi long. The lake's average depth is 46 fathoms 3 feet (279 ft; 85 m), while its greatest depth is 153 fathoms 5 feet (923 ft; 281 m). It contains a volume of 1,180 cubic miles (4,918 km) of water.

=== Cities ===

Twelve million people live along Lake Michigan's shores, mainly in the Chicago and Milwaukee metropolitan areas. Universities including Concordia University Wisconsin, and many towns, villages and cities in Northern Michigan and Door County, Wisconsin are centered on a tourist base that takes advantage of the beauty and recreational opportunities offered by Lake Michigan. These cities have large seasonal populations that arrive from the nearby urban areas such as Chicago, Milwaukee, Grand Rapids and Detroit, as well as from Southern states, such as Florida and Texas. Some seasonal residents have summer homes along the waterfront and return home for the winter. The southern tip of the lake near Gary, Indiana is heavily industrialized. Cities on the shores of Lake Michigan include:
The Milwaukee lakefront.

 ; Illinois * Chicago * Evanston * Glencoe * Highland Park * Kenilworth * Lake Forest * North Chicago * Waukegan * Wilmette * Winnetka ; Indiana * East Chicago * Gary * Hammond * Michigan City * Portage * Porter * Whiting ; Michigan * Benton Harbor * Bridgman * Charlevoix * Douglas * Elberta * Escanaba * Ferrysburg * Frankfort * Gladstone * Glen * Grand Beach * Grand Haven * Harbor Springs * Holland * Ludington * Mackinaw City * Manistee * Manistique * Menominee * Michiana * Muskegon * New Buffalo * Norton Shores * Pentwater * Petoskey * Saugatuck * St. Joseph * Shoreham * South Haven * Traverse City ; Wisconsin * Algoma * Cudahy * Fox Point * Green Bay * Kenosha * Kewaunee * Manitowoc * Milwaukee * Mequon * Oconto * Port Washington * Racine * Sheboygan * Shorewood * South Milwaukee * Sturgeon Bay * Two Rivers * Whitefish Bay 

The Chicago skyline can be seen from the northwest Indiana shoreline and, on a clear day, extreme southwestern Michigan. When standing at the waterfront in some parts of Illinois, Indiana, and the southern lower peninsula of Michigan, it is impossible for one to see across the lake to another state. On a clear day, it is possible from some of the taller buildings in Chicago to see the coast of Indiana and the southern coast of Michigan's lower peninsula, including the NIPSCO (Northern Indiana Public Service Company) cooling tower of its power plant in Michigan City, Indiana.

=== Connection to ocean and open water ===
Sunset over Lake Michigan from Grand Traverse Point
The Saint Lawrence Seaway and Great Lakes Waterway opened the Great Lakes to ocean-going vessels. Wider ocean-going container ships do not fit through the locks on these routes, and thus shipping is limited on the lakes. Despite their vast size, large sections of the Great Lakes freeze in winter, interrupting most shipping. Some icebreakers ply the lakes.

The Great Lakes are also connected by canal to the Gulf of Mexico via the Illinois River (from Chicago) and the Mississippi River. An alternate track is via the Illinois River (from Chicago), to the Mississippi, up the Ohio, and then through the Tennessee-Tombigbee Waterway (combination of a series of rivers and lakes and canals), to Mobile Bay and the Gulf. Commercial tug-and-barge traffic on these waterways is heavy.

Pleasure boats can also enter or exit the Great Lakes by way of the Erie Canal and Hudson River in New York. The Erie Canal connects to the Great Lakes at the east end of Lake Erie (at Buffalo, NY) and at the south side of Lake Ontario (at Oswego, NY).

=== Beaches ===

Sand dune on Lake Michigan at Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore
Lake Michigan has many beaches. The region is often referred to as the "Third Coast" of the United States, after those of the Atlantic Ocean and the Pacific Ocean. The sand is often soft and off-white, known as "singing sands" because of the squeaking noise (caused by high quartz content) made when one walks across it. There are often high sand dunes covered in green beach grass and sand cherries, and the water is usually clear and cool (between 55 and 80 F and 27 C), even in late summer. However, because prevailing westerly winds tend to move the surface water toward the east, there is a flow of warmer water to the Michigan shore in the summer. Hilton, George Woodman (2002). Lake Michigan Passenger Steamers, pp. 35. Stanford University Press. ISBN 0-8047-4240-5. The sand dunes located on the east shore of Lake Michigan are the largest freshwater dune system in the world. In fact, in multiple locations along the shoreline, the dunes rise several hundred feet above the Lake surface. Large dune formations can be seen in many state parks, national forests and national parks along the Indiana and Michigan shoreline. Some of the most expansive and unique dune formations can be found at Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore, Saugatuck Dunes State Park, Warren Dunes State Park, PJ Hoffmaster State Park, Silver Lake State Park, Ludington State Park and Sleeping Bear Dunes National Lakeshore. Small dune formations can be found on the western shore of Lake Michigan at Illinois Beach State Park and moderate sized dune formations can be found in Kohler Andre State Park and Point Beach State Forest in Wisconsin. A large Dune formation can be found in Whitefish Dunes State Park in Wisconsin in the Door Peninsula. Lake Michigan beaches in Northern Michigan are the only place in the world, aside from a few inland lakes in that region, where one can find Petoskey stones, the state stone.

The beaches of the western coast and the northernmost part of the east coast are often rocky, with some sandy beaches dues to local conditions; while the southern and eastern beaches are typically sandy and dune-covered. This is partly because of the prevailing winds from the west (which also cause thick layers of ice to build on the eastern shore in winter).

The Chicago city waterfront is composed of parks, beaches, harbors and marinas, and residential developments. Where there are no beaches or marinas, stone or concrete revetments protect the shoreline from erosion. The Chicago lakefront is quite walkable, as one can stroll past parks, beaches, and marinas for about 24 miles from the city southern limits with Lake Michigan to its northern city limits point.

The Great Lakes Circle Tour is a designated scenic road system connecting all of the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence River. Great Lakes Circle Tour. 

Some environmental problems can still plague the lake as steel mills operate near the Indiana shoreline. The Chicago Tribune reported that BP is a major polluter, dumping thousands of pounds of raw sludge into the lake every day from its Whiting, Indiana oil refinery. In March of 2014 BP's Whiting refinery was responsible for spilling over 1,600 gallons of oil into the lake. 

=== Car ferries ===
People can cross Lake Michigan by the SS Badger, a ferry that runs from Manitowoc, Wisconsin, to Ludington, Michigan. The Lake Express, established in 2004, carries motorists across the lake between Milwaukee, Wisconsin, and Muskegon, Michigan.

=== Islands ===
Big Sable Point, Michigan
* The Beaver Island archipelago in Charlevoix County, Michigan, includes Beaver Island, Garden Island, Grape Island, Gull Island, Hat Island, High Island, Hog Island, Horseshoe Island, Little Island, Pismire Island, Shoe Island, Squaw Island, Trout Island, and Whiskey Island.
* The Fox Islands in Leelanau County, Michigan, consist of North Fox Island and South Fox Island.
* The Manitou Islands, North Manitou Island and South Manitou Island, are in Leelanau County, Michigan.
* Islands within Grand Traverse Bay include Bassett Island, Bellow Island, and Marion Island.
* Islands south of the Garden Peninsula in Delta County, Michigan include Gravelly Island, Gull Island, Little Gull Island, Little Summer Island, Poverty Island, Rocky Island, St. Martin Island, and Summer Island.
* Islands in Big Bay de Noc in Delta County, Michigan include Round Island, Saint Vital Island, and Snake Island.
* Islands in Little Bay de Noc in Delta County, Michigan include Butlers Island and Sand Island.
* Wilderness State Park in Emmet County, Michigan contains Temperance Island and Waugoshance Island.
* Epoufette Island, Gravel Island, Little Hog Island, and Naubinway Island are located in Mackinac County, Michigan, in the area of Epoufette, Michigan and Naubinway, Michigan.
* Green Island and St. Helena Island are in the vicinity of the Mackinac Bridge, in Mackinac County, Michigan.
* Islands surrounding the Door Peninsula in Wisconsin include Chambers Island, Horseshoe Island, the Sister Islands, Detroit Island, Hog Island, Pilot Island, Plum Island, Rock Island, the Strawberry Islands and Washington Island. The northern half of the peninsula is technically an island itself, due to the Sturgeon Bay Ship Canal.
* Northerly Island is a 91 acre man-made island in Chicago. It is the home of the Adler Planetarium, the former site of Meigs Field, and the current site of the temporary concert venue Charter One Pavilion each summer.
* Other islands included Fisherman Island in Charlevoix County, Michigan and Ile aux Galets in Emmet County, Michigan.

=== Parks ===
The National Park Service maintains the Sleeping Bear Dunes National Lakeshore and Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore. Parts of the shoreline are within the Hiawatha National Forest and the Manistee National Forest. The Manistee National Forest section of the shoreline includes the Nordhouse Dunes Wilderness. The Lake Michigan division of the Michigan Islands National Wildlife Refuge is also within the lake.

There are numerous state and local parks located on the shores of the lake or on islands within the lake. A partial list follows.
Chicago's North Avenue Beach, Lincoln Park
Lake Michigan and the Chicago skyline from Portage, Indiana

* Chicago Park District Beaches
* Duck Lake State Park
* Fayette Historic State Park
* Fisherman's Island State Park
* Grand Haven State Park
* Grand Mere State Park
* Harrington Beach State Park
* Holland State Park
* Hoffmaster State Park
* Illinois Beach State Park
* Indian Lake State Park
* Indiana Dunes State Park
* Ludington State Park
* Leelanau State Park
* Mears State Park
* Muskegon State Park
* Newport State Park
* Orchard Beach State Park
* Peninsula State Park
* Racine Zoo
* Saugatuck Dunes State Park
* Silver Lake State Park
* Traverse City State Park
* Terry Andrae State Park
* Van Buren State Park
* Warren Dunes State Park
White Shoal Light (Michigan)
* Wells State Park
* Wilderness State Park

=== Lighthouses ===
* Illinois lighthouses
* Indiana lighthouses
* Michigan lighthouses
* Wisconsin lighthouses

== Hydrology ==
The Milwaukee Reef, running under Lake Michigan from a point between Milwaukee and Racine to a point between Grand Haven and Muskegon, divides the lake into northern and southern basins. Each basin has a clockwise flow of water, deriving from rivers, winds, and the Coriolis effect. Prevailing westerly winds tend to move the surface water toward the east, producing a moderating effect on the climate of western Michigan. There is a mean difference in summer temperatures of 5 to 10 degrees Fahrenheit (2 to 5 degrees Celsius) between the Wisconsin and Michigan shores. 

Hydrologically Michigan and Huron are the same body of water (sometimes called Lake Michigan-Huron), but are normally considered distinct. Counted together, it is the largest body of fresh water in the world by surface area. The Mackinac Bridge is generally considered the dividing line between them. Both lakes are part of the Great Lakes Waterway. In earlier maps of the region, the name Lake Illinois has been found in place of "Michigan".

; Historic High Water: The lake fluctuates from month to month, with the highest lake levels typically experienced in the summer. The normal high-water mark is 2.00 ft above datum 577.5 ft. In the summer of 1986, Lakes Michigan and Huron reached their highest level during the period during which records have been kept, at 5.92 ft above datum. Monthly bulletin of Lake Levels for The Great Lakes; September 2009; US Army Corps of Engineers, Detroit District The high water records began in February 1986 and lasted through the year, ending with January 1987. Water levels ranged from 3.67 ft to 5.92 ft above Chart Datum. On February 21, 1986 the waters neared the all-time maximum for the period during which records have been kept. 

; Historic Low Water: Lake levels tend to be the lowest in winter. The normal low water mark is 1.00 ft below datum 577.5 ft. In the winter of 1964, Lakes Michigan and Huron reached their lowest level at 1.38 ft below datum. As with the highwater records, monthly low water records were set each month from February 1964 through January 1965. During this twelve-month period water levels ranged from 1.38 ft to 0.71 ft below Chart Datum. 

In January 2013, Lake Michigan's monthly mean water levels dipped to an all-time low of 576.2 ft, 
 reaching their lowest ebb since record keeping began in 1918. The lakes were 29 in 29 inches below their long-term average and had declined 17 inches since January 2012. 
 Keith Kompoltowicz, chief of watershed hydrology for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' district office in Detroit, explained that biggest factors leading to the lower water levels in 2013 were a combination of the "lack of a large snowpack" in the winter of 2011/2012 coupled with very hot and dry conditions in the summer of 2012. 

===Drinking water===
The Great Lakes are used to supply drinking water to tens of millions of people in bordering areas. This valuable resource is collectively administered by the state and provincial governments adjacent to the lakes pursuant to the Great Lakes Compact.

==Lake Michigan fishing==

Lake Michigan is home to a variety of species of fish and other organisms. It was originally home to lake whitefish, lake trout, yellow perch, panfish, largemouth bass, smallmouth bass, bowfin, as well as some species of catfish. As a result of improvements to the Welland Canal in 1919, an invasion of sea lampreys, and overharvest caused a decline in native lake trout populations, ultimately causing an increase in the population of another invasive species, the alewife. As a result, salmonids including various strains of brown trout, steelhead (rainbow trout), coho and chinook salmon were introduced as predators of alewives to decrease the alewife population. This program was so successful that the introduced population of trout and salmon population exploded, resulting in the creation of a large sport fishery for introduced species of salmon and trout. Lake Michigan is now stocked annually with steelhead, brown trout, and coho and chinook salmon, which also have begun natural reproduction in some Lake Michigan tributaries. However, several invader species introduced such as lampreys, round goby, zebra mussels and quagga mussels continue to cause major changes in water clarity and fertility, resulting in major changes to Lake Michigan's ecosystem, and threaten the vitality of fish populations. 

=== Commercial fisheries ===
Fisheries in inland waters of the United States are small compared to marine fisheries. The largest fisheries are the landings from the Great Lakes, worth about $13 million in 2003. NOAA/NMFS: (2004) Fisheries of the United States, 2003 Michigans commercial fishery today consists mainly of 150 tribe-licensed commercial fishing operations through the Chippewa-Ottawa Resource Authority (CORA) and tribes belonging to the Great Lakes Indian Fish and Wildlife Commission (GLIFWC) which harvest 50 percent of the Great Lakes commercial catch in Michigan waters, and 45 state-licensed commercial fishing enterprises. 
 The prime commercial species is the tasty lake whitefish (Coregonus clupeaformis). The annual harvest declined from average annual harvests of 11 million pounds in 1981 to 1999 to more recent annual harvests of 9.5 to million pounds. The price for lake whitefish dropped from $1.04/lb. to as low as $.40/lb during periods of high production. 

===Sports fishing===
Sports fishing includes salmon, whitefish, smelt, lake trout and walleye being major catches. In the late 1960s, successful stocking programs for Pacific salmon, led to the development of Lake Michigans charter fishing industry. 
 

==Shipping==

Lake Michigan, like the other Great Lakes is today used as a major mode of transport for bulk goods. In 2002, 162 million net tons of dry bulk cargo were moved on the Lakes. This was, in order of volume: iron ore, grain and potash. The iron ore and much of the stone and coal are used in the steel industry. There is also some shipping of liquid and containerized cargo but most container ships cannot pass the locks on the Saint Lawrence Seaway because the ships are too wide. The total amount of shipping on the lakes has been on a downward trend for several years.

===Ports on Lake Michigan===

====The port of Chicago====

The Port of Chicago, operated by the Illinois International Port District, has Grain (14 million bushels) and bulk liquid (800,000 barrels) storage facilities along Lake Calumet. The central element of the Port District, Calumet Harbor, is maintained by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (November 2007). "Calumet Harbor, IL and IN." Retrieved on November 11, 2008. 

===Tourism and recreation===
Tourism and recreation are major industries on the Great Lakes. A few small cruise ships operate on Lake Michigan including a couple of sailing ships. Many other water sports are practiced on the lakes such as yachting, sea kayaking, diving, kitesurfing, and lake surfing.

====Great Lakes Circle Tour====
The Great Lakes Circle Tour is a designated scenic road system connecting all of the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence River. 

===Great Lakes passenger steamers===

Luxury steamers have been operating since the mid-1800s. Several ferries currently operate on the Great Lakes to carry passengers to various islands, including Beaver Island and Bois Blanc Island (Michigan). As of 2007, two car ferry services cross Lake Michigan, two on Lake Michigan: a steamer from Ludington, Michigan, to Manitowoc, Wisconsin, and a high speed catamaran from Milwaukee to Muskegon, Michigan.

== See also ==
Ohio Street Beach downtown Chicago
Saugatuck Dunes State Park

===Geography===

* Chicago beaches
* Chicago River
* Grand Traverse Bay
* Door Peninsula
* Green Bay
* Lake Michigan Shore AVA
* Leelanau Peninsula
* Little Bay de Noc
* Little Traverse Bay
* Jardine Water Purification Plant

===Prehistory===
* Lake Chicago
* Mackinac Falls

=== Great Lakes in general ===
* Great Lakes
* Great Lakes Areas of Concern
* Great Lakes census statistical areas
* Great Lakes Commission
* Great Recycling and Northern Development Canal
* Great Storm of 1913
* International Boundary Waters Treaty
* List of cities along the Great Lakes
* Seiche
* Sixty Years' War for control of the Great Lakes
* Third Coast
* Snowbelt

== References ==

== Bibliography ==

* Hyde, Charles K., and Ann and John Mahan. The Northern Lights: Lighthouses of the Upper Great Lakes. Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 1995. ISBN 0-8143-2554-8 ISBN 9780814325544.
* Oleszewski, Wes, Great Lakes Lighthouses, American and Canadian: A Comprehensive Directory/Guide to Great Lakes Lighthouses, (Gwinn, Michigan: Avery Color Studios, Inc., 1998) ISBN 0-932212-98-0.
* Penrod, John, Lighthouses of Michigan, (Berrien Center, Michigan: Penrod/Hiawatha, 1998) ISBN 978-0-942618-78-5 ISBN 9781893624238
* Penrose, Laurie and Bill, A Travelers Guide to 116 Michigan Lighthouses (Petoskey, Michigan: Friede Publications, 1999). ISBN 0-923756-03-5 ISBN 9780923756031
* Wagner, John L., Michigan Lighthouses: An Aerial Photographic Perspective, (East Lansing, Michigan: John L. Wagner, 1998) ISBN 1-880311-01-1 ISBN 9781880311011
* Wright, Larry and Wright, Patricia, Great Lakes Lighthouses Encyclopedia Hardback (Erin: Boston Mills Press, 2006) ISBN 1-55046-399-3

== External links ==

* EPA's Great Lakes Atlas
* Great Lakes Coast Watch
* Michigan DNR map of Lake Michigan
* Official Michigan DNR Freshwater Fishing Regulations
* Bathymetry of Lake Michigan
* 
* 
;Lighthouses
* Bibliography on Michigan lighthouses
* Interactive map of lighthouses in area (northern Lake Michigan)
* Interactive map of lighthouses in area (southern Lake Michigan)
* Terry Pepper on lighthouses of the western Great Lakes
* Wagner, John L., Beacons Shining in the Night, Michigan lighthouse bibliography, chronology, history, and photographs, Clarke Historical Library, Central Michigan University]

 
Michigan
Michigan
Michigan

Michigan



[[Fibonacci]]

Leonardo Pisano Bigollo (c. 1170  c. 1250) known as Fibonacci, and also Leonardo of Pisa, Leonardo Pisano, Leonardo Bonacci, Leonardo Fibonacciwas an Italian mathematician, considered by some "the most talented western mathematician of the Middle Ages." Howard Eves. An Introduction to the History of Mathematics. Brooks Cole, 1990: ISBN 0-03-029558-0 (6th ed.), p 261. 

Fibonacci is best known to the modern world for Leonardo Pisano  page 3: "Contributions to number theory". Encyclopdia Britannica Online, 2006. Retrieved 18 September 2006. 
the spreading of the HinduArabic numeral system in Europe, primarily through his composition in 1202 of Liber Abaci (Book of Calculation), and for a number sequence named the Fibonacci numbers after him, which he did not discover but used as an example in the Liber Abaci. Parmanand Singh. "Acharya Hemachandra and the (so called) Fibonacci Numbers". Math. Ed. Siwan , 20(1):2830, 1986. ISSN 0047-6269] 

==Life==
Fibonacci was born around 1170 to Guglielmo Bonacci, a wealthy Italian merchant and, by some accounts, the consul for Pisa. Guglielmo directed a trading post in Bugia, a port in the Almohad dynasty's sultanate in North Africa. Fibonacci traveled with him as a young boy, and it was in Bugia (now Bjaa, Algeria) that he learned about the HinduArabic numeral system. 

Alternatively, according to a history text by mathematician Tobias Dantzig, his father was "a lowly shipping clerk nicknamed Bonaccio, which, in the idiom of the period, meant 'simpleton' ... hence 'Fibonacci,' the 'son of a simpleton.'" . 

Recognizing that arithmetic with HinduArabic numerals is simpler and more efficient than with Roman numerals, Fibonacci travelled throughout the Mediterranean world to study under the leading Arab mathematicians of the time. He returned from his travels around 1200, and in 1202, the 32-year-old recorded what he had learned in Liber Abaci (Book of Abacus or Book of Calculation), and thereby popularized HinduArabic numerals in Europe.

Fibonacci became a guest of Emperor Frederick II, who enjoyed mathematics and science. In 1240 the Republic of Pisa honored Fibonacci (referred to as Leonardo Bigollo) See the incipit of Flos: "Incipit flos Leonardi bigolli pisani..." (quoted in the MS Word document Sources in Recreational Mathematics: An Annotated Bibliography by David Singmaster, 18 March 2004  emphasis added), in English: "Here starts 'the flower' by Leonardo the wanderer of Pisa..."The basic meanings of "bigollo" appear to be "good-for-nothing" and "traveller" (so it could be translated by "vagrant", "vagabond" or "tramp"). A. F. Horadam contends a connotation of "bigollo" is "absent-minded" (see first footnote of "Eight hundred years young"), which is also one of the connotations of the English word "wandering". The translation "the wanderer" in the quote above tries to combine the various connotations of the word "bigollo" in a single English word. by granting him a salary.

The date of Fibonacci's death is not known, but it has been estimated to be between 1240 . and 1250, . most likely in Pisa.

==Liber Abaci==
A page of Fibonacci's Liber Abaci from the Biblioteca Nazionale di Firenze showing (in box on right) the Fibonacci sequence with the position in the sequence labeled in Roman numerals and the value in Hindu-Arabic numerals.

In the Liber Abaci (1202), Fibonacci introduced the so-called modus Indorum (method of the Indians), today known as Arabic numerals (Sigler 2003; Grimm 1973). The book advocated numeration with the digits 09 and place value. The book showed the practical importance of the new numeral system by applying it to commercial bookkeeping, conversion of weights and measures, the calculation of interest, money-changing, and other applications. The book was well received throughout educated Europe and had a profound impact on European thought.

==Fibonacci sequence==

Liber Abaci also posed, and solved, a problem involving the growth of a population of rabbits based on idealized assumptions. The solution, generation by generation, was a sequence of numbers later known as Fibonacci numbers. The number sequence was known to Indian mathematicians as early as the 6th century, Rachel W. Hall. Math for poets and drummers. Math Horizons 15 (2008) 1011. but it was Fibonacci's Liber Abaci that introduced it to the West.

In the Fibonacci sequence of numbers, each number is the sum of the previous two numbers. Fibonacci began the sequence not with 0, 1, 1, 2, as modern mathematicians do but with 1,1, 2, etc. He carried the calculation up to the thirteenth place (fourteenth in modern counting), that is 233, though another manuscript carries it to the next place: 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, 144, 233, 377. Fibonacci Numbers from The On-Line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences. Il Liber Abbaci, 1857 edition, p. 231. Online at Fibonacci did not speak about the golden ratio as the limit of the ratio of consecutive numbers in this sequence.

==Works==
* Liber Abaci (1202), a book on calculations (English translation by Laurence Sigler, Springer, 2002)
* Practica Geometriae (1220), a compendium of techniques in surveying, the measurement and partition of areas and volumes, and other topics in practical geometry (English translation by Barnabas Hughes, Springer, 2008).
* Flos (1225), solutions to problems posed by Johannes of Palermo
* Liber quadratorum ("The Book of Squares") on Diophantine equations, dedicated to Emperor Frederick II. See in particular the BrahmaguptaFibonacci identity.
* Di minor guisa (on commercial arithmetic; lost)
* Commentary on Book X of Euclid's Elements (lost)

19th century statue of Fibonacci in Camposanto, Pisa.

==Legacy==
In the 19th century, a statue of Fibonacci was constructed and erected in Pisa. Today it is located in the western gallery of the Camposanto, historical cemetery on the Piazza dei Miracoli. 

There are many mathematical concepts named after Fibonacci, for instance because of a connection to the Fibonacci numbers. Examples include the BrahmaguptaFibonacci identity, the Fibonacci search technique, and the Pisano period. Beyond mathematics, namesakes of Fibonacci include the asteroid 6765 Fibonacci and the art rock band The Fibonaccis.

==See also==
* Fibonacci numbers in popular culture

==Notes==

==References==
* Goetzmann, William N. and Rouwenhorst, K.Geert, The Origins of Value: The Financial Innovations That Created Modern Capital Markets (2005, Oxford University Press Inc, USA), ISBN 0-19-517571-9.
* Grimm, R. E., "The Autobiography of Leonardo Pisano", Fibonacci Quarterly, Vol. 11, No. 1, February 1973, pp. 99104.
* A. F. Horadam, "Eight hundred years young," The Australian Mathematics Teacher 31 (1975) 123134.

==External links==
*Fibonacci Biography
*Who was Fibonacci? by Ron Knott.
* Goetzmann, William N., Fibonacci and the Financial Revolution (October 23, 2003), Yale School of Management International Center for Finance Working Paper No. 03-28
*Fibonacci at Convergence
*

* 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fibonacci_number

[[Lake Superior]]

Lake Superior () is the largest of the Great Lakes of North America. The lake is bounded by Ontario and Minnesota to the north and west, and Wisconsin and Michigan to the south. It is generally considered the largest freshwater lake in the world by surface area. "Michigan and Huron: One Lake or Two?" Pearson Education, Inc: Information Please Database, 2007. It is the world's third-largest freshwater lake by volume and the largest by volume in North America. Superior Pursuit: Facts About the Greatest Great Lake - Minnesota Sea Grant University of Minnesota. Retrieved on 2007-08-09. 

==Name==
The Ojibwe call the lake gichigami, meaning "be a great sea." Henry Wadsworth Longfellow wrote the name as "Gitche Gumee" in The Song of Hiawatha, as did Gordon Lightfoot in his song, "The Wreck of the Edmund Fitzgerald". According to other sources the actual Ojibwe name is Ojibwe Gichigami ("Ojibwe's Great Sea") or Anishnaabe Gichiami ("Anishinaabe's Great Sea"). Under the Shadow of the Gods: A guide to the History of the Canadian Shore of Lake Superior by Barbara Chisholm & Andrea Gutsche 1st edition 1998 printed bound in Canada by Transcontinental Printing Inc or taught in Ojibwe language classes as gichigami, gitchi-gami or kitchi-gami. http://www.lakesuperior.com/the-lake/lake-superior/281almanac/ Kitchi-Gami Almanac - The Name January 1st, 2006 Retrieved 10/25/13 The 1878 dictionary by Father Frederic Baraga, the first one written for the Ojibway language, gives the Ojibwe name as Otchipwe-kitchi-gami (reflecting Ojibwe Gichigami). The first French explorers approaching the great inland sea by way of the Ottawa River and Lake Huron during the 17th century referred to their discovery as le lac suprieur. Properly translated, the expression means "Upper Lake," that is, the lake above Lake Huron. The lake was also called Lac Tracy by 17th century Jesuit missionaries. Great Lakes Atlas, Environment Canada and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 1995. The British, upon taking control of the region from the French in the 1760s following the French and Indian War, anglicized the lake's name to Superior, "on account of its being superior in magnitude to any of the lakes on that vast continent." George R. Stewart, "Names on the Land, A historical Account of Place-Naming in the United States," 1945, p. 83 

==Hydrography==

Lake Superior empties into Lake Huron via the St. Marys River and the Soo Locks. Lake Superior is the largest freshwater lake in the world in area (if Lakes Michigan and Huron are taken separately; see Lake MichiganHuron), and the third largest in volume, behind Lake Baikal in Siberia and Lake Tanganyika in East Africa. The Caspian Sea, while larger than Lake Superior in both surface area and volume, is brackish; though presently isolated, historically the Caspian has been repeatedly connected to and isolated from the Mediterranean via the Black Sea.

Lake Superior has a surface area of 31700 sqmi, which is approximately the size of South Carolina. It has a maximum length of 350 smi and maximum breadth of 160 smi. Its average depth is 80.5 fathom with a maximum depth of 222 fathom. Lake Superior contains 2,900 cubic miles (12,100 km) of water. There is enough water in Lake Superior to cover the entire land mass of North and South America to a depth of 30 cm. North America (2.47 km) and South America (1.78 km) combined cover 4.26 km. Lake Superior's volume (1.20 km) over 4.26 km gives a depth of 0.282 m. The shoreline of the lake stretches 2726 mi (including islands). 

American limnologist J. Val Klump was the first person to reach the lowest depth of Lake Superior on July 30, 1985, as part of a scientific expedition, which at 122 fathoms 1 foot (733 ft) below sea level is the lowest spot in the continental interior of the United States and the second-lowest spot in the interior of the North American continent after the deeper Great Slave Lake in Canada (1503 ft below sea level). (Though Crater Lake is the deepest lake in the United States and deeper than Lake Superior, Crater Lake's elevation is higher and consequently its deepest point is 4229 ft above sea level.)

While the temperature of the surface of Lake Superior varies seasonally, the temperature below 110 fathom is an almost constant 39 F (4 C). This variation in temperature makes the lake seasonally stratigraphic. Twice per year, however, the water column reaches a uniform temperature of 39 F (4 C) from top to bottom, and the lake waters thoroughly mix. This feature makes the lake dimictic. Because of its volume, Lake Superior has a retention time of 191 years. http://www.seagrant.umn.edu/superior/processes 

Annual storms on Lake Superior regularly feature wave heights of over 20 ft. "The fall storm season." (Website.) National Weather Service, U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved on 2007-09-25 Waves well over 30 ft have been recorded. Chisholm, B. & Gutsche, p. xiii 

===Tributaries and outlet===
Lake Superior Basin
The lake is fed by over 200 rivers. The largest include the Nipigon River, the St. Louis River, the Pigeon River, the Pic River, the White River, the Michipicoten River, the Bois Brule River and the Kaministiquia River. Lake Superior drains into Lake Huron via the St. Marys River. There are rapids at the river's upper (Lake Superior) end where the river bed has a relatively steep gradient. The Soo Locks were built to enable ships to bypass the rapids and to overcome the 25 ft height difference between Lakes Superior and Huron.

===Water levels===
Lake Superior in winter, as seen from Duluth, Minnesota in December 2004
Ice on Lake Superior as seen from space (MODIS, March 3, 2009)
The lake's average surface elevation is 600 ft above sea level. Until approximately 1887 the natural hydraulic conveyance through the St. Marys River rapids determined outflow from Lake Superior. By 1921 development in support of transportation and hydroelectric power resulted in gates, locks, power canals and other control structures completely spanning St. Marys rapids. The regulating structure is known as the Compensating Works and is operated according to a regulation plan known as Plan 1977-A. Water levels, including diversions of water from the Hudson Bay watershed, are regulated by the International Lake Superior Board of Control which was established in 1914 by the International Joint Commission.

Lake Superior's water level was at a new record low in September 2007, slightly less than the previous record low in 1926. Associated Press. (2007-10-01.) "Lake Superior hits record lows." The Globe and Mail, via globeandmail.com. Retrieved on 2007-10-06. However, the water levels returned within a few days. Current Great Lakes Water Levels. Great Lakes Information Network. Retrieved on October 23, 2007. 

Historic High Water
The lake's water level fluctuates from month to month, with the highest lake levels in October and November. The normal high-water mark is 1.17 ft above datum (601.1 ft or 183.2 m). In the summer of 1985, Lake Superior reached its highest recorded level at 2.33 ft above datum. Monthly bulletin of Lake Levels for The Great Lakes; September 2009; U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Detroit District The winter of 1986 set new high-water records through the winter and spring months (January to June), ranging from 1.33 ft to 1.833 ft above Chart Datum. 

Historic Low Water
The lake's lowest levels occur in March and April. The normal low-water mark is 0.33 ft below datum (601.1 ft or 183.2 m). In the winter of 1926 Lake Superior reached its lowest recorded level at 1.58 ft below datum. Additionally, the entire first half of the year (January to June) included record low months. The low water was a continuation of the dropping lake levels from the previous year, 1925, which set low-water records for October through December. During the nine-month period October 1925 to June 1926 water levels ranged from 1.58 ft to 0.33 ft below Chart Datum. In the summer of 2007 monthly historic lows were set; August at 0.66 ft, September at 0.58 ft. 

===Climate change===
According to a study by professors at the University of Minnesota Duluth, Lake Superior may have warmed faster than its surrounding area. Marshall, Jessica. (2007-05-30.) "Global warming is shrinking the Great Lakes." New Scientist, via newscientist.com. Retrieved on 2007-09-25. Summer surface temperatures in the lake appeared to have increased by about 4.5 F (2.5 C) since 1979, compared with an approximately 2.7 F (1.5 C) increase in the surrounding average air temperature. The increase in the lakes surface temperature may be related to the decreasing ice cover. Less winter ice cover allows more solar radiation to penetrate and warm the water. If trends continue, Lake Superior, which freezes over completely once every 20 years, could routinely be ice-free by 2040. Associated Press. (2007-06-04.) "Lake Superior warming faster than surrounding climate." The Globe and Mail, via globeandmail.com (fee required). Retrieved on 2007-09-25. This would be a significant departure from historical records as, according to Hubert Lamb, Samuel Champlain reported ice along the shores of Lake Superior in June 1608. Warmer temperatures could actually lead to more snow in the lake effect snow belts along the shores of the lake, especially in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan.

==Geography==
Brooklyn Museum - Lake Superior - Walter Shirlaw
The largest island in Lake Superior is Isle Royale in the state of Michigan. Isle Royale contains several lakes, some of which also contain islands. Other large famous islands include Madeline Island in the state of Wisconsin, Michipicoten Island in the province of Ontario, and Grand Island (location of the Grand Island National Recreation Area) in the state of Michigan.

The larger cities on Lake Superior include: the twin ports of Duluth, Minnesota, and Superior, Wisconsin; Thunder Bay, Ontario; Marquette, Michigan; and the twin cities of Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan, and Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario. Duluth, at the western tip of Lake Superior, is the most inland point on the St. Lawrence Seaway and the most inland port in the world.

Among the scenic places on the lake are: the Apostle Islands National Lakeshore, Isle Royale National Park, Porcupine Mountains Wilderness State Park, Pukaskwa National Park, Lake Superior Provincial Park, Grand Island National Recreation Area, Sleeping Giant (Ontario) and Pictured Rocks National Lakeshore.

===Great Lakes Circle Tour===
The Great Lakes Circle Tour is a designated scenic road system connecting all of the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence River. Great Lakes Circle Tour. 

==Climate==
Lake Superior's size reduces the severity of the seasons of its humid continental climate (more typically seen in locations like Nova Scotia). Highway 17: A Scenic Route along the northern Lake Superior shore The water surface's slow reaction to temperature changes, seasonally ranging between 32 and 55 F (013 C) around 1970, Derecki, J. A. (July 1980.) "NOAA Technical Memorandum ERL GLERL-29: Evaporation from Lake Superior." Great Lakes Environmental Research Laboratory, U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, page 37. Retrieved on 2007-09-25. helps to moderate surrounding air temperatures in the summer and winter, and creates lake effect snow in colder months. The hills and mountains that border the lake hold moisture and fog, particularly in the fall.

The lake's surface temperature has risen by 4.5 F (2.5 C) since 1979. "Global warming is shrinking the Great Lakes." New Scientist, via newscientist.com. Retrieved on 2007-09-25. 
Bedrock geologic map of the U.S. area bordering Lake Superior: Minnesota, Wisconsin, and the Upper Peninsula of Michigan.
North American cratons and basement rock, showing the formation of the Midcontinent Rift containing today's Lake Superior.

==Geology==
The rocks of Lake Superior's northern shore date back to the early history of the earth. During the Precambrian (between 4.5 billion and 540 million years ago) magma forcing its way to the surface created the intrusive granites of the Canadian Shield. Geology of National Parks, Second Edition, Ann G. Harris, Kendall Hunt Publishing, Dubuque, Iowa, 1977, p. 200 These ancient granites can be seen on the North Shore today. It was during the Penokean orogeny, part of the process that created the Great Lakes Tectonic Zone, that many valuable metals were deposited. The region surrounding the lake has proved to be rich in minerals. Copper, iron, silver, gold and nickel are or were the most frequently mined. Examples include the Hemlo gold mine near Marathon, copper at Point Mamainse, silver at Silver Islet and uranium at Theano Point.

The mountains steadily eroded, depositing layers of sediments that compacted and became limestone, dolostone, taconite and the shale at Kakabeka Falls.

The continent was later riven, creating one of the deepest rifts in the world. Linder, Douglas O. (2006) Simply Superior: The World's Greatest Lake "Lake Superior facts". The lake lies in this long-extinct Mesoproterozoic rift valley, the Midcontinent Rift. Magma was injected between layers of sedimentary rock, forming diabase sills. This hard diabase protects the layers of sedimentary rock below, forming the flat-topped mesas in the Thunder Bay area.

Amethyst formed in some of the cavities created by the Midcontinent Rift and there are several amethyst mines in the Thunder Bay area. Ontario Amethyst: Ontario's Mineral Emblem Ontario Ministry of Northern Development and Mines. Retrieved on 2007-08-04. 
Basaltic columns along Lake Superior
Lava erupted from the rift and formed the black basalt rock of Michipicoten Island, Black Bay Peninsula, and St. Ignace Island.

During the Wisconsin glaciation 10,000 years ago, ice covered the region at a thickness of 1.25 mi. The land contours familiar today were carved by the advance and retreat of the ice sheet. The retreat left gravel, sand, clay and boulder deposits. Glacial meltwaters gathered in the Superior basin creating Lake Minong, a precursor to Lake Superior. Chisholm & Gutsche, p. xv Without the immense weight of the ice, the land rebounded, and a drainage outlet formed at Sault Ste. Marie, which would become known as St. Mary's River.

==History==
Pictographs at Lake Superior Provincial Park, Ontario

The first people came to the Lake Superior region 10,000 years ago after the retreat of the glaciers in the last Ice Age. They are known as the Plano, and they used stone-tipped spears to hunt caribou on the northwestern side of Lake Minong.

The next documented people were known as the Shield Archaic (c. 5000500 BC). Evidence of this culture can be found at the eastern and western ends of the Canadian shore. They used bows and arrows, dugout canoes, fished, hunted, mined copper for tools and weapons, and established trading networks. They are believed to be the direct ancestors of the Ojibwe and Cree. Chisholm & Gutsche, p. xvi 

The Laurel people (c. 500 BC to AD 500) developed seine net fishing, evidence being found at rivers around Superior such as the Pic and Michipicoten.

Another culture known as the Terminal Woodland Indians (c. AD 9001650) has been found. They were Algonkian people who hunted, fished and gathered berries. They used snow shoes, birch bark canoes and conical or domed lodges. At the mouth of the Michipicoten River, nine layers of encampments have been discovered. Most of the Pukaskwa Pits were likely made during this time. 

The Anishinaabe, which includes the Ojibwe or Chippewa, have inhabited the Lake Superior region for over five hundred years and were preceded by the Dakota, Fox, Menominee, Nipigon, Noquet and Gros Ventres. They called Lake Superior either Ojibwe Gichigami ("the Ojibwe's Great Sea") or Anishnaabe Gichgamiing ("the Anishinaabe's Great Sea"). After the arrival of Europeans, the Anishinaabe made themselves the middle-men between the French fur traders and other Native peoples. They soon became the dominant Indian nation in the region: they forced out the Sioux and Fox and won a victory against the Iroquois west of Sault Ste. Marie in 1662. By the mid-18th century, the Ojibwe occupied all of Lake Superior's shores. Chisholm & Gutsche, p. xvii 
Vintage stereoscopic photo titled, "Ice blockade in Marquette Harbor, June 1873

Reconstructed Great Hall, Grand Portage National Monument, Minnesota

In the 18th century, the fur trade in the region was booming, with the Hudson's Bay Company having a virtual monopoly. In 1783, however, the North West Company was formed to rival Hudson's Bay Company. The North West Company built forts on Lake Superior at Grand Portage, Nipigon, the Pic River, the Michipicoten River, and Sault Ste. Marie. But by 1821, with competition taking too great a toll on both, the companies merged under the Hudson's Bay Company name.

Many towns around the lake are either current or former mining areas, or engaged in processing or shipping. Today, tourism is another significant industry; the sparsely populated Lake Superior country, with its rugged shorelines and wilderness, attracts tourists and adventurers.

===Shipping===
Lake Superior has been an important link in the Great Lakes Waterway, providing a route for the transportation of iron ore as well as grain and other mined and manufactured materials. Large cargo vessels called lake freighters, as well as smaller ocean-going freighters, transport these commodities across Lake Superior.

===Shipwrecks===

According to shipwreck historian Frederick Stonehouse, the southern shore of Lake Superior between Grand Marais, Michigan, and Whitefish Point is known as the "Graveyard of the Great Lakes" and more ships have been lost around the Whitefish Point area than any other part of Lake Superior. Stonehouse, Frederick (1985, 1998). Lake Superiors Shipwreck Coast, p. 267, Avery Color Studios, Gwinn, Michigan, U.S.A. ISBN 0-932232-43-3, These shipwrecks are now protected by the Whitefish Point Underwater Preserve. The SS Edmund Fitzgerald was the last major shipwreck on Lake Superior, sinking 15 nmi from Whitefish Point on November 10, 1975.

According to legend, "Lake Superior seldom gives up her dead". Kohl, Cris (1998). The 100 Best Great Lakes Shipwrecks, Volume II, p. 430. Seawolf Communications, Inc. ISBN 0-9681437-3-3. 
This is because of the unusually low temperature of the water, estimated at under 36 F on average around 1970. Normally, bacteria feeding on a sunken decaying body will generate gas inside the body, causing it to float to the surface after a few days. The water in Lake Superior is cold enough year-round to inhibit bacterial growth, and bodies tend to sink and never resurface. Chisholm & Gutsche, p. xxxiv This is alluded to in Gordon Lightfoot's ballad "The Wreck of the Edmund Fitzgerald". The Edmund Fitzgerald's 29 crew members all perished when the ship sank in a storm in 1975. Edmund Fitzgerald adventurer Joe MacInnis reported that, in July 1994, explorer Frederick Shannon's Expedition 94 to the Fitzgerald discovered and filmed a man's body near the port side of her pilothouse, not far from the open door, "fully clothed, wearing an orange life jacket, and lying face down in the sediment." No crew members were ever recovered. The Fitzgerald was swallowed up so intensely by Lake Superior that the 729 ft ship split in half. Her two pieces are approximately 170 ft apart in a depth of 91 fathoms 4 feet (550 ft)

Storms that claimed multiple ships include the Mataafa Storm on November 28, 1905, and the Great Lakes Storm of 1913.

In August 2007 wreckage was found of the Cyprus, a 420 ft ore carrier which sank during a Lake Superior storm in 77 fathoms (460 ft) of water. All but Charles G. Pitz of the Cyprus 23 crew perished on October 11, 1907. The ore carrier sank in Lake Superior on her second voyage, while hauling iron ore from Superior, Wisconsin, to Buffalo, New York. Built in Lorain, Ohio, the Cyprus was launched August 17, 1907. MSNBC, Century-old shipwreck discovered 

In 1918 the last warships to sink in the great lakes, French minesweepers Inkerman and Cerisoles vanished in a Lake Superior storm marking the largest loss of life on Lake Superior to date.

==Ecology==
Bedrock shoreline, Neys Provincial Park, Ontario

Over 80 species of fish have been found in Lake Superior. Species native to the lake include: banded killifish, bloater, brook trout, burbot, cisco, lake sturgeon, lake trout, lake whitefish, longnose sucker, muskellunge, northern pike, pumpkinseed, rock bass, round whitefish, smallmouth bass, walleye, white sucker and yellow perch. In addition, many fish species have been either intentionally or accidentally introduced to Lake Superior: atlantic salmon, brown trout, carp, chinook salmon, coho salmon, freshwater drum, pink salmon, rainbow smelt, rainbow trout, round goby, ruffe, sea lamprey and white perch. Minnesota 2009 fishing regulations, p. 23 

Lake Superior has fewer dissolved nutrients relative to its water volume compared to the other Great Lakes and so is less productive in terms of fish populations and is an oligotrophic lake. This is a result of the underdeveloped soils found in its relatively small watershed. However, nitrate concentrations in the lake have been continuously rising for more than a century. They are still much lower than levels considered dangerous to human health; but this steady, long-term rise is an unusual record of environmental nitrogen buildup. It may relate to anthropogenic alternations to the regional nitrogen cycle, but researchers are still unsure of the causes of this change to the lake's ecology. 

As for other Great Lakes fish populations have also been impacted by the accidental or intentional introduction of foreign species such as the sea lamprey and Eurasian ruffe. Accidental introductions have occurred in part by the removal of natural barriers to navigation between the Great Lakes. Overfishing has also been a factor in the decline of fish populations. 

==See also==
Pictured Rocks National Lakeshore, Michigan

* the North Shore of Lake Superior
* the South Shore of Lake Superior
* Michigan lighthouses

===General===

* Great Lakes
* Great Lakes Areas of Concern
* Great Lakes census statistical areas
* Great Lakes Commission
* Great Recycling and Northern Development Canal
* Great Storm of 1913
* International Boundary Waters Treaty
* List of cities along the Great Lakes
* Seiche
* Shipwrecks of the 1913 Great Lakes storm
* Sixty Years' War for control of the Great Lakes
* Third Coast

==References==

===Notes===

==Bibliography==
*Chisholm, B. & Gutsche, A., Superior: Under the Shadow of the Gods, Lynx Images, 1998 ISBN 0-9698427-7-5

===Further reading===
* Burt, Williams A., and Hubbard, Bela Reports on the Mineral Region of Lake Superior (Buffalo: L. Danforth, 1846), 113 pages.
* Grady, Wayne. The Great Lakes: The Natural History of a Changing Region.Greystone Books, D&M Publishers INC, 2007
* Hyde, Charles K., and Ann and John Mahan. The Northern Lights: Lighthouses of the Upper Great Lakes. Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 1995. ISBN 0-8143-2554-8 ISBN 9780814325544.
* Oleszewski, Wes, Great Lakes Lighthouses, American and Canadian: A Comprehensive Directory/Guide to Great Lakes Lighthouses, (Gwinn, Michigan: Avery Color Studios, Inc., 1998) ISBN 0-932212-98-0.
* Penrod, John, Lighthouses of Michigan, (Berrien Center, Michigan: Penrod/Hiawatha, 1998) ISBN 978-0-942618-78-5 ISBN 9781893624238
* Penrose, Laurie and Bill, A Travelers Guide to 116 Michigan Lighthouses (Petoskey, Michigan: Friede Publications, 1999). ISBN 0-923756-03-5 ISBN 9780923756031
* Sims, P.K. and L.M.H. Carter, eds. Archean and Proterozoic Geology of the Lake Superior Region, U.S.A., 1993 Geological Survey Professional Paper 1556. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Geological Survey, 1996.
* Splake, T. Kilgore. Superior Land Lights. Battle Creek, MI: Angst Productions, 1984
* Stonehouse, Frederick. Marquette Shipwrecks. Marquette, MI: Harboridge Press, 1974
* Wagner, John L., Michigan Lighthouses: An Aerial Photographic Perspective, (East Lansing, Michigan: John L. Wagner, 1998) ISBN 1-880311-01-1 ISBN 9781880311011
* Wright, Larry and Wright, Patricia, Great Lakes Lighthouses Encyclopedia Hardback (Erin: Boston Mills Press, 2006) ISBN 1-55046-399-3
* U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. "Record Low Water Levels Expected on Lake Superior." August 2007
* Great Lakes Environmental Research Laboratory. "Great Lakes Sensitivity to Climatic Forcing: Hydrological Models." NOAA, 2006
;Shipwrecks
* "America"; Houghton, Michigan; Houghton Mining Gazette; Vol. 29; June 8, 1928
* Stonehouse, Frederick; Isle Royale Shipwrecks; Marquette, Michigan; Arery Color Studios; 1977
* "Cumberland" & "Wreck of Sidewheel Steamer Cumberland"; Detroit, Michigan; Detroit Free Press; January 29, 1974
* "S.S.George M. Cox Wrecked"; Houghton, Michigan; Houghton Mining Gazette; May 28, 1933
* Holdon, Thom "Reef of the Three C's"; Duluth, Minnesota; Lake Superior Marine Museum; Vol. 2, #4; July/August 1977
* Holdon, Thom; "Above and Below: Steamer America"; Duluth, Minnesota; Lake Superior Marine Museum; Vol. 3, #3 & #4; May/June & July/August 1978

==External links==

* Lake Superior NOAA nautical chart #14961 online
* International Lake Superior Board of Control
* EPA's Great Lakes Atlas
* EPA's Great Lakes Atlas Factsheet #1
* Great Lakes Coast Watch
* Parks Canada Lake Superior
* Minnesota Sea Grant - Lake Superior Page
* Lake Superior Bathymetry

*



[[Leipzig]]

Leipzig (; ) is a city in the federal state of Saxony, Germany. It has around 630,000 inhabitants and is the heart of the Central German Metropolitan Region. Leipzig is located about 150 km south of Berlin at the confluence of the White Elster, Pleisse, and Parthe rivers at the southerly end of the North German Plain.

Leipzig has been a trade city, since, at least the time of the Holy Roman Empire, sitting at the intersection of the Via Regia and Via Imperii, two important Medieval trade routes. At one time, Leipzig was one of the major European centers of learning and culture in fields such as music and publishing. [http://www.idehist.uu.se/distans/ilmh/Ren/bokt-frankfurt.htm ] After World War II, Leipzig became a major urban center within the German Democratic Republic (East Germany), but its cultural and economic importance declined, despite East Germany being the richest economy in the Soviet Bloc. 

Leipzig later played a significant role in instigating the fall of communism in Eastern Europe, through events which took place in and around St. Nicholas Church. Since the reunification of Germany, Leipzig has undergone significant change with the restoration of some historical buildings, the demolition of others, and the development of a modern transport infrastructure. Infrastruktur Leipzig today is an economic center in Germany and has a prominent opera house and one of the most modern zoos in Europe. Leipzig is nicknamed as the "Boomtown of eastern Germany" or "Hypezig". http://www.mdr.de/mdr-info/geburten-in-leipzig100.html http://www.handelsblatt.com/panorama/lifestyle/hypezig-leipzig-mutiert-zur-szenemetropole/8880718.html 

In December 2013, according to a study by Marktforschungsinstituts GfK, Leipzig was ranked as the most livable city in Germany http://www.focus.de/immobilien/wohnen/sicher-sauber-gruen-leipzig-lebenszufriedenheit-das-sind-die-beliebtesten-staedte-deutschlands_id_3474281.html http://www.n24.de/n24/Mediathek/videos/d/3964070/leipzig-im-ranking-ganz-vorne.html?fb_action_ids=641293605921434&fb_action_types=og.likes&fb_source=other_multiline&action_object_map=%5B512902725471934%5D&action_type_map=%5B%22og.likes%22%5D&action_ref_map and is one of the three European cities with the highest quality of living (after Groningen and Krakw). http://www.welt.de/vermischtes/article1057316/Leipzig-ist-die-beste-deutsche-Stadt-Europas.html In 2010, Leipzig was included in the top 10 cities to visit by the New York Times, and ranked 39th globally out of 289 cities for innovation in the 4th Innovation Cities Index published by Australian agency 2thinknow. Leipzig is currently listed as Gamma World City. http://www.lboro.ac.uk/gawc/world2012t.html 

==History==
New City Hall of Leipzig, built in 1905

===Name===
Leipzig is derived from the Slavic word Lipsk, which means "settlement where the linden trees (British English: lime trees; U.S. English: basswood trees) stand". Hanswilhelm Haefs. Das 2. Handbuch des nutzlosen Wissens. ISBN 3-8311-3754-4 An older spelling of the name in English is Leipsic. The Latin name Lipsia was also used. Lexicum nominum geographicorum latinorum 

In 1937 the Nazi government officially renamed the city Reichsmessestadt Leipzig (Imperial Trade Fair City Leipzig). Geschichte des Stadtkreises Leipzig 

More recently, the city is sometimes nicknamed Hypezig for being celebrated by the media as a hip urban center for the creative scene. ZEIT - Kann Leipzig Hypezig berleben?, October 1, 2013 (German) Handelsblatt - Hypezig - Leipzig mutiert zur Szenemetropole, October 3, 2013 (German) 

===Origins===

A map from Meyers Encyclopedia depicting the Battle of Leipzig on 18 October 1813
Leipzig old town from above

Leipzig was first documented in 1015 in the chronicles of Bishop Thietmar of Merseburg as 'urbs Libzi' (Chronikon VII, 25), and endowed with city and market privileges in 1165 by Otto the Rich. The Leipzig Trade Fair, started in the Middle Ages, became an event of international importance and is the oldest remaining trade fair in the world.

There are records of commercial fishing operations on the river Pleisse in Leipzig dating back to 1305, when the Margrave Dietrich the Younger granted the fishing rights to the church and convent of St. Thomas. 

There were a number of monasteries in and around the city, including a Benedectine monastery after which the Barfugchen (Barefoot Alley) is named and a monastery of Irish monks (Jacobskirche, destroyed in 744) near the present day Ranstdter Steinweg (old Via Regia).

The foundation of the University of Leipzig in 1409 initiated the city's development into a center of German law and the publishing industry, and towards being the location of the Reichsgericht (Imperial Court of Justice), and the German National Library (founded in 1912).

On 24 December 1701, an oil-fueled street lighting system was introduced. The city employed light guards who had to follow a specific schedule to ensure the punctual lighting of the 700 lanterns.

===Nineteenth century===
The Leipzig region was the arena of the 1813 Battle of Leipzig between Napoleonic France and an allied coalition of Prussia, Russia, Austria, and Sweden. It was the largest battle in Europe prior to World War I and the coalition victory ended Napoleon's presence in Germany and would ultimately lead to his first exile on Elba. In 1913 the Monument to the Battle of the Nations monument celebrating the centenary of this event was completed.

A terminus of the first German long distance railway to Dresden (the capital of Saxony) in 1839, Leipzig became a hub of Central European railway traffic, with Leipzig Hauptbahnhof the largest terminal station by area in Europe. The train station has two grand entrance halls, the eastern one for the Royal Saxon State Railways and the western one for the Prussian state railways.

Leipzig became a center of the German and Saxon liberal movements. The first German labor party, the General German Workers' Association (Allgemeiner Deutscher Arbeiterverein, ADAV) was founded in Leipzig on 23 May 1863 by Ferdinand Lassalle; about 600 workers from across Germany travelled to the foundation on the new railway line. Leipzig expanded rapidly to more than 700.000 inhabitants. Huge Grnderzeit areas were built, which mostly survived both war and post-war demolition.
Augustusplatz with Leipzig Opera House, around 1900

===Twentieth century===

With the opening of a fifth production hall in 1907, the Leipziger Baumwollspinnerei became the largest cotton mill company on the continent, housing over 240,000 spindles. Daily production surpassed 5 million kilograms of yarn. 

The city's mayor from 1930 to 1937, Carl Friedrich Goerdeler was a noted opponent of the Nazi regime in Germany. He resigned in 1937 when, in his absence, his Nazi deputy ordered the destruction of the city's statue of Felix Mendelssohn. On Kristallnacht in 1938, one of the city's most architecturally significant buildings, the 1855 Moorish Revival Leipzig synagogue was deliberately destroyed.

Leipzig after bombing in World War II
Several thousand forced laborers were stationed in Leipzig during World War II.

The city was also heavily damaged by Allied bombing during World War II. Unlike its neighboring city of Dresden this was largely conventional bombing, with high explosives rather than incendiaries. The resultant pattern of loss was a patchwork, rather than wholesale loss of its center, but was nevertheless very extensive.

The Allied ground advance into Germany reached Leipzig in late April 1945. The U.S. 2nd Infantry Division and U.S. 69th Infantry Division fought into the city on 18 April and completed its capture after fierce urban combat, in which fighting was often house-to-house and block-to-block, on 19 April 1945. Stanton, Shelby, World War II Order of Battle: An Encyclopedic Reference to U.S. Army Ground Forces from Battalion through Division, 1939-1946 (Revised Edition, 2006), Stackpole Books, p. 78, 139. 

The U.S. turned the city over to the Red Army as it pulled back from the line of contact with Soviet forces in July 1945 to the predesignated occupation zone boundaries. Leipzig became one of the major cities of the German Democratic Republic (East Germany).

In the mid-20th century, the city's trade fair assumed renewed importance as a point of contact with the Comecon Eastern Europe economic bloc, of which East Germany was a member. At this time, trade fairs were held at a site in the south of the city, near the Monument to the Battle of the Nations.

In October 1989, after prayers for peace at St. Nicholas Church, established in 1983 as part of the peace movement, the Monday demonstrations started as the most prominent mass protest against the East German regime. David Brebis (ed.), Michelin guide to Germany, Greenville (2006), p. 324. ISBN 086699077417 + video. 
Since the reunification of Germany, Leipzig has undergone significant change with the restoration of some historical buildings, the demolition of others, and the development of a modern transport infrastructure. Nowadays, Leipzig is an economic center in eastern Germany. Leipzig was the German candidate for the 2012 Summer Olympics, but was unsuccessful. After ten years of construction, the Leipzig City Tunnel opened at 14. December 2013. http://www.bild.de/regional/leipzig/city-tunnel/city-tunnel-eroeffnet-33842252.bild.html 

==Geography==
The White Elster in the Plagwitz district of Leipzig
The Leipzig Riverside Forest
Leipzig lies at the confluence of the rivers White Elster, Pleisse, and Parthe, in the Leipzig Bay, on the most southerly part of the North German Plain, which is the part North European Plain in Germany. The site is characterized by swampy areas such as the Leipzig Riverside Forest, though there are also some limestone areas to the north of the city. The landscape is mostly flat though there is also some evidence of moraine and drumlins.

Although there are some forest parks within the city limits, the area surrounding Leipzig is relatively unforested. During the 20th century, there were a several open-cast mines in the region, many of which are being converted to use as lakes.

Leipzig is also situated at the intersection of the ancient roads known as the Via Regia (King's highway), which traversed Germanic lands in an east-west direction, and Via Imperii (Imperial Highway), a north-south road.

Leipzig was a walled city in the Middle Ages and the current "ring" road around the historic center of the city corresponds to the old city walls.

=== Districts and neighboring regions ===
Leipzig is divided administratively since 1992 into ten urban districts, which contain 63 subdistricts. Some of these correspond to outlying villages which were annexed by Leipzig.

 City districts, Ortsteilkatalog der Stadt Leipzig 2008 their location and relation to neighboring districts 
 District Pop. Areakm Pop.per km 
 Center 49,562 13,88 3,570 
 Northeast 41,186 26.29 1.566 
 East 69,666 40.74 1,710 
 Southeast 51,139 34.65 1,476 
 South 57,434 16.92 3,394 
 Southwest 45,886 46.67 983 
 West 51,276 14.69 3,491 
 Old West 46,009 26.09 1,764 
 Northwest 28,036 39.09 717 
 North 57,559 38.35 1,501 

Districts and Regions

 Delitzsch Jesewitz 
 Schkeuditz Rackwitz Taucha 
 100px Borsdorf Brandis 
 Markranstdt Markkleeberg Naunhof 
 Kitzen Zwenkau Grosspoesna 
 

===Climate===
Climate diagram for Leipzig Geoklima 2.1 
Leipzig is located in a temperate transition zone between oceanic and continental Monats- und Jahreswerte fr Augsburg - Temperatur, Niederschlag und Sonnenschein - WetterKontor climate Koppen Map.png] (Kppen: Cfb) with summer temperatures sometimes over 30 Celsius (in 10 days of 2010) and very frequently below 0 in winter (in 62 days of 2010). http://www.leipzig.de/imperia/md/content/12_statistik-und-wahlen/lz_jb2011.pdf As in much of Germany in winter, snow will regularly stay on the ground for weeks or even months.

The hottest day on record was 9 August 1992 with a high of 38.8 C, the coldest was 14 January 1987 with 27.6 C. LIM - Klimastatistik - Extremwerte 

===Demographics===
Population development since 1600
Leipzig has a population of about 540,000. http://www.lvz-online.de/nachrichten/mitteldeutschland/bevoelkerung-in-sachsens-grossstaedten-waechst--mehr-kinder-und-zuzuege/r-mitteldeutschland-a-222052.html In 1930 the population reached its historical high of over 700,000. It decreased steadily from 1950 until 1989 to about 530,000. In the 1990s the population decreased rather rapidly to 437,000 in 1998. This reduction was mostly due to outward migration and suburbanization. After almost doubling the city area by incorporation of surrounding towns in 1999, the number stabilized and started to rise again with an increase of 1,000 in 2000. 
The growth of the past 1015 years has mostly been due to inward migration. In recent years inward migration accelerated, reaching +10,800 in 2012. http://www.statistik.sachsen.de/download/010_GB-Bev/02_03_23_tab.pdf 

In the years following German reunification many people of working age took the opportunity to move to the states of the former West Germany to seek work. This was a contributory factor to falling birth rates. Births dropped from 7,000 in 1988 to less than 3,000 in 1994. However, the number of children born in Leipzig has risen since the late 1990s. In 2011 it reached 5,490 newborns resulting in a RNI of -17.7 (-393.7 in 1995). http://www.statistik.sachsen.de/download/010_GB-Bev/02_03_20_tab.pdf 

The unemployment rate decreased from 18.2% in 2003 to 10.8% in 2012. 

The percentage of the population with an immigrant background is quite low compared with other German cities. As of 2012, only 5.6% of the population were foreigners, compared to the German overall average of 7.7%. https://www.destatis.de/DE/PresseService/Presse/Pressekonferenzen/2013/Zensus2011/bevoelkerung_zensus2011.pdf?__blob=publicationFile 

The number of people with an immigrant background (immigrants and their children) grew from ~40,000 in 2010 to ~50,000 in 2012, making it 9.3% of the city's population. http://statistik.leipzig.de/(S(1v0h2iqzyrjp2w55jlzknvj2))/statdist/table.aspx?cat=2&rub=4&obj=0 

Number of minorities (1st and 2nd generation) in Leipzig by country of origin at 31 December 2010. http://www.leipzig.de/imperia/md/content/12_statistik-und-wahlen/lz_fb_migranten.pdf 

 Rank Ancestry Number 
 1 Russia 5,600 
 2 Ukraine 3,100 
 3 Vietnam 3,000 
 4 Kazakhstan 2,100 
 5 Poland 2,000 
 6 Turkey 1,600 
 7 Iraq 1,600 
 8 China 1,100 

 Percentage of the population with migration background 
 Germans (without any migrant background) 90% 
 Germans of foreign origin/Foreigners 10 % 
 former Soviet background (mostly Russia, Kazakhstan, Ukraine etc.) 2% 
 Muslim/Middle Eastern background (Turkey, Arab League, Iran) 2% 
 Asian background (mostly Vietnam, China etc.) 1,5% 
 others (u. a. Poles, Yugoslavians, Romanians, Afro-Germans, Indians etc.) 4,5% 

==Culture==

===Architecture===
Palais Robach, one of the many Grnderzeit buildings in Leipzig
The historic downtown area of Leipzig features a renaissance style ensemble of buildings from the 16th century, including the old city hall in the market place. There are also several baroque period trading houses and former residences of rich merchants. As Leipzig grew considerably during the economic boom of the late 19th century, the town has many buildings in the historicist style representative of the Grnderzeit era. Approximately 35% of Leipzig's apartments are in buildings of this type. The new city hall, completed in 1905, displays the same style.

Some 64,000 apartments were built in Plattenbau buildings during the Communist rule in East Germany. der Plattenbausiedlungen in Sachsen#Leipzig] and although some of these have been demolished and the numbers living in this type of accommodation have declined in recent years, at least 10% of Leipzig's population (50,000 people) are still living in Plattenbau accommodation. in Leipzig] Grnau, for example, has approximately 40,000 people living in this sort of accommodation. Leipzig-Grnau 

The building of the St. Paul's Church was destroyed by the communists in 1968 to make room for a new main building of the university. After some debate, the city decided to establish a new, mainly secular building at the same location, called Paulinum, which was completed in 2012. Its architecture alludes to the look of the former church and it includes a room for religious use.

Many commercial buildings were built in the 1990s as a result of tax breaks after German reunification.

===Main sights===
*St. Thomas Church (Thomaskirche): Most famous as the place where Johann Sebastian Bach worked as a cantor and home to the renowned boys choir Thomanerchor
*Monument to Felix Mendelssohn in front of this church. Destroyed by the Nazis in 1936, it was rebuilt on 18 October 2008.
*St. Nicholas Church (Nikolaikirche), for which Bach was also responsible. The weekly Montagsgebet (Monday prayer) held here became in the 1980s the starting point of peaceful Monday demonstrations against the DDR regime.
*Vlkerschlachtdenkmal (Battle of the Nations Monument): one of the largest monuments in Europe, built to commemorate the victorious battle against Napoleonic troops
*Gewandhaus: home to the famous Gewandhaus Orchestra, it is the third building of that name
*Old City Hall: the old city hall was built in 1556 and houses a museum of the city's history
*New City Hall: the city's new administrative building was built upon the remains of the Pleissenburg, a castle that was the site of the 1519 debate between Johann Eck and Martin Luther
*City-Hochhaus Leipzig: built in 1972, the city's tallest building is one of the top 20 tallest buildings in Germany. Tallest building in Germany 
*Auerbach's Cellar: a young Goethe ate and drank in this basement-level restaurant while studying in Leipzig; it is the venue of a scene from his play Faust
*Bundesverwaltungsgericht: Germany's federal administrative court was the site of the Reichsgericht, the highest state court between 1888 and 1945
*The Leipzig Botanical Garden is the oldest botanical garden in Germany

Among Leipzig's noteworthy institutions are the opera house and the Leipzig Zoological Garden, the latter of which houses the world's largest zoological facilities for primates (monkey house). Leipzig's international trade fair center in the north of the city is home to the world's largest levitated glass hall. Leipzig 

File:Bundesverwaltungsgericht.jpg|Federal Administrative Court of Germany
File:Vlkerschlachtdenkmal Nacht.jpg|The Monument to the Battle of the Nations, one of the biggest monuments in Europe
File:Neues Rathaus Leipzig jpg8.jpg|New City Hall
File:Leipzig 03.jpg|Old town hall at market square
File:Opernhausleipzig445.JPG|Leipzig Opera
File:Nikolaikirche Leipzig 2009.jpg|St. Nicholas Church, Leipzig
File:Leipzig Thomaskirche.jpg|St. Thomas Church, Leipzig
File:Leipzig Hauptbahnhof Passage.jpg|Leipzig Hauptbahnhof
File:Leipzig Messe Kongresszentrum Glashalle.jpg|Leipzig Trade Fair
File:Uni Leipzig Paulinum Universittskirche St. Pauli 216-cvh.jpg|The new Augusteum and Paulinum of the University of Leipzig
File:City hochhaus leipzig.JPG|City-Hochhaus Leipzig
File:Neues Gewandhaus Leipzig 2011 Alupus.jpg|The Gewandhaus
File:Cospudener See (1) 2005-09-09.JPG|Cospudener See at Neuseenland district
File:Eroeffnung Gondwanaland Boot auf Urfluss.jpg|Inside Gondwanaland at Leipzig Zoological Garden
File:Suedfriedhof Leipzig.jpg|View over South Cemetery and the chapel complex
File:Leipzig Russische Gedaechtniskirche.jpg|Russian church in Leipzig
File:Hfe am Brhl 20120928-3.jpg|Hfe am Brhl, new shopping center near downtown
File:BibLeipzigaussen.JPG|German National Library in Leipzig
File:Alte Handelsbrse, Leipzig.jpg|Old Leipzig bourse at night
File:12-06-30-leipzig-by-ralfr-16.jpg|Tram in Leipzig with Hotel Astoria and Hotel The Westin Leipzig
File:Johannapark Leipzig.JPG|Johannapark with City-Hochhaus Leipzig and the tower of the New Town Hall (Leipzig) in the background
File:Leipzig Augustusplatz.jpg|Augustusplatz
File:Mdlerpassage Figurenpruppen Auerbachs Keller Leipzig 052-cvh.jpg|Mdlerpassage
File:Schilder an Auerbachs Keller 2013.jpg|The well known Auerbachs Keller in the Mdlerpassage
File:Johann Sebastian Bach Denkmal Leipzig.jpg|Monument of Johann Sebastian Bach
File:Grassimuseum.jpg|Grassi Museum
File:Leipzig City von Osten.jpg|View over central Leipzig

===Music===
View over Augustusplatz with the Gewandhaus, home of the world famous Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra
Johann Sebastian Bach worked in Leipzig from 1723 to 1750, conducting the St. Thomas Church Choir, at the St. Thomas Church, the St. Nicholas Church and the Paulinerkirche, the university church of Leipzig (destroyed in 1968). The composer Richard Wagner was born in Leipzig in 1813, in the Brhl. Robert Schumann was also active in Leipzig music, having been invited by Felix Mendelssohn when the latter established Germany's first musical conservatoire in the city in 1843. Gustav Mahler was second conductor (working under Artur Nikisch) at the Leipzig Theatre from June 1886 until May 1888, and achieved his first great recognition while there by completing and publishing Carl Maria von Weber's opera Die Drei Pintos, and Mahler also completed his own 1st Symphony while living there.

This conservatory is today the University of Music and Theatre Leipzig A broad range of subjects are taught, including artistic and teacher training in all orchestral instruments, voice, interpretation, coaching, piano chamber music, orchestral conducting, choir conducting and musical composition in various musical styles. The drama departments teach acting and scriptwriting.

The Bach-Archiv for documentation and research of life and work of Bach and also of the Bach family was founded in Leipzig in 1950 by Werner Neumann. The Bach-Archiv organizes the prestigious International Johann Sebastian Bach Competition, initiated in 1950 as part of a music festival marking the bicentennial of Bach's death. The competition is now held every two years in three changing categories. The Bach-Archiv also organizes performances, especially the international festival Bachfest Leipzig (de) and runs the Bach-Museum.

The city's musical tradition is also reflected in the worldwide fame of the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra under the baton of chief conductor Riccardo Chailly and the Thomas Church Choir.

The MDR Leipzig Radio Symphony Orchestra is Leipzig's second large symphony orchestra. Its current chief conductor is Kristjan Jarvi. Both the Gewandhausorchester and the MDR Leipzig Radio Symphony Orchestra reside in the Gewandhaus concert hall.

For over 60 years Leipzig has been offering a "school concert programme for children in Germany, with over 140 concerts every year in venues such as the Gewandhaus and over 40,000 children attending.

As for contemporary music, Leipzig is known for its independent music scene and subcultural events. Leipzig has for 20 years been home to the world's largest Gothic festival, the annual Wave-Gotik-Treffen (WGT), where thousands of fans of electronic music from across Europe gather in the early summer. Leipzig Pop Up is an annual music trade fair for the independent music scene as well as a music festival taking place on Pentecost weekend. Its most famous indie-labels are Moon Harbour Recordings (house) and Kann Records (House/Techno/Psychedelic). Several venues offer live music on a daily basis. is one of the oldest student clubs in Europe with concerts in various styles. For over 15 years "Tonelli's" has been offering free weekly concerts every day of the week, though door charges may apply Saturdays.

The cover photo for Beirut's 2005 album Gulag Orkestar was, according to the sleeve notes, stolen from a Leipzig library by Zach Condon.

The city of Leipzig is also known in the heavy metal community as the birthplace of Till Lindemann, best known as the lead vocalist of the band Rammstein, a band formed in 1994.

===Arts===
Leipzig Museum of Fine Arts
The city's contemporary arts highlight was the Neo Rauch retrospective opening in April 2010 at the Leipzig Museum of Fine Arts. This is a show devoted to the father of the New Leipzig School Neue Leipziger Schule (German Wikipedia entry) of artists. According to The New York Times, this scene "has been the toast of the contemporary art world" in the past decade. Furthermore, there are eleven galleries in the so-called Spinnerei,. 

The building complex of the Grassi Museum contains three more of Leipzig's major collections: the Ethnography Museum, Applied Arts Museum, and Musical Instrument Museum (the last of which is run by the University of Leipzig). The university also runs the Museum of Antiquities. 

===Annual events===
Leipzig Trade Fair
*Auto Mobil International (AMI) motor show 
*AMITEC, trade fair for vehicle maintenance, care, servicing and repairs in Germany and Central Europe 
*A cappella: vocal music festival, organized by the Ensemble amarcord
*Bach-Fest: Johann Sebastian Bach-festival
*Christmas market (since 1767)
*Dok Leipzig: international festival for documentary and animated film
*Jazztage, contemporary jazz festival
*Ladyfest Leipzig (August) Emancipatoric, feminist Punk & Electro Festival
*Leipzig Book Fair: the second largest German book fair after Frankfurt
*OPER unplugged with Music Dance Theatre by Heike Hennig & Co 
*Stadtfest: city festival
*Wave-Gotik-Treffen at Pentecost: world's largest goth or "dark culture" festival
*Leipzig Pop Up 

===Sports===
The Red Bull Arena from above
More than 300 sport clubs in the city represent 78 different disciplines. Over 400 athletic facilities are available to citizens and club members. 

The German Football Association (DFB) was founded in Leipzig in 1900. The city was the venue for the 2006 FIFA World Cup draw, and hosted four first-round matches and one match in the round of 16 in the central stadium.

VfB Leipzig, now 1. FC Lokomotive Leipzig, won the first national soccer championship in 1903. In June 2009 Red Bull entered the local market after being denied the right to buy into FC Sachsen Leipzig in 2006. The newly founded RB Leipzig is now attempting to come up through the ranks of German soccer to bring Bundesliga soccer back to the region. 

Leipzig also hosted the Fencing World Cup in 2005 and hosts a number of international competitions in a variety of sports each year.

Since the beginning of the 20th century Ice hockey gained popularity and several local clubs established departments dedicated to that sport. 

From 1950 to 1990 Leipzig was host of the Deutsche Hochschule fr Krperkultur (DHfK) (German highschool for physical culture), the national sport university of the GDR.

Handball-Club Leipzig is one of the most successful women's handball clubs in Germany, winning 20 domestic championships since 1956 and 3 Champions League titles.

Leipzig made a bid to host the 2012 Summer Olympic Games. The bid did not make the shortlist after the International Olympic Committee pared the bids down to 5.

Markkleeberg Lake (Markkleeberger See) is a new lake next to Markkleeberg, a suburb on the south side of Leipzig. A former open-pit coal mine, it was flooded in 1999 with groundwater and developed in 2006 as a tourist area. On its southeastern shore is Germany's only pump-powered artificial whitewater slalom course, Markkleeberg Canoe Park (Kanupark Markkleeberg), a venue which rivals the Eiskanal in Augsburg for training and international canoe/kayak competition.

Leipzig Rugby Club competes in the German Rugby Bundesliga but finished at the bottom of their group in 2013. Rugby Club Leipzig e.V 

===Food and drink===
*An all-season local dish is Leipziger Allerlei, a stew consisting of seasonal vegetables and crayfish.
*Leipziger Lerche is a shortcrust pastry dish filled with crushed almonds, nuts and strawberry jam; the name ("Leipzig lark") comes from a lark pt which was a Leipzig speciality until the banning of songbird hunting in Saxony in 1876.
*Gose is a locally brewed top-fermenting sour beer that originated in the Goslar region and in the 18th century became popular in Leipzig.

File:Leipziger_Lerchen.jpg|Leipziger Lerchen
File:Goseflasche Pressglas.jpg|Historical Gose bottle (ca. 1900)

==Education==
Leipzig University
Atrium of the Hochschule fr Grafik und Buchkunst Leipzig

===University===
Leipzig University, founded 1409, is one of Europe's oldest universities. The philosopher and mathematician Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz was born in Leipzig in 1646, and attended the university from 1661 to 1666. Nobel Prize laureate Werner Heisenberg worked here as a physics professor (from 1927 to 1942), as did Nobel Prize laureates Gustav Ludwig Hertz (physics), Wilhelm Ostwald (chemistry) and Theodor Mommsen (Nobel Prize in literature). Other former staff of faculty include mineralogist Georg Agricola, writer Gotthold Ephraim Lessing, philosopher Ernst Bloch, eccentric founder of psychophysics Gustav Theodor Fechner, and psychologist Wilhelm Wundt. Among the university's many noteworthy students were writers Johann Wolfgang Goethe and Erich Kstner, and philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche, political activist Karl Liebknecht, and composer Richard Wagner. Germany's chancellor since 2006, Angela Merkel, studied physics at Leipzig University. The university has about 30,000 students.

A part of Leipzig University is the German Institute for Literature which was founded in 1955 under the name "Johannes R. Becher-Institut". Many noted writers have graduated from this school, including Heinz Czechowski, Kurt Drawert, Adolf Endler, Ralph Giordano, Kerstin Hensel, Sarah and Rainer Kirsch, Angela Krau, Erich Loest, Fred Wander. After its closure in 1990 the institute was refounded in 1995 with new teachers.

===Visual arts and theatre===
The Academy of Visual Arts (Hochschule fr Grafik und Buchkunst) was established in 1764. Its 530 students (as of 2006) are enrolled in courses in painting and graphics, book design/graphic design, photography and media art. The school also houses an Institute for Theory.

The University of Music and Theatre offers a broad range of subjects ranging from training in orchestral instruments, voice, interpretation, coaching, piano chamber music, orchestral conducting, choir conducting and musical composition to acting and scriptwriting.

===University of Applied Science===
The Leipzig University of Applied Sciences (HTWK) has approximately 6,200 students (as of 2007) and is (as of 2007) the second biggest institution of higher education in Leipzig. It was founded in 1992, merging several older schools. As a university of applied sciences (German: Fachhochschule) its status is slightly below that of a university, with more emphasis on the practical part of the education. The HTWK offers many engineering courses, as well as courses in computer science, mathematics, business administration, librarianship, museum studies and social work. It is mainly located in the south of the city.

===Others===
The private Leipzig Graduate School of Management, (in German Handelshochschule Leipzig (HHL)), is the oldest business school in Germany.

Among the research institutes located in Leipzig, three belong to the Max Planck Society. These are the Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, and Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology. Two more are Fraunhofer Society institutes. Others are the Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research, part of the Helmholtz Association of German Research Centres, and the Leibniz-Institute for Tropospheric Research.

Leipzig is home to one of the world's oldest schools Thomasschule zu Leipzig (St. Thomas' School, Leipzig), which gained fame for its long association with the Bach family of musicians and composers.

==Economy==
The city is a location for automobile manufacturing by BMW and Porsche in large plants north of the city. In 2011 and 2012 DHL transferred the bulk of its European air operations from Brussels Airport to Leipzig/Halle Airport. Kirow Ardelt AG, the world market leader in breakdown cranes, is based in Leipzig. The city also houses the European Energy Exchange, the leading energy exchange in Central Europe.

Some of the largest employers in the area (outside of manufacturing) include software companies such as Spreadshirt, Unister and the various schools and universities in and around the Leipzig/Halle region. The University of Leipzig attracts millions of euros of investment yearly and is in the middle of a massive construction and refurbishment to celebrate its 600th anniversary.

Many bars, restaurants and stores found in the downtown area are patronized by German and foreign tourists. Leipzig Hauptbahnhof itself is the location of a shopping mall. 

Companies with operations in or around Leipzig include:
*Amazon
*Blthner: piano-manufacturing
*BMW
*DHL
*Porsche
*Siemens
*Future Electronics

File:Porsche Diamond.jpg|Porsche Diamond, the customer center building of Porsche Leipzig
File:BMW Leipzig MEDIA Download Luftaufnahme 3 max.jpg|BMW production facility in Leipzig
File:Amazon.de Versandhaus Leipzig.jpg|Amazon in Leipzig
File:EAT LEJ Hangar.jpg|Leipzig is the hub of DHL
File:Lhrs Carr Leipzig.JPG|Headquarters of the Sparkasse Leipzig bank

==Media==
MDR, one of Germany's public broadcasters
*MDR, one of Germany's public broadcasters, has its headquarters and main television studios in the city. It provides programmes to various TV and radio networks and has its own symphony orchestra, choir and a ballet.
*Leipziger Volkszeitung (LVZ) is the city's only daily newspaper. Founded in 1894, it has published under several different forms of government. The monthly magazine Kreuzer specializes in culture, festivities and the arts in Leipzig.Leipzig was also home to the world's first daily newspaper in modern times. The "Einkommende Zeitungen" were first published in 1650. Zeitungen] 
*Once known for its large number of publishing houses, Leipzig had been called Buch-Stadt (book city)., the most notable of them being branches of Brockhaus and Insel Verlag. Few are left after the years of economic decline during the German Democratic Republic, during which time Frankfurt developed as a much more important publishing center. Reclam, founded in 1828, was one of the large publishing houses to move away. Leipzig still has a book fair, but Frankfurt's is far bigger.
*The German Library (Deutsche Bcherei) in Leipzig is part of Germany's National Library. Its task is to collect a copy of every book published in German. German National Library 

==Transport==

===Road===
Leipzig's road network
Leipzig/Halle Airport, hub of DHL
Originally founded at the crossing of Via Regia and Via Imperii, Leipzig has been a major interchange of inter-European traffic and commerce since medieval times. After the Reunification of Germany, immense efforts to restore and expand the traffic network have been undertaken and left the city area with an excellent infrastructure.

Since 1936, Leipzig has been connected to the A 9 and A 14 autobahns via the Schkeuditzer Kreuz (Schkeuditz Cross) interchange and several exits. The A 38 completes the autobahn beltway around Leipzig since 2006.

Like most German cities, Leipzig has a traffic layout designed to be bicycle-friendly. There is an extensive cycle network. In most of the one-way central streets, cyclists are explicitly allowed to cycle both ways. A few cycle paths have been built or declared since 1990.

===Rail===
Leipzig Hauptbahnhof, opened in 1915, is at a junction of important north-to-south and west-to-east railway lines. The ICE train between Berlin and Munich stops in Leipzig and it takes approximately one hour from Berlin Hauptbahnhof and five hours from Mnchen Hauptbahnhof. 

===Air===
Leipzig/Halle Airport is the main airport in the vicinity of the city. Leipzig/Halle Airport offers a number of seasonal vacation charter flights as well as regular scheduled services. The former military airport near Altenburg, Thuringia called Leipzig-Altenburg Airport about a half-hour drive from Leipzig was previously (until 2010) served by Ryanair.

===Water===
In the first half of the 20th century, the construction of the Elster-Saale canal, White Elster and Saale was started in Leipzig in order to connect to the network of waterways. The outbreak of the Second World War stopped most of the work, though some may have continued through the use of forced labor. The Lindenauer port was almost completed but not yet connected to the Elster-Saale and Karl-Heine canal respectively. The Leipzig rivers (White Elster, New Luppe, Pleisse, and Parthe) in the city have largely artificial river beds and are supplemented by some channels. These waterways are suitable only for small leisure boat traffic.

Through the renovation and reconstruction of existing mill races and watercourses in the south of the city and flooded disused open cast mines, the city's navigable water network is being expanded. The city commissioned planning for a link between Karl Heine Canal and the disused Lindenauer port in 2008. Still more work was still scheduled to complete the Elster-Saale canal. Such a move would allow small boats to reach the Elbe from Leipzig. The intended completion date has been postponed because of an unacceptable cost-benefit ratio.

===Public transport===
Leipzig has an extensive local public transport network. The city's tram and bus network is operated by the Leipziger Verkehrsbetriebe. Leipzig's tram network, at a length of 148.3 km, is the second biggest in Germany.
Leipzig City Tunnel forms the centerpiece of an extensive S-Bahn network serving 1.2 million people in the Leipzig/Halle metropolitan area. The tunnel links the main station in the north with the Bayrische Bahnhof in the south.

File:Leipzig Hauptbahnhof.jpg|Leipzig Hauptbahnhof is the main hub of tram and rail network and the world's largest railway station by floor area
File:Leipzig NGT8D Augustusplatz.jpg|Tram of Leipziger Verkehrsbetriebe
File:Leipzig Georg-Schumann-Strasse.jpg|Tramsystem at the Georg-Schumann-Strae
File:City-Tunnel Leipzig, Bahnhof Wilhelm-Leuschner-Platz.jpg|Leipzig City Tunnel, part of Leipzig's new S-Bahn network
File:Talent 2 Leipzig.JPG|trains of the upcoming S-Bahn network

==Quotations==
Mein Leipzig lob' ich mir! Es ist ein klein Paris und bildet seine Leute. (I praise my Leipzig! It is a small Paris and educates its people.) - Frosch, a university student in Goethe's Faust, Part One

Ich komme nach Leipzig, an den Ort, wo man die ganze Welt im Kleinen sehen kann. (I'm coming to Leipzig, to the place where one can see the whole world in miniature.)  Gotthold Ephraim Lessing

Extra Lipsiam vivere est miserrime vivere. (To live outside Leipzig is to live miserably.) - Benedikt Carpzov the Younger

Das angenehme Pleis-Athen, Behlt den Ruhm vor allen, Auch allen zu gefallen, Denn es ist wunderschn. (The pleasurable Pleiss-Athens, earns its fame above all, appealing to every one, too, for it is mightily beauteous.) - Johann Sigismund Scholze

==International relations==

Plaque on Leipzig Street in Kiev, one of Leipzig's twin towns

Leipzig is twinned with: 

 
 * Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, since 2004 * Birmingham, UK, since 1992 * Bologna, Italy, since 1962, renewed in 1997 * Brno, Czech Republic, since 1973, renewed in 1999 * Frankfurt am Main, Germany, since 1990 * Hanover, Germany, since 1987 * Houston, United States, since 1993 * Kiev, Ukraine, since 1961, renewed in 1992 * Lyon, France, since 1981 * Nanjing, China, since 1988 * Plovdiv, Bulgaria, since 1975, renewed in 2007 * Thessaloniki, Greece, since 1984 * Travnik, Bosnia and Herzegovina, since 2003 * Herzliya, Israel, since 2010 * So Paulo, Brazil, since 2014 

===Partnerships===

 
 * Krakw, Poland, since 1973, renewed in 1995 

==See also==

* Ubiquity Theatre Company - English speaking theatre projects in Leipzig.
*Leipzig Human Rights Award
*List of mayors of Leipzig
*Hugo Schneider AG
* Leipzig University Library
*Leipzig Jewish community
*Battle of Breitenfeld (1642)

==References==
;Notes

*The city's official website
*
*Leipzig as virtual city 408 Points of Interest - English
*Ubiquity Theatre Company, - English language theatre projects in Leipzig
*Leipzig Zeitgeist, an English magazine about Leipzig
*This is Leipzig, an English web site for Leipzig
*

 



[[LimeWire]]

LimeWire was a free peer-to-peer file sharing (P2P) client program that ran on Windows, Mac OS X, Linux, and other operating systems supported by the Java software platform. LimeWire used the gnutella network as well as the BitTorrent protocol. A freeware version and a purchasable "enhanced" version were available. BitTorrent support is provided by libtorrent.

On October 26, 2010, U.S. federal court judge Kimba Wood issued an injunction forcing LimeWire to prevent "the searching, downloading, uploading, file trading and/or file distribution functionality, and/or all functionality" of its software in Arista Records LLC v. Lime Group LLC. A trial investigating the damages necessary to compensate the affected record labels was scheduled to begin in January 2011. As a result of the injunction, LimeWire 5.5.11 and newer have been disabled using a backdoor installed by the company. However, version 5.5.10 and all prior versions of LimeWire remain fully functional and cannot be disabled unless a user upgrades to one of the newer versions. The program has been "resurrected" by the creators of LimeWire Pirate Edition. 

== Features ==
Written in the Java programming language, LimeWire is able to run on any computer with a Java Virtual Machine installed. Installers were provided for Apple's Mac OS X, Microsoft's Windows, and Linux. Support for Mac OS 9 and other previous versions was dropped with the release of LimeWire 4.0.10. From version 4.8 onwards, LimeWire works as a UPnP Internet Gateway Device controller in that it can automatically set up packet-forwarding rules with UPnP-capable routers.

LimeWire offers the sharing of its library through the Digital Audio Access Protocol (DAAP). As such when LimeWire is running and configured to allow it, any files shared will be detectable and downloaded on the local network by DAAP-enabled devices (e.g., Zune, iTunes). Beginning with LimeWire 4.13.9, connections can be encrypted with Transport Layer Security (TLS). Following LimeWire 4.13.11, TLS became the default connection option. 

== Version history ==
Until October 2010, Lime Wire LLC, the New York City based developer of LimeWire, distributed two versions of the program: a basic free version, and an enhanced version, LimeWire PRO, sold for a fee of US$21.95 with 6 months of updates, or $34.95 with 1 year of updates. Lime Wire PRO. The company claimed the paid version provides faster downloads and 66% better search results. This is accomplished by facilitating direct connection with up to 10 hosts of an identical searched file at any one time, whereas the free version is limited to a maximum of 8 hosts. Lime Wire Download LimeWire. 

Being free software, LimeWire has spawned forks, including LionShare, an experimental software development project at Penn State University, and Acquisition, a Mac OS X-based gnutella client with a proprietary interface. Researchers at Cornell University developed a reputation management add-in called Credence that allows users to distinguish between "genuine" and "suspect" files before downloading them. An October 12, 2005 report states that some of LimeWire's free and open source software contributors have forked the project and called it FrostWire. "FrostWire Beta Released", from Slyck.com. 

LimeWire was the second file sharing program after Frostwire to support firewall-to-firewall file transfers, a feature introduced in version 4.2, which was released in November 2004. LimeWire also now includes BitTorrent support, but is limited to three torrent uploads and three torrent downloads, which coexist with ordinary downloads. As of LimeWire 5.0, an instant messenger has been added which uses the XMPP Protocol, an open source communication protocol. Users can now chat and share files with individuals or a group of friends in their buddy list.

From version 5.5.1, LimeWire has added a key activation, which requires the user to enter the unique key before activation the "Pro" version of the software. This has stopped people from illegally downloading the "Pro" versions. However, there are still ways to bypass this security feature, which was done when creating the pirate edition. For example, there are currently cracks available on the internet, and people can continue using the LimeWire Pro 5.5.1 Beta, which also includes AVG for LimeWire and is the first version to include AVG. The most recent stable version of LimeWire is 5.5.16.

Versions of LimeWire prior to 5.5.10 can still connect to the Gnutella network and users of these versions are still able to download files, even though a message is displayed concerning the injunction during the startup process of the software. LimeWire versions 5.5.11 and newer feature an auto-update feature that allowed Lime Wire LLC to disable newer versions of the LimeWire software. Older versions of LimeWire prior to version 5.5.11, however, do not include the auto-update feature and are still fully functional. As a result, neither the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) nor Lime Wire LLC have the ability to disable older versions of LimeWire, unless the user chooses to upgrade to a newer version of LimeWire. 

On November 10, 2010, a secret group of developers called the "Secret Dev Team" sought to keep the application working by releasing the "LimeWire Pirate Edition". The software is based on LimeWire 5.6 Beta, and is aimed to allow Windows versions to still work and remove the threat of spyware or adware. The exclusive features in LimeWire PRO were also unlocked, and all security features installed by Lime Wire LLC were removed. Andrew Lyle. LimeWire resurrected by Secret Dev Team. Neowin.net. Retrieved November 10, 2010. (archive) enigmax. Torrentfreak %28Torrentfreak%29 LimeWire Resurrected By Secret Dev Team. TorrentFreak. Retrieved November 10, 2010. (archive) 

== Forks and alternatives ==
A number of forks from LimeWire have appeared, with the goal of giving users more freedom, or objecting to decisions made by LimeWire LLC they disagreed with.

=== FrostWire ===

FrostWire was started in September 2004 by members of the LimeWire open source community, after LimeWire's distributor considered adding "blocking" code, in response to RIAA pressure and the threat of legal action, in light of the U.S. Supreme Court's decision in MGM Studios, Inc. v. Grokster, Ltd.. When eventually activated, the code could block its users from sharing licensed files. This code was recently changed when lawsuits had been filed against LimeWire for P2P downloading. It had blocked all their users and redirected them to FrostWire. FrostWire has since completely moved to the BitTorrent protocol from Gnutella (LimeWire's file sharing network).

=== LimeWire Pirate Edition ===

In November 2010, as a response to the legal challenges regarding LimeWire, an anonymous individual by the handle of Meta Pirate released a modified version of LimeWire Pro, which was entitled LimeWire Pirate Edition. It came without the Ask.com toolbar, advertising, spyware, and backdoors, as well as all dependencies on LimeWire LLC servers. 

In response to allegations that a current or former member of Lime Wire LLC staff wrote and released the software, the company has stated that: "is not behind these efforts. LimeWire does not authorize them. LimeWire is complying with the Courts October 26, 2010 injunction." 

The LimeWire team, after being accused by the RIAA of being complicit in the development of LimeWire Pirate Edition, swiftly acted to shut down the LimeWire Pirate Edition website. A court order was issued to close down the website, and, to remain anonymous, Meta Pirate, the developer of LimeWire PE, did not contest the order. 

== Criticism ==
On February 15, 2010, LimeWire reversed its previous anti-bundling stance and announced the inclusion of an Ask.com-powered browser toolbar which must be explicitly opted-out to prevent installation. Limewire Blog The toolbar sends web and bittorrent searches to Ask.com, and LimeWire searches to an instance of LimeWire on the user's machine.

In LimeWire versions before 5.0, users could accidentally configure the software to allow access to any file on their computer, including documents with personal information. Recent versions of LimeWire do not allow unintentional sharing of documents or applications. In 2005, the US Federal Trade Commission issued a consumer warning regarding the dangers of using peer-to-peer file sharing networks, stating that using such networks can lead to identity theft and lawsuits. On May 5, 2009, a P2P industry spokesman represented Lime Wire and others at a U.S. House of Representatives legislative hearing on H.R. 1319, "The Informed P2P User Act." http://dcia.info/documents/testimony/5-5%20DCIA%20WrittenTestimony.pdf 

One investigation showed that of 123 randomly selected downloaded files, 37 contained malware  about 30%. PC Pro Magazine, September 2008 issue, p. 109. In mid-2008, a Macintosh trojan exploiting a vulnerability involving Apple Remote Desktop was distributed via LimeWire affecting users of Mac OS X Tiger and Leopard. Firms discover Trojan horse targeted at Mac OS X. The ability to distribute such malware and viruses has also been reduced in versions of LimeWire 5.0 and greater, with the program defaulting to not share or search for executable files.

Prior to April 2004, the free version of LimeWire was distributed with a bundled program called LimeShop (a variant of TopMoxie), which was spyware. Among other things, LimeShop monitored online purchases in order to redirect sales commissions to Lime Wire LLC. Uninstallation of LimeWire would not remove LimeShop. With the removal of all bundled software in LimeWire 3.9.4 (released on April 20, 2004), these objections were addressed. Lime Wire Features History. LimeWire currently has a facility that allows its server to contact a running LimeWire client and gather various information. 

An identity theft scheme involving LimeWire was discovered in Denver in 2006. Police: File sharing key to ID theft scheme By Howard Pankratz. Denver Post, October 27, 2006. On September 7, 2007, Gregory Thomas Kopiloff of Seattle was arrested in what the U.S. Justice Department described as its first case against someone accused of using file sharing computer programs to commit identity theft. According to federal prosecutors, Kopiloff used LimeWire to search other people's computers for inadvertently shared financial information and then used it to obtain credit cards for an online shopping spree. U.S. arrest puts spotlight on file-sharing risk. 

LimeWire automatically receives a cryptographically signed file, called simpp.xml, containing an IP block list. Blocking certain IPs has become commonplace and even considered essential in P2P filesharing.

== Injunction ==
According to a June 2005 report in The New York Times, Lime Wire LLC was considering ceasing its distribution of LimeWire because the outcome of MGM v. Grokster "handed a tool to judges that they can declare inducement whenever they want to." 

On May 12, 2010, Judge Kimba Wood of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York ruled in Arista Records LLC v. Lime Group LLC that LimeWire and its creator, Mark Gorton, had committed copyright infringement, engaged in unfair competition, and induced others to commit copyright infringement. On October 26, 2010, LimeWire was ordered to disable the "searching, downloading, uploading, file trading and/or file distribution functionality" after losing a court battle with the RIAA over claims of copyright infringement. The RIAA also announced intentions to pursue legal action over the damages caused by the program in January to compensate the affected record labels. In retaliation, the RIAA's website was taken offline on October 29 via denial-of-service attacks executed by members of Operation Payback and Anonymous. 

In response to the ruling, a company spokesperson said that the company is not shutting down, but will be using its "best efforts" to cease distributing and supporting P2P software. 

In early 2011, the RIAA announced their intention to sue LimeWire, pursuing a statutory damages theory that claimed up to $72 trillion in damages a sum greater than the current GDP of the entire global economy. There are currently around 11,000 songs on LimeWire that have been tagged as copyright-infringed, and the RIAA estimates that each one has been downloaded thousands of times, the penalties accruing to the above sum. Purewal, Sarah Jacobsson. "RIAA Thinks LimeWire Owes $75 Trillion in Damages", PCWorld.com, March 26, 2011, accessed April 9, 2011. 

A trial to decide on the eventual amount of damages owed by Limewire to thirteen record labels, including Warner Music Group and Sony Music, all of which are represented by the RIAA, started early in May and went on until on May 13, 2011, when Gorton agreed to pay the 13 record companies $105 million in an out-of-court settlement.

Mitch Bainwol, chairman of the RIAA, referred to the "resolution of the case another milestone in the continuing evolution of online music to a legitimate marketplace that appropriately rewards creators." 

== See also ==

* Comparison of file sharing applications
* Open Music Model

=== Similar court rulings ===
* AllOfMP3
* Kazaa
* Mininova
* Napster

== References ==

== Sources ==
* 
* 

== External links ==

* 
* A PDF record Judge Kimba Wood's 2010 injunction
* 10 Alternatives to LimeWire, Zeropaid.com
* LimeWire Resurrected By Secret Dev Team, TorrentFreak



[[Latveria]]

Flag of Latveria
Latveria is a fictional nation in the . It is depicted within the storylines of Marvel's comic titles as an isolated European country ruled by the fictional supervillain Doctor Doom, supposedly located in the Banat region. It is surrounded by the Carpathian Mountains, and also borders Symkaria (home of Silver Sable) to the south. Its capital is Doomstadt.

==Publication history==
Latveria first appeared in Fantastic Four Annual #2, published in 1962. Victor von Doom is the ruler of Latveria. Though he has been dethroned a number of times, Victor has inevitably managed to return to the throne of his country within a matter of months. 

Victor also has a council who obey him entirely. In Fantastic Four #536 in 2006, he killed his own Prime Minister for claiming control of Latveria in his absence, and threatened to kill two other ministers if they failed to find the landing spot of Thor's hammer.

Doctor Doom's style of rule can best be described as an absolute monarchy, as it was revealed that there is no legislature, and one minister boasted "Doctor Doom decides everything. His slightest whim is Latverian law!" It is shown Doom has devices throughout the Kingdom to watch his people and even has hidden weapons to prevent them leaving without his consent. In one story he is able to activate a force field around Latveria which prevents anybody leaving, though apparently it can be a defense against nuclear attack. (Avengers vol 1 #21)

==History==
Latveria was formed out of land annexed from southern Hungary centuries before, and possibly land from Serbia as well. Fantastic Four #504 

===Latveria under the Fantastic Four===
Due to Doom's constant activities that drive him away from Latveria, the monarch is often absent. After Doom's descent into Hell, the nation became a target for conquest by the neighboring countries. This forces Reed Richards to seize control of the country, attempting to pry the populace out from under the thumb of Doom, while at the same time disarming all of Doom's weaponry and technology, so if he ever returned, he would come back to absolutely nothing. In the process, Richards relocated Doom from Hell into a pocket dimension of his own design, and although Doom used his consciousness-switching abilities to escape, the death of his host body seemingly caused him to die as well, and the Fantastic Four pulled out of the country.

However Doom survives this and rules Latveria for a time with a 'puppet' Prime Minister and robotic enforcers.

===Series of takeovers===
After the Fantastic Four left, the United States attempted to fill the void left by Doom by establishing a democracy for the nation. The Countess Lucia von Bardas was elected as Prime Minister. However, when it was revealed that von Bardas was employing the Tinkerer to use Doom's technology to arm various tech-based villains in the United States, S.H.I.E.L.D. Commander Nick Fury took action.

During Secret War, Fury and a number of superheroes invaded Latveria without permission of the US Government and attempted to assassinate von Bardas. While von Bardas survived, she was horribly disfigured and sought to destroy Fury and the heroes responsible. She was killed by S.H.I.E.L.D. Agent Daisy Johnson while trying to blow up New York with the armor of the various villains she employed.

===Country-wide disasters===
Much of Latveria was destroyed and the population severely reduced by an attack executed by the Marquis of Death (aka "Dooms Master"). 

S.H.I.E.L.D., under the leadership of Iron Man and his team of U.S. sanctioned Avengers invaded Latveria after discovering Doom's involvement in the release of a symbiote virus on New York. The country was yet again devastated and Doom was taken into custody for crimes against humanity. The Mighty Avengers #7-12 (2007) 

Doom is released from prison due to the influence of H.A.M.M.E.R director Norman Osborn. He restores his nation with the use of his time travel technology. Dark Avengers #4 (2009) 

===Avengers Vs. X-Men===
During the Avengers vs. X-Men storyline, Spider-Man fights against a Juggernaut-empowered Colossus here. AVX Vs #2 

==Statistics==
The common geographic description of Latveria places it as a small nation, around the area where Hungary, Romania and Serbia (Vojvodina) meet in real life. To its south in the Marvel universe is the nation of Symkaria, which is depicted as a benevolent constitutional monarchy in contrast to the dictatorship to its north. The capital city of Latveria is Doomstadt, formerly Hassenstadt, renamed when Doom seized power, located just north of the Kline River. The administrative center is Castle Doom.

* Population: 500,000 (This is an approximation since the government of Latveria has not allowed an outside census in over 20 years)
* Type of Government: Dictatorship (Victor von Doom prefers to call this an "enforced monarchy")
* Languages: German, Hungarian, English, Latverian (local dialect, derivative of Hungarian), Romany.
* Ethnic Groups: Mixed European stock, Roma, Greek.
* Major Business Centers: None
* Currency: Latverian Franc
* Public Holidays: Doom's Day, Christmas, New Year (Note: Doom's Day is an eclectic holiday, celebrated whenever Doom declares it. It is different from Doomsday)
* Airports: The only airport for the country, Doomsport, lies on the southern outskirts of Doomstadt. It maintains two runways and a modern terminal, but flights into and out of Doomsport are quite limited.

===Cities and Towns===
* Doomsburg -
* Doomsdale -
* Doomstadt - The capital of Latveria.
* Doomsvale -
* Doomton -
* Doomwood -

====Points of Interest====
* Boar's Vale -
* Castle Doom -
* Citadel of Doom -
* Cynthia Von Doom Memorial Park -
* Doom Falls -
* Doomsport Airport - The only airport in Latveria, which is located south of Doomstadt.
* Doomstadt Rail Station -
* Doomstadt Rathauz -
* Doomwood Forest -
* Folding City -
* Lanzarini Temple -
* Heroic Andrew Boulevard -
* Kron Victory Swad -
* Latverian Academy of the Science -
* Latverian Southern Border -
* Monument Park -
* Mount Sorcista - A demon sorceress named Pandemonia lives here.
* Mount Victorum -
* Old Town of Doomstadt - It is located in Doomstadt and overlooked by Castle Doom.
* St. Blaise Church -
* St. Peter Church -
* Werner Academy -

===Demographics===
The population consists of mixed European stock and Gypsies, in whose welfare von Doom takes a particular interest.

===Law enforcement===
Because it lacks a native superhero populace, Latveria relies largely on Dooms' robot sentinels called Doombots to keep law and order. One of the few known Latverian superhumans is Dreadknight, whom Doom himself created by punishing Dreadknight's alter ego for hoarding an idea from him. Dreadknight has since tried to get revenge on Doctor Doom only to be thwarted by various superheroes.

==Known inhabitants==
* Doctor Doom - The current ruler of Latveria.
* Alexander Flynn - The alleged mutant son of Doctor Doom and an unidentified gypsy lady.
* Arturo Frazen - He was installed as Latveria's ambassador during the temporary reign of Prince Zorba Fortunov.
* Baron Karl Hassen - He was the ruler of Latveria during the 14th Century.
* Baron Karl Hassen III - He was part of Latveria's royalty sometime before Doctor Doom became Latveria's ruler.
* Boris - Doctor Doom's Zefiro guardian since childhood and closest confidant.
* Count Sabbat - He was part of Latveria's royalty during the 15th Century.
* Cristos Malachi - A one-time member of Doctor Doom's Zefiro Gypsy Clan. He served as the Zefiro Gypsy Clan's fortune-teller.
* Cynthia Von Doom - The mother of Doctor Doom.
* Daniel Kurtz - A one-time classmate of Doctor Doom. He lost an eye during Victor's experiment which involved contacting his mother.
* Djordji Zindelo Hungaro - The Zefiro mystic who trained Cynthia Von Doom in the mystic arts.
* Editor - He was tasked with rewriting Latverian history to conform with Doctor Doom's world view.
* Fydor Gittrlsohn - One of Doctor Doom's chief scientists.
* Gert Hauptmann - One of Doctor Doom's chief scientists and the brother of Gustav Hauptmann. His attempt at betrayal led to his death at the hands of Doctor Doom.
* Gustav Hauptmann - One of Doctor Doom's chief scientists. He was a former Nazi that worked for Adolf Hitler and Red Skull. When the flamethrower that Gustav was using to attack Mister Fantastic with nearly endangered his art collection, Doctor Doom reversed the sonic weapon he planned to use on the Fantastic Four and ended up using it to kill Gustav Hauptmann.
* Gustav von Kampen - A one-time member of Doctor Doom's Zefiro Gypsy Clan.
* Gustav van Erven - A Latverian refugee living on Brazil on Doctor Doom 2099 timeline.
* Hans Stutgart - A Latverian agent who is living in the United States.
* Jakob Gorzenk - He serves as the chief ambassador to the United States.
* King Rudolfo I - He ruled Latveria sometime before Doctor Doom became Latveria's ruler.
* King Stefan - He ruled Latveria sometime before Doctor Doom became Latveria's ruler.
* King Vladimir Vassily Gonereo Tristian Mangegi Fortunov - The tyrannical ruler of Latveria who was extremely harsh to the gypsies that lived on the borders. He was killed by Doctor Doom.
* Kristoff Vernard - The adopted son of Doctor Doom. His mother was killed by a robot that was used by Prince Zorba Fortunov.
* Kroft Family - A family of vampire hunters that existed from the 16th Century to the 19th Century.
** Kurt Kroft -
** Leo Kroft -
** Oscar Kroft -
** Pietro Kroft -
** Stefan Kroft -
** Wilhelm Kroft -
* Larin - A Tibetan Monk who helped to construct Doctor Doom's first armor.
* Lucia von Bardas - The Prime Minister of Latveria.
* Mengo Brothers - A pair of international mercenaries.
** Grigori Mengochuzcraus -
** Stanislaus Mengochuzcraus -
* Otto Kronsteig - One of Doctor Doom's chief scientists.
* Prince Rudolfo Fortunov - The former crown prince of Latveria before his family was ousted by Doctor Doom.
* Prince Zorba Fortunov - The former prince of Latveria and brother of Rudolfo. He once reclaimed the throne to Latveria when the Fantastic Four had defeated Doctor Doom. With the help of the Fantastic Four, Doctor Doom was able to reclaim his throne.
* Robert Doom - The distant cousin of Doctor Doom.
* Torvalt - A one-time member of Doctor Doom's Zefiro Gypsy Clan.
* Tristian de Sabbat -
* Valeria - The teenage love of Doctor Doom's life who is the granddaughter of Boris. Her life was sacrificed to the Haazareth Three (a group of demons) by Doctor Doom.
* Vlad Draasen - He was a member of Latveria's royalty during the 15th Century.
* Werner Von Doom - A talented doctor of the Zefiro Gypsy Tribe and father of Doctor Doom.

==Other versions==
===Marvel 1602===
In the Marvel 1602 storyline, Latveria is ruled by Count Otto von Doom, also known as Otto the Handsome. It is inhabited by mythical beings, and Latveria experiments on intricate clockwork devices, one of which was used to kill Queen Elizabeth I of England. The native language appears to bear a close resemblance to modern German.

===Marvel 2099===
In the alternate future called "Marvel 2099", various power struggles over the fate of Latveria end with most of the country destroyed by nanites.

===Marvel Zombies===
In the Marvel Zombies storyline, Latveria is one of the last few outposts of humanity, as Doctor Doom gathers up the fittest and most fertile of the Latverian survivors in order to send them off to other dimensions. An army of super-zombies lay siege to Doom's castle and eventually break inside. Despite this and Doom himself being bitten, all the Latverian citizens successfully escape.

===Ultimate Marvel===
Latveria was introduced as a bankrupt peasant nation, but thanks to Doctor Doom it was made the ninth richest country on Earth. The townsfolk wear Doom's dragon tattoos as backup, the tattoos being far more than they seem, should anything ever happen to him. Where this Latveria lies is unclear but there are Belgian Flags on display in the background in the one picture displayed of Latveria.

In Ultimate Marvel Team-Up, Latveria was presented as an impoverished dictatorial theocracy, under "his holiness" President Victor von Doom (wearing his traditional Marvel armour and cloak). They attempted, in collusion with the United States via Nick Fury, to steal the Iron Man technology from Tony Stark; this fails, partly due to the intervention of Spider-Man. At some point, however, Doom declared a holy war on the United States, creating tensions between two countries. Ultimate Marvel Team-Up #4 Ultimate Marvel Team-Up #14 This would be ignored and retconned away in later Ultimate Marvel titles.

==In other media==
===Television===
* Latveria appears in the 1994 Fantastic Four TV series.

* Latveria appears in The Super Hero Squad Show episode "Pedicure of Doom." Doctor Doom, MODOK, and Abomination fall back to Castle Doom only to find that Doctor Doom's mother Cynthia "Coco" Von Doom had converted it into a spa with Chthon's help.

* Latveria is mentioned in the episode "The Might of Doom."

* Latveria appears in episode "The Private War of Doctor Doom."

* Latveria appears in the Ultimate Spider-Man episode "Doomed." Spider-Man, Power Man, Iron Fist, Nova, and White Tiger head to Latveria in order to capture Doctor Doom as part of their plan to impress Nick Fury. The Latverian Embassy appears in the episode "Not a Toy" when Captain America's shield ends up in the Latverian Embassy and that Spider-Man must work with Captain America to get it back before Doctor Doom can experiment with it.

===Film===
* In the Fantastic Four film, Latveria is mentioned initially in reference to Victor Von Doom's past and is described as "the old country", possibly indicating his birth there. After "The End" has appeared, Von Doom's incarcerated body is shown on board a ship bound for Latveria. Also during the scene where he first dons his trademark metal mask, a plaque can be seen declaring it as a gift to Doom from the people of Latveria.

* In the sequel , Doom is reawakened in his castle by the Silver Surfer's passage through Latveria. The capital's name has been changed from "Doomstadt" to "Hattenstadt".

===Video games===
* In the 1980s computer game Accolade's Comics the protagonist Steve Keene is offered tickets to the Latverian Ballet.

* In (2000 video game)|Spider-Man: The Game], a billboard can be seen in the first level advertising tourism in Latvania, a misspelling of Latveria.

* Latveria is referred to in the Spider-Man 2 video game when J. Jonah Jameson says that a Latverian diplomat is landing at the United Nations building by helicopter, although circumstances force the player to miss sighting any such diplomat.

* In the Ultimate Spider-Man video game, the Beetle was reported to have ducked into the Latverian Embassy after evading Spider-Man. In the special edition of the game, the player can look at concept art that shows what happens to Beetle after his confrontation with Spider-Man. He flies into the embassy and walks up to a throne, kneels down, and presents the Sandman vial to Doctor Doom in some plot to develop super-soldiers for Latveria. Later on in the game, the Green Goblin is later seen escaping from the Latverian Embassy.
* In , Castle Doom in Latveria is a level. If the player asks about Latveria to Vision, he mentions that there is barely any crime there since Doctor Doom's robots are always patrolling the country.

* The Latverian Embassy is featured in The Incredible Hulk video game.

* Latveria is featured in . The first part of the game is based on the Secret War storyline. Nick Fury leads the heroes to Latveria to deal with Lucia von Bardas after the President does not want to take action against her illegal activities.

* The Latverian Embassy is featured in .

==References==

==External links==

* Latveria at Marvel.com
* Latveria at Marvel Wiki
* Article on History of Latveria



[[Least common multiple]]

LCMs of numbers 0 through 10. Line labels = first number. X axis = second number. Y axis = LCM.

In arithmetic and number theory, the least common multiple (also called the lowest common multiple or smallest common multiple) of two integers a and b, usually denoted by LCM(a, b), is the smallest positive integer that is divisible by both a and b. Hardy & Wright,  5.1, p. 48 Since division of integers by zero is undefined, this definition has meaning only if a and b are both different from zero. However, some authors define lcm(a,0) as 0 for all a, which is the result of taking the lcm to be the least upper bound in the lattice of divisibility.

The LCM is familiar from grade-school arithmetic as the "least common denominator" (LCD) that must be determined before fractions can be added, subtracted or compared.

The LCM of more than two integers is also well-defined: it is the smallest integer that is divisible by each of them.

== Overview ==

A multiple of a number is the product of that number and an integer. For example, 10 is a multiple of 5 because 5  2 = 10, so 10 is divisible by 5 and 2. Because 10 is the smallest positive integer that is divisible by both 5 and 2, it is the least common multiple of 5 and 2. By the same principle, 10 is the least common multiple of 5 and 2 as well.

=== Notation ===

In this article we will denote the least common multiple of two integers a and b as lcm( a, b ). Some older textbooks use [ a, b ]. 

=== Example ===

What is the LCM of 4 and 6?

Doubly even numbers are:

: 4, 8, 12, 16, 20, 24, 28, 32, 36, 40, 44, 48, 52, 56, 60, 64, 68, 72, 76, 80, 84, 88, 92, 96, 100, 104, 108, 112, 116, 120, 124, 128, 132, 136, 140, 144...

and the even multiples of 3 are:

: 6, 12, 18, 24, 30, 36, 42, 48, 54, 60, 66, 72, 78, 84, 90, 96, 102, 108, 114, 120, 126, 132, 138, 144...

Common multiples of 4 and 6 are simply the numbers that are in both lists:

: 12, 24, 36, 48, 60, 72, 84, 96, 108, 120, 132, 144....

So, from this list of the first few common multiples of the numbers 4 and 6, their least common multiple is 12.

2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18 and 20 (including 20) are all even numbers below 20.

4, 8, 12, 16, 20, 24, 28, 32, 36 and 40 (including 40) are all doubly even numbers below 40.

6, 12, 18, 24, 30, 36, 42, 48, 54 and 60 (including 60) are all even multiples of 3 below 60.

8, 16, 24, 32, 40, 48, 56, 64, 72 and 80 (including 80) are all quadruple even numbers below 80.

10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90 and 100 (including 100) are all even multiples of 5 below 100.

=== Applications ===

When adding, subtracting, or comparing vulgar fractions, it is useful to find the least common multiple of the denominators, often called the lowest common denominator, because each of the fractions can be expressed as a fraction with this denominator. For instance,

:

where the denominator 42 was used because it is the least common multiple of 21 and 6.

== Computing the least common multiple ==

=== Reduction by the greatest common divisor ===
The following formula reduces the problem of computing the least common multiple to the problem of computing the greatest common divisor (GCD), also known as the greatest common factor:

:

This formula is also valid when exactly one of a and b is 0, since gcd(a, 0) = |a|. (However, if both a and b are 0, this formula would cause division by zero; lcm(0, 0) = 0 is a special case.

There are fast algorithms for computing the GCD that do not require the numbers to be factored, such as the Euclidean algorithm. To return to the example above,

:

Because gcd(a, b) is a divisor of both a and b, it's more efficient to compute the LCM by dividing before multiplying:

:

This reduces the size of one input for both the division and the multiplication, and reduces the required storage needed for intermediate results (overflow in the a&times;b computation). Because gcd(a, b) is a divisor of both a and b, the division is guaranteed to yield an integer, so the intermediate result can be stored in an integer. Done this way, the previous example becomes:

:

=== Finding least common multiples by prime factorization ===

The unique factorization theorem says that every positive integer greater than 1 can be written in only one way as a product of prime numbers. The prime numbers can be considered as the atomic elements which, when combined together, make up a composite number.

For example:

:

Here we have the composite number 90 made up of one atom of the prime number 2, two atoms of the prime number 3 and one atom of the prime number 5.

This knowledge can be used to find the LCM of a set of numbers.

Example: Find the value of lcm(8,9,21).

First, factor out each number and express it as a product of prime number powers.
:
:
:

The lcm will be the product of multiplying the highest power of each prime number together. The highest power of the three prime numbers 2, 3, and 7 is 23, 32, and 71, respectively. Thus,

:

This method is not as efficient as reducing to the greatest common divisor, since there is no known general efficient algorithm for integer factorization, but is useful for illustrating concepts.

This method can be illustrated using a Venn diagram as follows. Find the prime factorization of each of the two numbers. Put the prime factors into a Venn diagram with one circle for each of the two numbers, and all factors they share in common in the intersection. To find the LCM, just multiply all of the prime numbers in the diagram.

Here is an example:

: 48 = 2 &times; 2 &times; 2 &times; 2 &times; 3,
: 180 = 2 &times; 2 &times; 3 &times; 3 &times; 5,

and what they share in common is two "2"s and a "3":

:400px

: Least common multiple = 2 &times; 2 &times; 2 &times; 2 &times; 3 &times; 3 &times; 5 = 720
: Greatest common divisor = 2 &times; 2 &times; 3 = 12

This also works for the greatest common divisor (GCD), except that instead of multiplying all of the numbers in the Venn diagram, one multiplies only the prime factors that are in the intersection. Thus the GCD of 48 and 180 is 2 &times; 2 &times; 3 = 12.

===A simple algorithm===

This method works as easily for finding the LCM of several integers.

Let there be a finite sequence of positive integers X = (x1, x2, ..., x'n), n > 1. The algorithm proceeds in steps as follows: on each step m it examines and updates the sequence X(m) = (x1(m), x2(m), ..., x'n(m)), X(1) = X, where X(m) is the mth iteration of X, i.e. X at step m of the algorithm, etc. The purpose of the examination is to pick the least (perhaps, one of many) element of the sequence X(m). Assuming x'k0(m) is the selected element, the sequence X(m+1) is defined as

: x'k(m+1) = x'k(m), k  k0
: x'k0(m+1) = x'k0(m) + x'k0.

In other words, the least element is increased by the corresponding x whereas the rest of the elements pass from X(m) to X(m+1) unchanged.

The algorithm stops when all elements in sequence X(m) are equal. Their common value L is exactly LCM(X). (For a proof and an interactive simulation see reference below, Algorithm for Computing the LCM.)

===A method using a table===

This method works for any number of factors. One begins by listing all of the numbers vertically in a table (in this example 4, 7, 12, 21, and 42):

: 4
: 7
: 12
: 21
: 42

The process begins by dividing all of the factors by 2. If any of them divides evenly, write 2 at the top of the table and the result of division by 2 of each factor in the space to the right of each factor and below the 2. If a number does not divide evenly, just rewrite the number again. If 2 does not divide evenly into any of the numbers, try 3.

 x 2 
 4 2 
 7 7 
 12 6 
 21 21 
 42 21 

Now, check if 2 divides again:

 x 2 2 
 4 2 1 
 7 7 7 
 12 6 3 
 21 21 21 
 42 21 21 

Once 2 no longer divides, divide by 3. If 3 no longer divides, try 5 and 7. Keep going until all of the numbers have been reduced to 1.

 x 2 2 3 7 
 4 2 1 1 1 
 7 7 7 7 1 
 12 6 3 1 1 
 21 21 21 7 1 
 42 21 21 7 1 

Now, multiply the numbers on the top and you have the LCM. In this case, it is 2 &times; 2 &times; 3 &times; 7 = 84. You will get to the LCM the quickest if you use prime numbers and start from the lowest prime, 2.

==Formulas==

===Fundamental theorem of arithmetic===

According to the fundamental theorem of arithmetic a positive integer is the product of prime numbers, and, except for their order, this representation is unique:

:

where the exponents n2, n3, ... are non-negative integers; for example, 84 = 22 31 50 71 110 130 ...

Given two integers and their least common multiple and greatest common divisor are given by the formulas

:
and
:

Since
:
this gives
:

In fact, any rational number can be written uniquely as the product of primes if negative exponents are allowed. When this is done, the above formulas remain valid. Using the same examples as above:
:

:

:

===Lattice-theoretic===

The positive integers may be partially ordered by divisibility: if a divides b (i.e. if b is an integer multiple of a) write a  b (or equivalently, b  a). (Forget the usual magnitude-based definition of  in this section - it isn't used.)

Under this ordering, the positive integers become a lattice with meet given by the gcd and join given by the lcm. The proof is straightforward, if a bit tedious; it amounts to checking that lcm and gcd satisfy the axioms for meet and join. Putting the lcm and gcd into this more general context establishes a duality between them:

:If a formula involving integer variables, gcd, lcm,  and  is true, then the formula obtained by switching gcd with lcm and switching  with  is also true. (Remember  is defined as divides).

The following pairs of dual formulas are special cases of general lattice-theoretic identities.

 ;Commutative laws : : ;Associative laws : : ;Absorption laws: : : 

 ;Idempotent laws : :. ;Define divides in terms of lcm and gcd : : 

It can also be shown The next three formulas are from Landau, Ex. III.3, p. 254 that this lattice is distributive, i.e. that lcm distributes over gcd and, dually, that gcd distributes over lcm:

:
:

This identity is self-dual:
:

===Other===

Let D be the product of &omega;(D) distinct prime numbers (i.e. D is squarefree).

Then Crandall & Pomerance, ex. 2.4, p. 101. 

:

where the absolute bars || denote the cardinality of a set.

== The LCM in commutative rings ==
The least common multiple can be defined generally over commutative rings as follows: Let a and b be elements of a commutative ring R. A common multiple of a and b is an element m of R such that both a and b divide m (i.e. there exist elements x and y of R such that ax = m and by = m). A least common multiple of a and b is a common multiple that is minimal in the sense that for any other common multiple n of a and b, m divides n.

In general, two elements in a commutative ring can have no least common multiple or more than one. However, any two least common multiples of the same pair of elements are associates. In a unique factorization domain, any two elements have a least common multiple. In a principal ideal domain, the least common multiple of a and b can be characterised as a generator of the intersection of the ideals generated by a and b (the intersection of a collection of ideals is always an ideal). In principal ideal domains, one can even talk about the least common multiple of arbitrary collections of elements: it is a generator of the intersection of the ideals generated by the elements of the collection.

== See also ==
*Anomalous cancellation
*Chebyshev function
*Greatest common divisor

==Notes==

==References==
*
*
*
* 
* 

==External links==
* LCD Practice (Fifth grade)
* Online LCM calculator
* Online LCM and GCD calculator &ndash; displays also fractions of given numbers
* Algorithm for Computing the LCM
* Least Common Multiple from Wolfram MathWorld
* LCM of Fractions
* Advanced Least Common Multiple (LCM) calculator for 2 - 5 numbers.



[[Louis St. Laurent]]

Louis Stephen St. Laurent, PC, CC, QC (Saint-Laurent or St-Laurent in French, baptized Louis-tienne St-Laurent), (1 February 188225 July 1973) was the 12th Prime Minister of Canada, from 15 November 1948 to 21 June 1957. He was a Liberal with a strong base in the Catholic francophone community, from which base he had long mobilised support to Prime Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King. His foreign policy initiatives transformed Canada from an isolationism with little role in world affairs to an active "middle power." St. Laurent was an enthusiastic proponent of Canada's joining NATO in 1949 to fight Communist totalitarianism, overcoming opposition from some intellectuals, the far left, and many French Canadians. James Eayrs, In Defence of Canada: volume 4: Growing Up Allied (1980) pp 54-62 The contrast with Mackenzie King was not dramatic  they agreed on most policies. St. Laurent had more hatred of communism, and less fear of the United States. He was neither an idealist nor a bookish intellectual, but a eminently moderate, cautious conservative man....and a strong Canadian nationalist. Donald Creighton, The Forked Road: Canada 1939-1957 (1976) 159 

== Early life and career ==
Louis St-Laurent () was born on 1 February 1882 in Compton, Quebec, a village in the Eastern Townships to Jean-Baptiste-Mose Saint-Laurent, a French-Canadian, and Mary Anne Broderick, an Irish-Canadian. He grew up fluently bilingual. His English had a noticeable Irish brogue, while his gestures (such as a hunch of the shoulders) were French. Mr. Prime Minister 1867-1964, by Bruce Hutchison, Toronto 1964, Longmans Canada publishers. 

He received degrees from St. Charles Seminary (B.A. 1902) and Universit Laval (LL.L. 1905). He was offered, but declined, a Rhodes Scholarship upon this graduation from Laval in 1905. In 1905 he married Jeanne Renault (18861966) with whom he had two sons and three daughters.

St-Laurent worked as a lawyer from 1905 to 1941, also becoming a professor of law at Universit Laval in 1914. St-Laurent practised corporate and constitutional law in Quebec and became one of the country's most respected counsel. He served as President of the Canadian Bar Association from 1930 to 1932.

St-Laurent's father, a Compton shopkeeper, was a staunch supporter of the Liberal Party of Canada and was particularly enamoured with Sir Wilfrid Laurier. When Laurier led the Liberals to victory in the 1896 election, 14-year-old Louis relayed the election returns from the telephone in his father's store. However, while an ardent Liberal, Louis remained aloof from active politics for much of his life, focusing instead on his legal career and family. He became one of Quebec's leading lawyers and was so highly regarded that he was offered a position in the Cabinet of the Conservative Prime Minister Arthur Meighen in 1926 and was offered a seat as a justice in the Supreme Court of Canada.

It was not until he was nearly 60 that St-Laurent finally agreed to enter politics when Liberal Prime Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King appealed to his sense of duty in late 1941.

== Member of Mackenzie King Cabinet ==

===Minister of Justice===
Following the death of his Quebec lieutenant, Ernest Lapointe, in November 1941, King was well aware of the need for the government to have a strong, well respected member of cabinet to serve as a new deputy for Quebec to help deal with the volatile conscription issue. King had been in his political infancy when he witnessed the Conscription Crisis of 1917 during World War I and he wanted to prevent the same divisions from threatening his government.

No Quebec or francophone members of King's cabinet or government were willing to step into the role, but many recommended St. Laurent to take the post instead. On these recommendations, King recruited St. Laurent to his World War II cabinet as Minister of Justice, Lapointe's old post, on 9 December. St. Laurent agreed to go to Ottawa out of a sense of duty, but only on the understanding that his foray into politics was temporary and that he would return to Quebec at the conclusion of the war. In February 1942, he won a by-election for Quebec East, Lapointe's old riding.

St-Laurent supported King's decision to introduce conscription in 1944, despite the lack of support from other French Canadians (see Conscription Crisis of 1944). His support prevented more than a handful of Quebec Liberal Members of Parliament (MPs) from leaving the party, and was therefore crucial to keeping the government and the party united.

=== Minister of External Affairs===
King came to regard St-Laurent as his most trusted minister and natural successor. He persuaded St-Laurent that it was his duty to remain in government following the war in order to help with the construction of a post war international order and promoted him to the position of Secretary of State for External Affairs (foreign minister) in 1945, a portfolio King had previously always kept for himself. In this role, St-Laurent represented Canada at the Dumbarton Oaks Conference and San Francisco Conference that led to the founding of the United Nations (UN).

At the conferences, St-Laurent, compelled by his belief that the UN would be ineffective in times of war and armed conflict without some military means to impose its will, advocated the adoption of a UN military force. This force he proposed would be used in situations that called for both tact and might to preserve peace or prevent combat. In 1956, this idea was actualized by St-Laurent and his Secretary of State for External Affairs Lester B. Pearson in the development of UN Peacekeepers that helped to put an end to the Suez Crisis.

== Prime Minister of Canada ==
Louis St. Laurent, 7 August 1948
In 1948, King retired, and quietly persuaded his senior ministers to support St-Laurent's selection as the new Liberal leader at the Liberal leadership convention of August 1948. St-Laurent won, and was sworn in as Prime Minister of Canada on 15 November, making him Canada's second French-Canadian Prime Minister, after Wilfrid Laurier.
 
The Canadian economy was one of the strongest in the world in the period immediately following the end of the war. The prosperity lasted for more than a decade, significantly expanding the Canadian national infrastructure. 

In the 1949 federal election that followed his ascension to the Liberal leadership many wondered, including Liberal party insiders, if St-Laurent would appeal to the post-war populace of Canada. On the campaign trail, St-Laurent's image was developed into somewhat of a 'character' and what is considered to be the first 'media image' to be used in Canadian politics. St-Laurent chatted with children, gave speeches in his shirt sleeves, and had a 'common touch' that turned out to be appealing to voters. At one event during the 1949 election campaign, he disembarked his train and instead of approaching the assembled crowd of adults and reporters, gravitated to, and began chatting with, a group of children on the platform. A reporter submitted an article entitled "'Uncle Louis' can't lose!" which earned him the nickname "Uncle Louis" in the media (Papa Louis in Quebec). With this common touch and broad appeal, he subsequently led the party to victory in the election against the Progressive Conservative Party led by George Drew. The Liberals won 190 seatsthe most in Canadian history at the time, and still a record for the party.

His reputation as Prime Minister was impressive. He demanded hard work of all of his MPs and Ministers, and worked hard himself. He was reputed to be as knowledgeable on some ministerial portfolios as the ministers responsible themselves. To that end, Jack Pickersgill (a minister in St-Laurent's cabinet) said as prime minister St-Laurent had: "as fine an intelligence as was ever applied to the problems of government in Canada. He left it a richer, a more generous and more united country than it had been before he became prime minister."

St-Laurent led the Liberals to another powerful majority in the 1953 federal election. While the Liberals lost several seats, they still had 111 more seats than the Tories, enabling them to dominate the Canadian House of Commons.

=== Foreign policy ===
St-Laurent and his cabinet oversaw Canada's expanding international role in the postwar world. His stated desire was for Canada to occupy a social, military and economic 'middle power' role in the post-World War II world. In 1947 he identified five basic principles of Canadian foreign policy and five practical applications regarding Canada's international relations. Always highly sensitive to cleavages of language, religion and region, he stressed national unity, insisting, "that our external policies shall not destroy our unity....for a disunited Canada will be a powerless one." He also stressed political liberty and rule of law in the sense of opposition to totalitarianism. Hector Mackenzie, "Shades of Gray? 'The Foundations of Canadian Policy in World Affairs' in Context," American Review of Canadian Studies (2007) 37#4 pp 459-473. 

Militarily, St-Laurent was a leading proponent of the establishment of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) in 1949, serving as an architect and signatory of the treaty document. James Eayrs, In Defence of Canada: volume 4: Growing Up Allied (1980) pp 58-62 Involvement in such an organization marked a departure from King who had been reticent about joining a military alliance. Under his leadership, Canada supported the United Nations (U.N.) in the Korean War and committed the third largest overall contribution of troops, ships and aircraft to the U.N. forces to the conflict. Troops to Korea were selected on a voluntary basis. 
In 1956, under his direction, St-Laurent's Secretary of State for External Affairs Lester B. Pearson, helped solve the Suez Crisis in 1956 between Great Britain, France, Israel and Egypt, bringing forward St-Laurent's 1946 views on a U.N. military force in the form of the United Nations Emergency Force (UNEF) or peacekeeping. It is widely believed that the activities directed by St-Laurent and Pearson could well have avoided a nuclear war. These actions were recognized when Pearson won the 1957 Nobel Peace Prize.

St-Laurent was an early supporter of British Prime Minister Clement Attlee's proposal to transform the British Commonwealth from a club of white dominions into a multi-racial partnership. The leaders of the other "white dominions" were less than enthusiastic. It was St-Laurent who drafted the London Declaration, recognizing King George VI as Head of the Commonwealth as a means of allowing India to remain in the international association once it became a republic.

=== Domestic policy ===
St-Laurent's government was modestly progressive, fiscally conservative and run with business-like efficiency. Robertson says, "St Laurent's administrations from 1949 to 1956 probably gave Canada the most consistently good, financially responsible, trouble-free government the country has had in its entire history." 

It took taxation surpluses no longer needed by the wartime military and paying back in full Canada's debts accrued during the World Wars and the Great Depression. With remaining revenues, St-Laurent oversaw the expansion of Canada's social programs, including the gradual expansion of social welfare programs such as family allowances, old age pensions, government funding of university and post-secondary education and an early form of Medicare termed Hospital Insurance at the time. This scheme lay the groundwork for Tommy Douglas' healthcare system in Saskatchewan, and Pearson's nationwide universal healthcare in the late 1960s. Under this legislation, the federal government paid around 50% of the cost of provincial health plans to cover "a basic range of inpatient services in acute, convalescent, and chronic hospital care." The condition for the cost-sharing agreements was that all citizens were to be entitled to these benefits, and by March 1963, 98.8 of Canadians were covered by Hospital Insurance. The emergence of social security in Canada by Dennis Guest During his last term as Prime Minister, St-Laurent's government used $100 million in death taxes to establish the Canada Council to support research in the arts, humanities, and social sciences.

In addition, St-Laurent modernized and established new social and industrial policies for the country during his time in the prime minister's office. Amongst these measures included the universalization of old-age pensions for all Canadians aged seventy and above (1951), Gray agendas: interest groups and public pensions in Canada, Britain, and the United States by Henry J. Pratt the introduction of old age assistance for needy Canadians aged sixty-five and above (1951), Facts of life: the social construction of vital statistics, Ontario, 1869-1952 by George Neil Emery the introduction of allowances for the blind (1951) and the disabled (1954), amendments to the National Housing Act (1954) which provided federal government financing to non-profit organisations as well as the provinces for the renovation or construction of hostels or housing for students, the disabled, the elderly, and families on low incomes, and unemployment assistance (1956) for unemployed employables on welfare who had exhausted (or did not qualify for) unemployment insurance benefits. In pursuit of the public good: essays in honour of Allan J. MacEachen by Tom Kent and Allan J. MacEachen 

In 1949, the former lawyer of many Supreme Court cases, St-Laurent ended the practice of appealing Canadian legal cases to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council of Great Britain, making the Supreme Court of Canada the highest avenue of legal appeal available to Canadians. In that same year, St-Laurent negotiated the British North America (No. 2) Act, 1949 with Britain which 'partially patriated' the Canadian Constitution, most significantly giving the Canadian Parliament the authority to amend portions of the constitution. Also in 1949, following two referenda within the province, St-Laurent and Premier Joey Smallwood negotiated the entry of Newfoundland into Confederation.

When asked in 1949 whether he would outlaw the Communist Party in Canada, St-Laurent responded that the party posed little threat and that such measures would be drastic. http://books.google.ca/books?id=DMaS5cb7s8QC&lpg=PA117&ots=PPlsSbrg8_&dq=louis%20st.%20laurent%20outlaw%20communism&pg=PA117#v=onepage&q&f=false 

In 1952, he advised Queen Elizabeth II to appoint Vincent Massey as the first Canadian-born Governor-General. Each of the aforementioned actions were and are seen as significant in furthering the cause of Canadian autonomy from Britain and developing a national identity on the international stage.

In 1956, using the Constitutional taxation authority of the federal level of government, St-Laurent's government introduced the policy of "Equalization payments" which redistributes taxation revenues between provinces to assist the poorer provinces in delivering government programs and services, a move that has been considered a strong one in solidifying the Canadian federation, particularly with his home province of Qubec.

The government also engaged in massive public works and infrastructure projects such as building the Trans-Canada Highway (1949), the St. Lawrence Seaway (1954) and the Trans-Canada Pipeline. It was this last project that was to sow the seeds that led to the downfall of the St-Laurent government.

St-Laurent was initially very well received by the Canadian public, but by 1957, "Uncle Louis" (as he was sometimes referred to) began to appear tired, old and out of touch. His government was also perceived to have grown too close to business interests. The 1956 Pipeline Debate led to the widespread impression that the Liberals had grown arrogant in power. On numerous occasions, the government invoked closure in order to curtail debate and ensure that its Pipeline Bill passed by a specific deadline. St. Laurent was criticized for a lack of restraint exercised on his minister C. D. Howe, who was widely perceived as extremely arrogant. Western Canadians felt particularly alienated by the government, believing that the Liberals were kowtowing to interests in Ontario and Quebec and the United States. (The opposition accused the government of accepting overly costly contracts that could never be completed on schedule. In the end, the pipeline was completed early and under budget.) The pipeline conflict turned out to be meaningless, insofar as the construction work was concerned, since pipe could not be obtained in 1956 from a striking American factory, and no work could have been done that year. The uproar in Parliament regarding the pipeline had a lasting impression on the electorate, and was a decisive factor in the Liberal government's 1957 defeat at the hands of the PCs, led by John Diefenbaker, in the 1957 election. Because the Liberals were still mostly classically liberal, Diefenbaker promised to outspend the incumbent Liberals, who campaigned on plans to stay the course of fiscal conservatism they had followed through St-Laurent's term in the 1940s and 1950s.

St-Laurent was the first Prime Minister to live in the present official residence of the Prime Minister of Canada: 24 Sussex Drive, from 1951 to 1957, the end of his term in office.
CCGS Louis S. St-Laurent, Heavy Icebreaker

== Defeat in the 1957 election ==
By 1957 St. Laurent was 75 years old and tired. His party had been in power so long it had accumulated too many factions and alienated too many groups. He was ready to retire, but made one last campaign. In the 1957 election, the Liberals won 200,000 more votes nationwide than the Progressive Conservatives (40.75% Liberals to 38.81% PC). However, most of those votes were wasted with huge majorities in Quebec. Largely due to dominating the rest of the country, the Conservatives took the greatest number of seats with 112 seats (42% of the House) to the Liberals' 104 (39.2%). Some ministers wanted St. Laurent to stay on and offer to form a minority government, arguing that the popular vote had supported them and the party's long years of experience would make them a more effective minority.

Another option circulated within the party saw the balance of power to be held by either the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation (CCF) and their 25 seats or Social Credit Party of Canada with their 15. St-Laurent was encouraged by others to reach out to the CCF and at least four of six independent/small party MPs to form a coalition majority government, which would have held 134 of the 265 seats in Parliament50.1% of the total. St. Laurent, however, wanted to retire; he accepted that the nation had passed a verdict against his government and his party. In any case the CCF and Socreds had pledged to cooperate with a Tory government, meaning that a minority government under St. Laurent probably could not survive long. St. Laurent resigned on 21 June 1957ending the Liberal tenure and marking the longest uninterrupted run in government for a party at the federal level in Canadian history. 

== Supreme Court appointments ==
Statue on grounds of Supreme Court of Canada
St-Laurent chose the following jurists to be appointed as justices of the Supreme Court of Canada by the Governor General:
* John Robert Cartwright (22 December 1949  23 March 1970)
* Joseph Honor Grald Fauteux (22 December 1949  23 December 1973)
* Douglas Charles Abbott (1 July 1954  23 December 1973)
* Patrick Kerwin (as Chief Justice, 1 July 1954  2 February 1963; appointed a Puisne Justice under Prime Minister Richard Bennett, 20 July 1935)
* Henry Grattan Nolan (1 March 1956  8 July 1957)

== Retirement ==
201 Grande-Alle, residence of St-Laurent in Quebec City for sixty years
After a short period as Leader of the Opposition and now more than 75 years old, St- Laurent's motivation to be involved in politics was gone. He announced his intention to retire from politics. St-Laurent was succeeded as Liberal Party leader by his former Secretary of State for External Affairs and representative at the United Nations, Lester B. Pearson, at the party's leadership convention in 1958.

After his political retirement, he returned to practising law and living quietly and privately with his family. During his retirement, he was called into the public spotlight one final time in 1967 for the inception of the award, he was made a Companion of the Order of Canada.

Louis Stephen St-Laurent died from natural causes on 25 July 1973, in Quebec City, Quebec, aged 91. He was laid to rest at Saint Thomas d'Aquin Cemetery in his hometown of Compton, Quebec. He is survived by granddaughter Louise Mignault and grandson Louis St-Laurent II.

St. Laurent was ranked #4 on a survey of the first 20 prime ministers (through Jean Chrtien) of Canada done by Canadian historians, and used by J. L. Granatstein and Norman Hillmer in their book Prime Ministers: Ranking Canada's Leaders.

The house and grounds in Compton where St. Laurent was born were designated a National Historic Site of Canada in 1973. St. Laurent's residence at 201 Grande-Alle Est in Quebec City is protected as a Recognized Federal Heritage Building. 

===Order of Canada citation===

St. Laurent was appointed a Companion of the Order of Canada on 6 July 1967. His citation reads: http://archive.gg.ca/honours/search-recherche/honours-desc.asp?lang=e&TypeID=orc&id=2308 
Former Prime Minister of Canada. For his service to his country.

==See also==
 
* List of Canadian Prime Ministers

==References==

==Bibliography==

* Granatstein, J.L. and Norman Hillmer. Prime Ministers: Ranking Canada's Leaders (Toronto: HarperCollins, 1999), pp. 114126. ISBN 0-00-200027-X.
* Mackenzie, Hector. "Shades of Gray? 'The Foundations of Canadian Policy in World Affairs' in Context," American Review of Canadian Studies (2007) 37#4 pp 459473. online
* Thompson, Dale C. Louis St. Laurent: Canadian (Toronto, Macmillan Canada, 1967)
* Thompson, Dale C. "The Political Ideas of Louis St. Laurent," in Marcel Hamelin, ed. The Political Ideas of the Prime Ministers of Canada (1969) 139-153

===Primary sources===
* J. W. Pickersgill. My years with Louis St. Laurent: a political memoir by J. W. Pickersgill (1975)

==External links==

* 
* 
* 
*CBC Digital Archives  Uncle Louis and Canada's Golden Age
*Louis St. Laurent's Grave



[[List of literary cycles]]

Literary cycles are groups of stories grouped around common figures, often (though not necessarily) based upon mythical figures or loosely on historic ones. Cycles which deal with an entire country are sometimes referred to as matters. A fictional cycle is often referred to as a mythos.

== Examples of Literary Cycles ==

*The Matter of Britain (or the "Arthurian cycle"), which centers around King Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table
*The Matter of France (or the "Carolingian cycle"), which centers around Charlemagne and the Twelve Peers
*The Matter of Rome (or the "cycle of Rome"), which centers around Julius Caesar and Alexander the Great
*The Reynard cycle, which centers around the fabular fox Reynard
*The Epic Cycle, which centers around the Trojan War
*The Mythological Cycle, which centers around the Celtic pantheon
*The Fenian Cycle, which centers around Fionn mac Cumhaill and the Fianna
*The Ulster Cycle, which centers around C Chulainn and the Kingdom of Ulster
*The Cycle of the Kings, which centers around the monarchy of Ireland
*Der Ring des Nibelungen (or the "Ring cycle"), which centers around the Ring and the Norse pantheon
*The four troubadours Bernart d'Auriac, Pere Salvatge, Roger Bernard III of Foix, and Peter III of Aragon composed a cycle of four sirventes in the summer of 1285 concerning the Aragonese Crusade.
*The Japanese literary concept of sekai (, lit. "world") bears strong similarities to that of a cycle. Those surrounding Minamoto no Yoshitsune and the Soga brothers are likely the most popularly reproduced.



[[Louis Leakey]]

Louis Seymour Bazett Leakey (L.S.B. Leakey) (7 August 1903  1 October 1972) was a British paleoanthropologist and archaeologist whose work was important in establishing human evolutionary development in Africa, particularly through his discoveries in the Olduvai Gorge. He also played a major role in creating organizations for future research in Africa and for protecting wildlife there. Having been a prime mover in establishing a tradition of palaeoanthropological inquiry, he was able to motivate the next generation to continue it, notably within his own family, many of whom also became prominent. Leakey participated in national events of British East Africa and Kenya during the 1950s.

In natural philosophy, he asserted Charles Darwin's theory of evolution unswervingly and set about to test Darwin's hypothesis that humans arose in Africa. Leakey was also a devout Christian. Reported in Ancestral Passions, Chapter 3. 

==Background==

 \"When I think back ... of the serval cat and a baboon that I had as pets in my childhood daysand that eventually I had to house in large cagesit makes me sad. It makes me sadder still, however, and also very angry, when I think of the innumerable adult animals and birds deliberately caught and locked up for the so-called 'pleasure' and 'education' of thoughtless human beings. ... surely there are today so many first-class films ... that the cruelty of keeping wild creatures in zoos should no longer be tolerated.\" 
 From L.S.B. Leakey, By the Evidence, Chapter 4. 

Louis' parents, Harry and Mary Bazett Leakey (called May by her friends), were British missionaries of the Christian faith in then British East Africa, now Kenya. Harry: 1868-1940; Mary: ?-1948. Harry later became canon of the station and had a distinguished career. Louis reports in his memoirs, Chapter 6, that the Leakeys were of the Church of England, or Anglican Harry had taken a previously established post of the Church Mission Society among the Kikuyu at Kabete. The station was at that time a hut and two tents in the highlands north of Nairobi. Louis' earliest home had an earthen floor, a leaky thatched roof, rodents and insects, and no heating system except for charcoal braziers. The facilities improved but slowly. The mission, a center of activity, set up a clinic in one of the tents, and later a girl's school for African women. Harry was working on a translation of the Bible into a Kenyan language, Kikuyu.

Louis had a younger brother, Douglas, and two older sisters, Gladys Leakey Beecher and Julia Leakey Barham. Louis' primary family came to contain also Miss Oakes (a governess), Miss Higgenbotham (another missionary), and Mariamu (a Kikuyu nurse). Unsurprisingly, Louis grew up, played, and learned to hunt with Africans. He also learned to walk with the distinctive gait of the Kikuyu and speak their language fluently, as did his siblings. He was initiated into the Kikuyu ethnic group, an event of which he never spoke, as he was sworn to secrecy. According to Blake Edgar in Louis Leakey's Legacy: Celebrating the Centennial of His Extraordinary Life and Finds in AnthroQuest Online for Fall, 2003, Louis received the Kikuyu name Wakuruigi, "Son of the Sparrow Hawk." Harry also had a name, apparently not an initiation name, but rather descriptive: Giteru, "Big beard." 

Louis requested and was given permission to build and move into a hut, Kikuyu style, at the end of the garden. It was home to his personal collection of natural objects, such as birds' eggs and skulls. All the children developed a keen interest in and appreciation of the pristine natural surroundings in which they found themselves. They raised baby animals, later turning them over to zoos. Louis read a gift book, Days Before History, by H. R. Hall (1907), a juvenile fictional work illustrating the prehistory of Britain. He began to collect tools and was further encouraged in this activity by a role model, Arthur Loveridge, first curator (1914) of the Natural History Museum in Nairobi, predecessor of the Coryndon Museum. This interest may have predisposed him toward a career in archaeology. Canon Leakey also was a naturalist and must have been a significant model, as Louis wished originally to pattern his life after his father's. Canon Leakey was one of the original founders of the East Africa and Uganda Natural History Society, according to Louis' memoirs, Chapter 8 

Neither Harry nor May were of strong constitution. From 1904-1906 the entire family lived at May's mother's house in Reading, Berkshire, England, while Harry recovered from neurasthenia, and again in 1911-1913, while May recovered from general frailty and exhaustion. During the latter stay, Harry bought a house in Boscombe. The facts for this section were gathered mainly from Ancestral Passions, Chapter 1, "Kabete", and from the "Publisher's Prologue" of the Harcourt Brace Jovanovich edition of By the Evidence. 

==The formative years==

=== His father's example ===
In Britain, the Leakey children attended elementary school; in Africa, they had a tutor, Miss Laing. They sat out World War I in Africa. When the sea lanes opened again, they returned to Boscombe, where Louis was sent to Weymouth College, a private boy's school in 1919 at age 16. In three years there, he did not do well and complained of rules that he considered an infringement on his freedom and hazing by the other boys. Advised by one teacher to seek employment in a bank, he appealed to his English teacher, Mr. Tunstall, who started him in the application process to Cambridge. His excellent scores on the entrance exams won him a scholarship. He didnt finish college until 7 years later!

Louis matriculated to the University of Cambridge, his father's alma mater, in 1922, intent on becoming a missionary to British East Africa.

For the rest of his life, he would dine out on the story of his finals. When he had arrived in Britain, he had notified the register of people with a knowledge of rare languages that he was fluent in Swahili. When he came to his finals, he asked to be examined in this and after some hesitation the authorities agreed. Then one day, he received two letters. One instructed him to report at a certain time and place for a viva voce examination in Swahili. The other asked if, at the same time and place, he would examine a candidate in Swahili.

His son says: Richard E. Leakey, The Making of Mankind, Chapter 1. The rest of the material comes from Morell, Chapter 2, "From Cambridge to Olduvai.". 
:"Louis was in his early twenties when he decided to pursue a fossil-hunting career. Until then, he had intended to follow his father's example and be a Christian missionary in Kenya."

He preached Christian zeal to his fellow students and otherwise impressed Cambridge society with behavior that was considered eccentric. For the details of eccentricity, read Bowman-Kruhm, Chapter 2. They include, for example, demonstrating talking drums from the roof of a building at Cambridge. He was also an evolutionist and befriended some future naturalists. Gregory Bateson, E. Barton Worthington In 1923, his usual zeal led him into a severe concussion in a game of Rugby union. He was relieved of his academic duties; rest and the outdoors were prescribed.

===Diversion from missionary work===
In that year a position became available that pushed all thought of rest into the background. In 1922 the British had been awarded German East Africa as part of the settlement of World War I, subsequently applying the name Tanganyika. Within its territory the Germans had discovered a site rich in dinosaur fossils, Tendaguru. Louis was told by C. W. Hobley, a friend of the family, that the British Museum of Natural History was going to send a fossil-hunting expedition to it. Louis applied and was hired to locate the site and manage the administrative details. In 1924 the party under William E. Cutler departed for Africa. They never found a complete dinosaur skeleton. Louis was recalled from the site by Cambridge in 1925, while Cutler contracted blackwater fever and died nine months later.

This critical experience changed Louis' career decision. Switching courses to anthropology, he found a new mentor in Alfred Cort Haddon, head of the department. In 1926 he graduated with a "double first", or high honours, in anthropology and archaeology. He had used some of his preexisting qualifications; for example, Kikuyu was offered and accepted as the second modern language in which he was required to be proficient, even though no one there could test him on it. The university accepted an affidavit from a Kikuyu chief signed with a thumbprint.

From 1925 on Louis lectured and wrote on African archaeological and palaeontological topics. On graduation he was such a respected figure that Cambridge sent him to East Africa to study prehistoric African humans. He excavated dozens of sites, undertaking for the first time a systematic study of the artifacts. Some of his culture names are still in use; for example, Elmenteitan. This Mesolithic culture is described in The Elmenteitan by Peter Robertshaw in World Archaeology, Vol. 20, No. 1, Archaeology in Africa (Jun., 1988), pp. 57-69, of which the first page is displayed for free. 

===Research fellow===
St. John's College, Cambridge.
In 1927, Louis received a visit at a site called Gamble's Cave, near Lake Elmenteita, by two young ladies on a holiday, one of whom was Henrietta Wilfreda "Frida" Avern. 1902-1993 She had done some course work in archaeology. Louis and she talked the entire night. They continued the relationship on his return to Cambridge and in 1928 they were married and set off together for Elmenteita. At that time he discovered the Acheulean site of Kariandusi, which he excavated in 1928, after collecting a team of interested associates. Douglas Leakey, Donald Macinnes, Tom Powys Cobb, John D. Solomon, Elisabeth Kitson, Cecily Creasy, Penelope Jenkin. For a description and history of the site see Kariandusi Museum at the National Museums of Kenya web site. 

On the strength of his work there he obtained a research fellowship at St. John's College and returned to Cambridge in 1929 to do post-graduate work and to classify and prepare the finds from Elmenteita. His patron and mentor at Cambridge was now Arthur Keith. While cleaning two skeletons he had found he noticed a similarity to one found in Olduvai Gorge by Professor Hans Reck, a German national, whom Louis had met in 1925 in Germany while on business for Keith. 
Olduvai Gorge.
The geology of Olduvai was known. In 1913 Reck had extricated a skeleton from Bed II in the gorge wall. He argued that it must have the date of the bed, which was believed to be 600,000 years, in the mid-Pleistocene. The public was not ready for this news. Humans must have evolved or have been created long after then, was the general belief. Reck became involved in a media uproar. He was barred from going back to settle the question by the war and then the terms of the transfer of Tanganyika from Germany to Britain. For an account of the incident refer to Hans Reck and the Discovery of O.H.1 at the "Always Something New" site. In 1929 Louis visited Berlin to talk to the now skeptical Reck. Noting an Acheulean tool in Reck's collection of artifacts from Olduvai, he bet Reck he could find ancient stone tools at Olduvai within 24 hours. The source for this subsection is Morell, Chapter 3, "Laying Claim to the Earliest Man." 

Meanwhile Frida worked on illustrations for The Stone Age Culture of Kenya Colony. Louis was given the PhD in 1930 at age 27. His first child, a daughter, Priscilla Muthoni Leakey, was born in 1931. His headaches and epilepsy returned in the excitement and he was prescribed Luminal, which he took the rest of his life.

==Reversals of fortune==

=== The Defense of Reck ===
In November, 1931, Louis led an expedition to Olduvai, including Reck, Arthur Tindell Hopwood, Donald MacInnes, Vivian Fuchs, Captain Hewlitt, Frances Kenrick, Frida, Reck, and a number of African assistants. whom he allowed to enter the gorge first. Louis did find Acheulean tools within the first 24 hours, costing Reck ten pounds on the bet. They verified the provenance of the 1913 find, now Olduvai Man. Non-humanoid fossils and tools were extracted from the ground in large numbers. Frida delayed joining him and was less enthusiastic about him on behalf of Priscilla. She did arrive eventually, however, and Louis put her to work. Frida's site became FLK, for Frida Leakey's karongo ("gully").

Back in Cambridge, the skeptics were not impressed. To find supporting evidence of the antiquity of Reck's Olduvai Man, Louis returned to Africa, excavating at Kanam and Kanjera. He easily found more fossils, which he named Homo kanamensis. Read about these events in Recent Research into Oldowan Hominin Activities at Kanjera South, Western Kenya, by L. C. Bishop et al., published in the African Archaeological Review. While he was gone, the opposition worked up some "evidence" of the intrusion of Olduvai Man into an earlier layer, evidence that seemed convincing at the time, but is missing and unverifiable now. On his return Louis' finds were carefully examined by a committee of 26 scientists and were tentatively accepted as valid.

===Scandal===
With Frida's dowry money, the Leakeys bought a large brick house in Girton near Cambridge, which they named "the Close." She suffered from morning sickness most of the time and was unable to work on the illustrations for Louis' second book, Adam's Ancestors. At a dinner party given in his honor after a lecture of his at the Royal Anthropological Institute, Gertrude Caton-Thompson introduced him to her own illustrator, the twenty-year-old Mary Nicol.

Louis convinced Mary to take on the illustration of his book. A few months later companionship turned to romance. Colin Leakey was born in December, 1933, and in January, 1934, Louis asked Frida for a divorce. She would not sue for divorce until 1936. This account is based on Morell, Chapter 4, "Louis and Mary." 

A panel at Cambridge investigated his morals. Grants dried up, but his mother raised enough money for another expedition to Olduvai, Kanam and Kanjera, the latter two on the Winam Gulf. The guest list is Peter Bell (zoologist), Sam White (surveyor), Peter Kent (geologist), Heselon Mukiri, Thairu Irumbi, Ndekei. His previous work there was questioned by P. G. H. Boswell, Head of the Department of Geology at the Imperial College of Science, London. whom he invited to verify the sites for himself. Arriving at Kanam and Kanjera in 1935, they found that the iron markers Louis had used to mark the sites had been removed by the Luo tribe for use as harpoons and the sites could not now be located. To make matters worse, all the photos Louis took were ruined by a light leak in the camera. After an irritating and fruitless two-month search, Boswell left for England, promising, as Louis understood it, not to publish a word until Louis returned.

Boswell immediately set out to publish as many words as he was able, beginning with an article in Nature dated 9 March 1935, destroying Reck's and Louis' dates of the fossils and questioning Louis' competence. Louis on his return accused Boswell of treachery, but Boswell now had public opinion on his side. Louis was not only forced to retract the accusation but also to recant his support of Reck. This account is based on Morell, Chapter 5, "Disaster at Kanam", supplemented with detail from Louis' account in By the Evidence, Chapter 2. Olduvai Man languished through World War II in a Berlin museum and then partially disappeared, but preservative applied to the bones took away any hope of an accurate C-14 date; however, neither can any evidence of intrusion be located. Kanjera Man is ancient, possibly Homo habilis; Homo kanamensis is an intrusion. Louis was through at Cambridge. Even his mentors turned on him.

===On the road in Africa===
Meeting Mary in Africa, he proceeded to Olduvai with a small party. Mary joined him under a stigma but her skill and competence eventually won over the other participants. Louis' parents continued to urge him to return to Frida, and would pay for everyone in the party but Mary. Louis and his associates did the groundwork for future excavation at Olduvai, uncovering dozens of sites for a broad sampling, as was his method. They were named after the excavator: SHK (Sam Howard's karongo), BK (Peter Bell's), SWK (Sam White's), MNK (Mary Nicol's). Louis and Mary conducted a temporary clinic for the Maasai, made preliminary investigations of Laetoli, and ended by studying the rock paintings at the Kisese/Cheke region. The initial chapters of By the Evidence and Morell, Chapter 6, "Olduvai's Bounty", describe the explorations on which these few sentences are based. 

===The Village of Nasty===
Louis and Mary returned to England in 1935 without positions or any place to stay except Mary's mother's apartment. They soon leased Steen Cottage in Great Munden This settlement was in Hertfordshire and had an unusual, more ancient name, which Louis, with his sense of humor noted in his memoirs, Chapter 5, as "the village of Nasty." Nasty is a hamlet in Great Munden; however, Louis' mood reflects that of the population of Hertfordshire, which delights in assigning unusual village names. and lived without heat, electricity, or plumbing, fetching water from a well, huddling before a fireplace and writing by oil lantern. They lived happily in poverty for eighteen months at this low point of their fortunes, visited at first only by Mary's relatives. Louis gardened for subsistence and exercise and improved the house and grounds. He appealed at last to the Royal Society, who relented with a small grant to continue work on his collection.

==In British East Africa==

=== The Return of the Native Son ===
Louis had already involved himself in Kikuyu tribal affairs in 1928, taking a stand against female genital cutting. He got into a shouting match in Kikuyu one evening with Jomo Kenyatta, who was lecturing on the topic. R. Copeland at Oxford recommended he apply to the Rhodes Trust for a grant to write a study of the Kikuyu and it was given late in 1936 along with a salary for two years. In January 1937 the Leakeys shook the dust off their feet and travelled to Kenya. Colin would not see his father for 20 years.

Louis returned to Kiambaa near Nairobi and persuaded Senior Chief Koinange, who designated a committee of chiefs, to help him describe the Kikuyu the way they had been. Mary excavated at Waterfall Cave. According to Louis' memoirs, Chapter 6, it was the chief who suggested she excavate. He knew artifacts were being washed from the cave. Louis and Mary had moved into a hut in his compound at his invitation. She fell ill with double pneumonia and lay at death's door for two weeks in the hospital in Nairobi, during which time her mother was sent for. Contrary to expectation she recovered and began another excavation at Hyrax Hill and then Ngoro River Cave. Louis got an extension of his grant, which he used partially for fossil-hunting. Leakey discoveries began to appear in the newspapers again.

Tensions between the Kikuyu and the settlers increased alarmingly. Louis jumped into the fray as an exponent of the middle ground. In Kenya: Contrasts and Problems, he angered the settlers by proclaiming Kenya could never be a "white man's country."

===The fossil police===
The government offered Louis work as a policeman in intelligence, which he could not afford to refuse. He traveled the country as a pedlar, reporting on the talk. When Britain went to war in September, 1939, the Kenyan government drafted Louis into its African intelligence service. Louis describes this authority in Chapter 8 of his Memoirs as "...the CID... Special Branch, Section 6, concerned with civil intelligence." The drafting authority was the "Kenya government" and there is no indication in the Memoirs that the service was more directly British; in fact, he refers to "my counterpart in military intelligence." However, Louis would not be revealing everything he knew. Morell portrays him as having been in police work before being drafted. She had personal access to the surviving Leakeys. Apart from some bumbling around, during which he and some settlers stalked each other as possible saboteurs of the Sagana Railway Bridge, Memoirs Chapter 8 his first task was to supply and arm Ethiopian guerrillas against the Italian invaders of their country. He created a clandestine network using his childhood friends among the Kikuyu. They also hunted fossils on the sly.

Louis conducted interrogations, analyzed handwriting, wrote radio broadcasts and took on regular police investigations. He loved a good mystery of any sort. The white leadership of the King's African Rifles used him extensively to clear up many cultural mysteries; for example, he helped an officer remove a curse he had inadvertently put on his men. Memoirs, Chapter 9. 

Mary continued to find and excavate sites. Jonathan Leakey was born in 1940. She worked in the Coryndon Memorial Museum (later called the National Museums of Kenya) where Louis joined her as an unpaid honorary curator in 1941. Their life was a menage of police work and archaeology. They investigated Rusinga Island and Olorgesailie. At the latter site they were assisted by a team of Italian experts recruited from the prisoners of war and paroled for the purpose. Memoirs Chapter 12 

In 1942 the Italian menace ended, but the Japanese began to reconnoiter with a view toward landing in force. Louis found himself in counter-intelligence work, which he performed with zest and imagination. Deborah was born, but died at three months. They lived in a rundown and bug infested Nairobi home, provided by the museum. Jonathan was attacked by army ants in his crib. This section is based on Morell, Chapter 8, "Cloak-and-Dagger." 

===The turn of the tide===
In 1944 Richard Leakey was born. In 1945 the family's income from police work all but vanished. By now Louis was getting plenty of job offers but he chose to stay on in Kenya as Curator of the Coryndon Museum, with an annual salary and a house, but more importantly, to continue palaeoanthropological research.

In January, 1947, Louis conducted the first Pan-African Congress of Prehistory at Nairobi. Sixty scientists from 26 countries attended, delivering papers and visiting the Leakey sites. The conference restored Louis to the scientific fold and made him a major figure in it. With the money that now poured in Louis undertook the famous expeditions of 1948 and beyond at Rusinga Island in Lake Victoria, where Mary discovered the most complete Proconsul fossil up to that time.

Charles Boise donated money for a boat to be used for transport on Lake Victoria, The Miocene Lady. Its skipper, Hassan Salimu, was later to deliver Jane Goodall to Gombe. Philip Leakey was born in 1949. In 1950, Louis was awarded an honorary doctorate by Oxford University.

===Kenyan affairs===

 \"\"... I sought a personal interview with the governor, hoping to make him appreciate that it was no longer possible to continue along the lines of the old colonial regime. ... Colonial governors and senior civil servants are not easy people to argue with; and, of course, I was not popular, because of my criticism of the colonial service ... Had it been possible to make the government open its eyes to the realities of the situation, I believe that the whole miserable episode of what is frequently spoken of as 'the Mau Mau rebellion' need never have taken place.\" 
 From L.S.B. Leakey, By the Evidence, Chapter 18. 

While the Leakeys were at Lake Victoria, the Kikuyu struck at the European settlers of the Kenyan highlands, who seemed to have the upper hand and were insisting on a "white" government of a "white" Africa. In 1949 the Kikuyu formed a secret society, the Mau Mau, which attacked settlers and especially loyalist Kikuyu.

Louis had attempted to warn Sir Philip Mitchell, governor of the colony, that nocturnal meetings and forced oaths were not Kikuyu customs and foreboded violence, but was ignored. Now he found himself pulled away from anthropology to investigate the Mau Mau. During this period his life was threatened and a reward placed on his head. The Leakeys began to pack pistols, termed "European National Dress." The government placed him under 24-hour guard.

In 1952, after a massacre of loyal chiefs, the government arrested Jomo Kenyatta, president of the Kenya African Union. Louis was summoned to be a court interpreter, but withdrew after an accusation of mistranslation because of prejudice against the defendant. He returned on request to translate documents only. Because of lack of evidence linking Kenyatta to the Mau Mau, although convicted, he did not receive the death penalty, but was sentenced to several years of hard labor and banned from Kenya.

The government brought in British troops and formed a home guard of 20,000 Kikuyu. During this time Louis played a difficult and contradictory role. He sided with the settlers, serving as their spokesman and intelligence officer, helping to ferret out bands of guerrillas. On the other hand he continued to advocate for the Kikuyu in his book, Defeating Mau Mau and numerous talks and articles. He recommended a multi-racial government, land reform in the highlands, a wage hike for the Kikuyu, and many other reforms, most of which were eventually adopted.

The British realized the rebellion was being directed from urban centers, instituted military law and rounded up the committees. Following Louis' suggestion, thousands of Kikuyu were placed in re-education camps and resettled in new villages. The rebellion continued from bases under Mt. Kenya until 1956, when, deprived of its leadership and supplies, it had to disperse. The state of emergency lasted until 1960. In 1963 Kenya became independent, with Jomo Kenyatta as prime minister. This subsection is based on Morell's chapter 11, "Louis and Kenyatta." 

==Work in Palaeoanthropology==

=== Vindication at Olduvai ===

 \"We know from the study of evolution that, again and again, various branches of animal stock have become over-specialized, and that over-specialization has led to their extinction. Present-day Homo sapiens is in many physical respects still very unspecialized ... But in one thing man, as we know him today, is over-specialized. His brain power is very over-specialized compared to the rest of his physical make-up, and it may well be that this over-specialization will lead, just as surely, to his extinction. ... if we are to control our future, we must first understand the past better.\" 
 From L.S.B. Leakey, Adam's Ancestors, Fourth Edition, final page. 

Louis and Mary spent all the time they could at Olduvai, starting in 1951. So far they had discovered only tools. A trial trench in Bed II at BK in 1951 was followed by a more extensive excavation in 1952. They found what Louis termed an Olduwan "slaughter-house", an ancient bog where animals had been trapped and butchered. Louis was so carried away that he worked without his hat and his hair was bleached white from the sun. They stopped in 1953.

In 1955 they excavated again with Jean Brown. She related that he preferred to be called Louis, was absent-minded, once had everyone looking for spectacles that were around his neck, wore pants with the buttons off and shoes with holes in them, charged about everywhere and once collapsed unconscious. He was completely happy. This Olduvai period, including Jean's description of Louis, is from Morell, Chapter 12, "Our Man." 

In 1959 they decided to excavate Bed I. While Louis was sick in camp, Mary discovered the fossilized skull OH 5 at FLK, which Mary called "Our Man", and became "Dear Boy" and "Zinj." The question was whether it was a previous genus discovered by Robert Broom, Paranthropus, which Broom had taken not to be in the human line, or a different one, in it. Louis opted for Zinj, a decision opposed by Wilfrid Le Gros Clark, but one which attracted the attention of Melville Bell Grosvenor, president of the National Geographic Society. That contact resulted in an article in National Geographic September, 1960, Finding the World's Earliest Man. and a hefty grant to continue work at Olduvai.

Also in 1960 Jack Evernden and Garniss Curtis, young geophysicists, dated Bed I to 1.75 mya. The world was stunned. Zinj was far older than anyone had imagined. Scientists swarmed to Africa. Reck and Louis were completely vindicated, too late for Reck, who had died in 1937. The material on Zinjanthropus and the dating of Bed I is from Morell, Chapter 13, "Fame, Fortune and Zinj." 

===Expansion===
In 1960, unable to leave the museum except on weekends, Louis appointed Mary director of excavation at Olduvai. She brought in a staff of Kamba tribesmen, instead of Kikuyu, who, she felt, took advantage of Louis. The first, Muteva Musomba, had kept her children's ponies. He recruited Kamoya Kimeu among others. Mary set up Camp 5 under Jonathan's direction. He was 19. From then on she had her own staff and associates.

Mary picked and sieved at the site from early morning dressed in old clothes, chain smoking cigarettes, always surrounded by her Dalmatian dogs. She and Louis communicated by radio. On weekends he drove non-stop at high speed the 357 miles between Olduvai and Nairobi. The teenage boys, Richard and Philip, were on site holidays and vacations. Louis invited them and Irven DeVore to eat a raw rat so that he could compare the result to some Hominid coprolites. He said to DeVore, "My dear boy, let me make you famous." DeVore and the boys demurred. The anecdote about the rat is given in Morell, Chapter 14, Note 8. 

Their home in Nairobi was chaotic, when they were there. Dinner guests were frequent. Important guests stayed for weeks if they could stand it. They shared the quarters and the dinner table with the Dalmatians, hyraxes, a monkey, a civet cat, an African eagle owl, tropical fish, snakes, such as vipers, and a python. The extended families of twenty African staff lived in cinderblock huts in the yard. Mary had switched to cigars and the ashes often fell into the food. Both Louis and Mary cooked. Louis never stopped talking; his stories were endless. This section is based on Morell, Chapter 5, "Mary's Dig." There was another side to the Leakey family, written about by Morell in Chapter 17, "Chimpanzees and Other Loves". Louis was a notorious womanizer. He was faithful neither to Frida nor to Mary. Mary tolerated this behavior well until his relationship with Rosalie Osborn, 1954/55, threatened to break up her marriage. The two fought constantly, upsetting the boys. After Richard nearly died in a fall from a horse, Louis broke with Rosalie for the sake of the boys. In 1960 Louis and Mary were especially close, which lasted until the arrival of Vanne Goodall. 

===Floruit===
Jonathan Leakey achieved some brief fame before he quit palaeoanthropology altogether. He started his own site, "Jonny's site" in the Leakey lingo, FLK-NN. There he discovered two skull fragments without the Australopithecine sagittal crest, which Mary connected with Broom's and Robinson's Telanthropus. The problem with it was its contemporaneity with Zinjanthropus. When mailed photographs, Le Gros Clark retorted casually "Shades of Piltdown." Louis cabled him immediately and had some strong words at this suggestion of his incompetence. Clark apologized. Morell, Chapter 14, "Mary's Dig." 

Not long after, in 1960, Louis, his son Philip and Ray Pickering discovered a fossil he termed "Chellean Man", as it was in context with Olduwan tools, the first such find. After reconstruction Louis and Mary called it "Pinhead." It was subsequently included with Homo erectus and was in fact contemporaneous with Paranthropus, which on that account cannot have been in the human line. For many years Louis believed H. erectus was the user of the tools and Australopithecus was not. It is now conceded that both Hominid genera used them.

In 1961 Louis got a salary as well as a grant from the National Geographic Society and turned over the acting directorship of Coryndon to a subordinate. He created the Centre for Prehistory and Paleontology on the same grounds, moved his collections to it, and appointed himself director. This was his new operations center. He opened another excavation at Fort Ternan on Lake Victoria. Shortly after, Heselon discovered Kenyapithecus wickeri, named after the owner of the property. Louis promptly celebrated with George Gaylord Simpson, who happened to be present, aboard the Miocene Lady with "Leakey Safari Specials", a drink made of condensed milk and cognac.

In 1962 Louis was visiting Olduvai when Ndibo Mbuika discovered the first tooth of Homo habilis at MNK. Louis and Mary thought it was female and named her Cinderella, or Cindy. Phillip Tobias identified Jonny's Child with it and Raymond Dart came up with the name Homo habilis at Louis' request, which Tobias translated as "handyman." Morell Chapter 16, "The Human with Ability." Richard Leakey tells a different story about the name. See the Notes section of Homo habilis. It was seen as intermediary between gracile Australopithecus and Homo. These few paragraphs rely on Morell, Chapter 16, "The Human with Ability." 

===Calico Hills===

In 1959 Leakey, while at the British Museum of Natural History in London, received a visit from Ruth DeEtte Simpson, an archaeologist from California. Simpson had acquired what looked like ancient scrapers from a site in the Calico Hills and showed it to Leakey.

In 1963, Leakey obtained funds from the National Geographic Society and commenced archaeological excavations with Simpson. Excavations at the site carried out by Leakey and Simpson revealed that they had located stone artifacts which were dated 100,000 years or older, suggesting a human presence in North America much earlier than others had estimated. Cameron B. Wesson Historical dictionary of early North America 2005, p. 35 

The geologist Vance Haynes had made three visits to the site in 1973 and had claimed that the artifacts found by Leakey were naturally formed geofacts. According to Haynes, the geofacts were formed by stones becoming fractured in an ancient river on the site. Steven Mithen After the ice: a global human history, 20,000-5000 BC 2006, p. 540 

In her autobiography, Mary Leakey wrote that because of Louis's involvement with the Calico Hills site she had lost academic respect for him and that the Calico excavation project was "catastrophic to his professional career and was largely responsible for the parting of our ways". Mary Leakey Disclosing the past 1984 pp. 142-144 

==The Trimates==

One of Louis's greatest legacies stems from his role in fostering field research of primates in their natural habitats, which he understood as key to unraveling the mysteries of human evolution. He personally chose three female researchers, Jane Goodall, Dian Fossey, and Birute Galdikas, calling them The Trimates. Morell, Virginia, "Called "'Trimates,' Three Bold Women Shaped Their Field". Science, Vol. 260, April 16, 1993, pp. 420425 Each went on to become an important scholar in the field of primatology. While these three are the stars, it should be noted that Leakey also encouraged and supported many other Ph.D. candidates, most notably from Cambridge University.

==The last years==
Kenya became independent at noon on 12 December 1963, with Jomo Kenyatta as the first prime minister. The settlers were already leaving the country in large numbers. Kenyatta saw that he had to act swiftly to prevent a descent into chaos. He took a conciliatory view. There were a few deportations, but no reprisals. Louis had felt considerable trepidation about the future of palaeoanthropology in Kenya. A meeting was arranged between him and Jomo at the suggestion of the last colonial governor, Malcolm MacDonald. He was introduced by his old friend Peter Koinange. They spoke in Kikuyu. The meeting ended with an embrace and reassurances. Morell, Chapter 19, "A Girl for the Gorillas." 

During his final years Louis became famous as a lecturer in the United States and United Kingdom. He brought audiences cheering to their feet. He did not personally excavate any longer, as he was crippled with arthritis, for which he had a hip replacement in 1968. He raised funds and directed his family and associates. In Kenya he was an indispensable facilitator for the hundreds of scientists then exploring the East African Rift system for fossils. Without his say-so, permits could not be obtained and access to museum collections was denied. Once he gave permission, his advice was invaluable.

In 1963 he helped Ruth De Ette get started at a site in the Calico Hills of the Mojave Desert in California. The date then accepted for the arrival of humans in the Americas was about 12,000 BCE. On the basis of the time required for the evolution and distribution of native American languages, Louis hypothesized that the arrival must have been thousands of years previously. He encouraged Ruth to view the apparent artifacts she was finding as older than 100,000 years.

Mary did not share his visionary view. She was increasingly disrespectful, viewing him as incompetent, from 1963 on. The old intimacy was gone. Her professional opposition began over Calico Man. Under the rationale of trying to stop Louis from making a mistake that would tarnish his reputation, she persuaded the National Geographic Society to refrain from publishing Calico and pull funding from the project, but Louis found other means. On 26 March 1968, Alan and Helen O'Brien of Newport Beach, California, and some prominent Californians formed the Leakey Foundation. When Louis stayed with them when he was in California, the O'Briens noticed that he was very much underpaid on the lecture circuit. From then on Louis worked with them in fund-raising.

Mary's opposition soon turned into a major schism in the palaeoanthropological village. For example, in 1968 Louis refused an honorary doctorate from the University of Witwatersrand in Johannesburg, primarily because of apartheid in South Africa. Mary accepted one. Now it was Louis' turn to be concerned about her reputation. The two still cared about each other, but were apart and conducted different professional lives. Morell Chapter 23, "Mining Hominids at Olduvai." 

In the last few years Louis' health began to fail more seriously. He had his first heart attacks and spent six months in the hospital. An empathy over health brought him and Dian Fossey together for a brief romance, which she broke off. Richard began to assume more and more of his father's responsibilities, which Louis resisted, but in the end was forced to accept. Everything bad seemed to happen to him in a run of unfortunate luck: he had more heart problems, he was swarmed by bees and nearly killed, he had a stroke, he was involved in controversy over Calico Man, and he had to brook Mary's opposition. One good thing that happened is that he found increasing support and comfort in his friend Vanne Goodall (mother of Jane Goodall), whose London apartment Louis visited when he could. These details and many more can be found in Morell, Chapters 27-30. 

==Death and legacy==

=== Death ===
On 1 October 1972, Louis was stricken with heart attack in Jane Goodall's apartment in London. Jane sat up all night with him in St. Stephen's Hospital and left at 9:00 a.m. He died 30 minutes later at the age of 69.

Mary wanted to cremate Louis and fly the ashes back to Nairobi. Richard intervened. Louis was flown home and interred at Limuru, near the graves of his parents.

In denial, the family did not face the question of a memorial marker for a year. When Richard went to place a stone on the grave he found one already there, courtesy of Rosalie Osborn. The inscription was signed with the letters, ILYFA, "I'll love you forever always", which Rosalie used to place on her letters to him. Richard left it in place. Morell Chapter 30, "An End and a Beginning." 

===Prominent organizations===
*1958. Louis founded the Tigoni Primate Research Center with Cynthia Booth, on her farm north of Nairobi. Later it was the National Primate Research Center, currently the Institute of Primate Research, now in Nairobi. As the Tigoni center, it funded Leakey's Angels.
*1961. Louis created the Centre for Prehistory and Paleontology on the same grounds as Coryndon Museum, appointing himself director.
*1968. Louis assisted with the founding of The Leakey Foundation, to ensure the legacy of his life's work in the study of human origins. The Leakey Foundation exists today as the number-one funder of human-origins research in the United States.

===Prominent family members===
Louis Leakey was married to Mary Leakey, who made the noteworthy discovery of fossil footprints at Laetoli. Found preserved in volcanic ash in Tanzania, they are the earliest record of bipedal gait.

He is also the father of paleoanthropologist Richard Leakey and the botanist Colin Leakey. Louis' cousin, Nigel Gray Leakey, was a recipient of the Victoria Cross during World War II.

=== Position in the Leakey family ===

==Books by Louis Leakey==
Louis's books are listed below. Most of them have many publishers in many editions. The gaps between books are filled by too many articles to list. It was Louis who began the Leakey tradition of publishing in Nature.

First Publication Date Title Notes + 
 1931 The Stone Age Culture of Kenya Colony Written in 1929. Illustrated by Frida Leakey. 
 1934 Adam's Ancestors: The Evolution of Man and His Culture Multiple editions with rewrites, the 4th in 1955. Illustrated by Mary Leakey. Book reviews: Prehistory and Physical Anthropology, American Anthropologist 
 1935 The Stone Age races of Kenya Proposes Homo kanamensis. 
 1936 Kenya: Contrasts and Problems Written in 1935. 
 1936 Stone Age Africa: an Outline of Prehistory in Africa Ten chapters consisting of the ten Munro Lectures delivered in 1936 by Louis to Edinburgh University and intended by him as a textbook. Illustrated by Mary. 
 1937 White African: an Early Autobiography Louis described it as a \"pot-boiler\" written in 1936 for Hodder & Stoughton. 
 1951 The Miocene Hominoidea of East Africa With Wilfrid Le Gros Clark. Volume I of the series Fossil Mammals of Africa published by the Natural History Museum in London. 
 1951 Olduvai Gorge: A Report on the Evolution of the Hand-Axe Culture in Beds I-IV Started in 1935. Names the Olduwan Culture. 
 1952 Mau Mau and the Kikuyu Online at Mau Mau and the Kikuyu Quaestia. 
 1953 Animals in Africa Photographs by Ylla. 
 1954 Defeating Mau Mau With Peter Schmidt. Online at Defeating Mau Mau Quaestia. 
 1965 Olduvai Gorge: A Preliminary Report on the Geology and Fauna, 1951-61 Volume 1. The second volume, Olduvai Gorge: the Cranium and Maxillary Dentition of Australopithecus (Zinjanthropus) boisei, was written by Phillip Tobias. The third volume was written by Mary Leakey. 
 1969 Unveiling Man's Origins With Vanne Morris Goodall. 
 1969 Animals of East Africa: The Wild realm 
 1970 Olduvai Gorge, 1965-1967 
 1974 By the Evidence: Memoirs, 1932-1951 Written in 1972 and published posthumously. Louis finished writing on the day before his death. 
 1977 The Southern Kikuyu before 1903 Published posthumously. The manuscript remained in Louis' safe for decades for lack of a publisher. It was 3 volumes. He refused to follow editorial advice and shorten it. 

==Notes==

==See also==
* Calico Early Man Site
Leonard Hofstatder, the popular (fictional) particle physicist, has claimed on several occasions to have a relation to Leakey on his paternal side.
* Leakey family
* List of fossil sites (with link directory)
* List of hominina (hominid) fossils (with images)

==References==
*Virginia Morell, Ancestral Passions: The Leakey Family and the Quest for Humankind's Beginnings , Copyright 1995.
*Mary Bowman-Kruhm, The Leakeys: a Biography, Copyright 2005, Greenwood Press, ISBN 0-313-32985-0

==External links==
*LeakeyFoundation.org  The Leakey Foundation: a non-profit organization committed to increasing scientific knowledge, education, and public understanding of human origins, evolution, behavior and survival. 
*TalkOrigins Archive  Louis Leakey
*Louis S. B. Leakey, the leakey.com biography.
*Louis Leakey, article by Brian M. Fagan in CD Groliers Encyclopedia.
*Louis Seymour Bazett Leakey (1903-1972)



[[Liar paradox]]

In philosophy and logic, the liar paradox or liar's paradox (pseudmenos lgos-- in Ancient Greek) is the statement "this sentence is false." Trying to assign to this statement a classical binary truth value leads to a contradiction (see paradox).

If "This sentence is false." is true, then the sentence is false, but then if "This sentence is false." is false, then the sentence is true, and so on.

==History==
The Epimenides paradox (circa 600 BC) has been suggested as an example of the liar paradox, but they are not logically equivalent. The semi-mythical seer Epimenides, a Cretan, reportedly stated that "The Cretans are always liars." Epimenides paradox has "All Cretans are liars." However, Epimenides' statement that all Cretans are liars can be resolved as false, given that he knows of at least one other Cretan who does not lie.

One version of the liar paradox is attributed to the Greek philosopher Eubulides of Miletus who lived in the 4th century BC. Eubulides reportedly asked, "A man says that he is lying. Is what he says true or false?" 

The paradox was once discussed by St. Jerome in a sermon:

In early Islamic tradition liar paradox was discussed for at least five centuries starting from late 9th century apparently without being influenced by any other tradition. Nar al-Dn al-s could have been the first logician to identify the liar paradox as self-referential. 

==Explanation of the paradox and variants==
The problem of the liar paradox is that it seems to show that common beliefs about truth and falsity actually lead to a contradiction. Sentences can be constructed that cannot consistently be assigned a truth value even though they are completely in accord with grammar and semantic rules.

The simplest version of the paradox is the sentence:

If (A) is true, then "This statement is false" is true. Therefore (A) must be false. The hypothesis that (A) is true leads to the conclusion that (A) is false, a contradiction.

If (A) is false, then "This statement is false" is false. Therefore (A) must be true. The hypothesis that (A) is false leads to the conclusion that (A) is true, another contradiction. Either way, (A) is both true and false, which is a paradox.

However, that the liar sentence can be shown to be true if it is false and false if it is true has led some to conclude that it is "neither true nor false". Andrew Irvine, Gaps, Gluts, and Paradox, Canadian Journal of Philosophy, supplementary vol. 18 of the A priori (1992), 273-99 This response to the paradox is, in effect, the rejection of the claim that every statement has to be either true or false, also known as the principle of bivalence, a concept related to the law of the excluded middle.

The proposal that the statement is neither true nor false has given rise to the following, strengthened version of the paradox:

If (B) is neither true nor false, then it must be not true. Since this is what (B) itself states, it means that (B) must be true. Since initially (B) was not true and is now true, another paradox arises.

Another reaction to the paradox of (A) is to posit, as Graham Priest has, that the statement is both true and false. Nevertheless, even Priest's analysis is susceptible to the following version of the liar:

If (C) is both true and false, then (C) is only false. But then, it is not true. Since initially (C) was true and is now not true, it is a paradox.

There are also multi-sentence versions of the liar paradox. The following is the two-sentence version:

Assume (D1) is true. Then (D2) is true. This would mean that (D1) is false. Therefore (D1) is both true and false.

Assume (D1) is false. Then (D2) is false. This would mean that (D1) is true. Thus (D1) is both true and false. Either way, (D1) is both true and false - the same paradox as (A) above.

The multi-sentence version of the liar paradox generalizes to any circular sequence of such statements (wherein the last statement asserts the truth/falsity of the first statement), provided there are an odd number of statements asserting the falsity of their successor; the following is a three-sentence version, with each statement asserting the falsity of its successor:

Assume (E1) is true. Then (E2) is false, which means (E3) is true, and hence (E1) is false, leading to a contradiction.

Assume (E1) is false. Then (E2) is true, which means (E3) is false, and hence (E1) is true. Either way, (E1) is both true and false - the same paradox as with (A) and (D1).

There are many other variants, and many complements, possible. In normal sentence construction, the simplest version of the complement is the sentence:

If F is assumed to bear a truth value, then it presents the problem of determining the object of that value. But, a simpler version is possible, by assuming that the single word 'true' bears a truth value. The analogue to the paradox is to assume that the single word 'false' likewise bears a truth value, namely that it is false. This reveals that the paradox can be reduced to the mental act of assuming that the very idea of fallacy bears a truth value, namely that the very idea of fallacy is false: an act of misrepresentation. So, the symmetrical version of the paradox would be:

==Possible resolutions==

===Alfred Tarski===
Alfred Tarski diagnosed the paradox as arising only in languages that are "semantically closed", by which he meant a language in which it is possible for one sentence to predicate truth (or falsehood) of another sentence in the same language (or even of itself). To avoid self-contradiction, it is necessary when discussing truth values to envision levels of languages, each of which can predicate truth (or falsehood) only of languages at a lower level. So, when one sentence refers to the truth-value of another, it is semantically higher. The sentence referred to is part of the "object language", while the referring sentence is considered to be a part of a "meta-language" with respect to the object language. It is legitimate for sentences in "languages" higher on the semantic hierarchy to refer to sentences lower in the "language" hierarchy, but not the other way around. This prevents a system from becoming self-referential.

===Arthur Prior===
Arthur Prior asserts that there is nothing paradoxical about the liar paradox. His claim (which he attributes to Charles Sanders Peirce and John Buridan) is that every statement includes an implicit assertion of its own truth. Thus, for example, the statement, "It is true that two plus two equals four", contains no more information than the statement "two plus two equals four", because the phrase "it is true that..." is always implicitly there. And in the self-referential spirit of the Liar Paradox, the phrase "it is true that..." is equivalent to "this whole statement is true and ...".

Thus the following two statements are equivalent:

The latter is a simple contradiction of the form "A and not A", and hence is false. There is therefore no paradox because the claim that this two-conjunct Liar is false does not lead to a contradiction. Eugene Mills Mills, Eugene (1998) A simple solution to the Liar, Philosophical Studies 89: 197-212. and Neil Lefebvre and Melissa Schelein Lefebvre, N. and Schelein, M., "The Liar Lied," in Philosophy Now issue 51 present similar answers.

===Saul Kripke===
Saul Kripke argued that whether a sentence is paradoxical or not can depend upon contingent facts. If the only thing Smith says about Jones is

and Jones says only these three things about Smith:

If Smith really is a big spender but is "not" soft on crime, then both Smith's remark about Jones and Jones's last remark about Smith are paradoxical.

Kripke proposes a solution in the following manner. If a statement's truth value is ultimately tied up in some evaluable fact about the world, that statement is "grounded". If not, that statement is "ungrounded". Ungrounded statements do not have a truth value. Liar statements and liar-like statements are ungrounded, and therefore have no truth value.

===Jon Barwise and John Etchemendy===
Jon Barwise and John Etchemendy propose that the liar sentence (which they interpret as synonymous with the Strengthened Liar) is ambiguous. They base this conclusion on a distinction they make between a "denial" and a "negation". If the liar means, "It is not the case that this statement is true", then it is denying itself. If it means, "This statement is not true", then it is negating itself. They go on to argue, based on situation semantics, that the "denial liar" can be true without contradiction while the "negation liar" can be false without contradiction. Their 1987 book makes heavy use of non-well-founded set theory. Jon Barwise and John Etchemendy (1987) The Liar. Oxford University Press. 

===Dialetheism===
Graham Priest and other logicians, including J.C. Beall, and Bradley Armour-Garb have proposed that the liar sentence should be considered to be both true and false, a point of view known as dialetheism. Dialetheism is the view that there are true contradictions. Dialetheism raises its own problems. Chief among these is that since dialetheism recognizes the liar paradox, an intrinsic contradiction, as being true, it must discard the long-recognized principle of explosion, which asserts that any proposition can be deduced from a contradiction, unless the dialetheist is willing to accept trivialism - the view that all propositions are true. Since trivialism is an intuitively false view, dialetheists nearly always reject the explosion principle. Logics that reject it are called paraconsistent.

===Non-cognitivism===

Andrew Irvine has argued in favour of a non-cognitivist solution to the paradox, suggesting that some apparently well-formed sentences will turn out to be neither true nor false and that "formal criteria alone will inevitably prove insufficient" for resolving the paradox. 

==Logical structure of the liar paradox==
For a better understanding of the liar paradox, it is useful to write it down in a more formal way. If "this statement is false" is denoted by A and its truth value is being sought, it is necessary to find a condition that restricts the choice of possible truth values of A. Because A is self-referential it is possible to give the condition by an equation.

If some statement, B, is assumed to be false, one writes, B = false. The statement (C) that the statement B is false would be written as C = B = false. Now, the liar paradox can be expressed as the statement A, that A is false:

A = A = false

This is an equation from which the truth value of A = "this statement is false" could hopefully be obtained. In the boolean domain "A = false" is equivalent to "not A" and therefore the equation is not solvable. This is the motivation for reinterpretation of A. The simplest logical approach to make the equation solvable is the dialetheistic approach, in which case the solution is A being both "true" and "false". Other resolutions mostly include some modifications of the equation; Arthur Prior claims that the equation should be "A = 'A = false and A = true'" and therefore A is false. In computational verb logic, the liar paradox is extended to statement like, "I hear what he says; he says what I don't hear", where verb logic must be used to resolve the paradox. 

==Applications==

===Gdel's First Incompleteness Theorem===

Gdel's incompleteness theorems are two fundamental theorems of mathematical logic which state inherent limitations of all but the most trivial axiomatic systems for mathematics. The theorems were proven by Kurt Gdel in 1931, and are important in the philosophy of mathematics. Roughly speaking, in proving the first incompleteness theorem, Gdel used a modified version of the liar paradox, replacing "this sentence is false" with "this sentence is not provable", called the "Gdel sentence G". Thus for a theory "T", "G" is true, but not provable in "T". The analysis of the truth and provability of "G" is a formalized version of the analysis of the truth of the liar sentence. 

To prove the first incompleteness theorem, Gdel represented statements by numbers. Then the theory at hand, which is assumed to prove certain facts about numbers, also proves facts about its own statements. Questions about the provability of statements are represented as questions about the properties of numbers, which would be decidable by the theory if it were complete. In these terms, the Gdel sentence states that no natural number exists with a certain, strange property. A number with this property would encode a proof of the inconsistency of the theory. If there were such a number then the theory would be inconsistent, contrary to the consistency hypothesis. So, under the assumption that the theory is consistent, there is no such number.

It is not possible to replace "not provable" with "false" in a Gdel sentence because the predicate "Q is the Gdel number of a false formula" cannot be represented as a formula of arithmetic. This result, known as Tarski's undefinability theorem, was discovered independently by Gdel (when he was working on the proof of the incompleteness theorem) and by Alfred Tarski.

George Boolos has since sketched an alternative proof of the first incompleteness theorem that uses Berry's paradox rather than the liar paradox to construct a true but unprovable formula.

==In popular culture==

The liar paradox is occasionally used in fiction to shut down artificial intelligences, who are presented as being unable to process the sentence. In episode I, Mudd, the Liar paradox is used by the characters of Captain Kirk and Harry Mudd to confuse and ultimately disable an android.

In the 1973 Doctor Who serial The Green Death, the Doctor temporarily stumps the insane computer BOSS by asking it "If I were to tell you that the next thing I say would be true, but the last thing I said was a lie, would you believe me?" However BOSS eventually decides the question is irrelevant and summons security.

The second book in Emily Rodda's Deltora Quest series, The Lake of Tears makes a notable use of the paradox. The main character, Lief, must answer a riddle correctly or be killed by the guardian of a bridge. When Lief answers the trick riddle wrongly, he confronts the guardian with his treachery. The guardian answers with another riddle, telling Lief to make a statement; if false, he will kill Lief by chopping off his head; if true, he will strangle Lief. Lief replies, "You will cut off my head." As the guardian was cursed to his fate by the evil sorceress Thaegan 'until truth and lies become one', the paradox allows him to revert to his original form: an eagle.

Episode 14 of Season Five of the TV series "Andromeda" (The Past is Prolix) opens with the following epigram:

The following statement is false:
The previous statement is true.
Welcome to our corner of the universe

In the 2011 videogame Portal 2, GLaDOS attempts to use the "this sentence is false" paradox to defeat the nave artificial intelligence Wheatley, but, lacking the intelligence to realize it's a paradox, he simply responds, "Um, true. I'll go with true. There, that was easy." and is unaffected.

Comedian George Carlin says "The following statement is true: the preceding statement is false!" within a list of announcements on his 1981 comedy album A Place For My Stuff.

In Lois McMaster Bujold's Vorkosigan Saga, Cordelia Naismith frequently muses on the axiom "all Cretans are liars" in her inner monologue.

In an episode of The Grim Adventures of Billy and Mandy Mandy precedes the episode with the paradox, "This statement is false."

==See also==
* Card paradox
* Epimenides paradox
* Insolubilia
* List of paradoxes
* Pinocchio paradox
* Quine's paradox
* Socratic paradox
* Yablo's paradox

==Notes==

==References==

* Greenough, P.M., (2001) " ," American Philosophical Quarterly 38:
* Hughes, G.E., (1992) John Buridan on Self-Reference : Chapter Eight of Buridan's Sophismata, with a Translation, and Introduction, and a Philosophical Commentary, Cambridge Univ. Press, ISBN 0-521-28864-9. Buridan's detailed solution to a number of such paradoxes.
* Kirkham, Richard (1992) Theories of Truth. MIT Press. Especially chapter 9.
* Saul Kripke (1975) "An Outline of a Theory of Truth," Journal of Philosophy 72: 690-716.
* Lefebvre, Neil, and Schelein, Melissa (2005) "The Liar Lied," Philosophy Now issue 51.
* Graham Priest (1984) "The Logic of Paradox Revisited," Journal of Philosophical Logic 13: 153-179.
* A. N. Prior (1976) Papers in Logic and Ethics. Duckworth.
* Smullyan, Raymond (19nn) What is the Name of this Book?. ISBN 0-671-62832-1. A collection of logic puzzles exploring this theme.
* 2|Portal 2: Chapter 7 The reunion] (2011) Valve Corporation

==External links==
*
*



[[Louchbem]]

Louchbem or loucherbem is Parisian and Lyonnaise butchers' (French boucher) slang, similar to Pig Latin and Verlan. It originated in the mid-19th century and was in common use until the 1950s. Each word is transformed by moving the first consonant to the end; and suffixes such as -me, -ji, -oc, -muche are added at the end; the letter "L" is placed at the beginning of the new word. Note that spelling often becomes phoneticised.

==Louchbem today==
Even today, Louchbem is still well-known and used among those working at point-of-sale in the meat retail industry. Some words have even leaked into common, everyday use by the masses; an example is the word loufoque, meaning unsound of mind.

In 1937 E.C. Bentley used the language as a plot point in his short story, 'The Old-Fashioned Apache'.

== Examples ==
Here are a few example Louchbem words.

 English French Louchbem 
 slang l'argot largomuche 
 butcher boucher louchbem 
 customer client liencls 
 coffeehouse caf lafcaisse 
 (don't) understand comprendre (pas) lomprenqus (dans le lap) 
 woman (lady) femme (dame) lemmef (lamd) 
 blunder gaffe lafgu 
 boy/waiter garon laronguesse 
 Roma (ethnicity) gitan litjoc 
 leg (of mutton, etc.) gigot ligogem 
 insane fou louf; loufoque 
 pork porc lorpic 
 mackerel maquereau lacromuche 
 Sir; Mister; gentleman monsieur lesieurmique 
 piece morceau lorsomique 
 on top (of) pardessus lardeuss (lardeussupem) 
 excuse me?; sorry pardon lardonpem 
 to talk parler larlpem 
 manager patron latronpuche 
 tip pourboire lourboirpem 
 bag sac lacs 
 expensive cher lerche; lerchem (often in the negative, as pas lerchem) 
 sneakily en douce en louced; en loucedoc 
 wallet portefeuille larfeuille; lortefeuillepem 
 thief, crook filou loufiah 
 knife couteau louteauc 

There is another French argot called largonji, which differs from louchbem only in the suffix that is added (-i instead of -em); the term is derived from jargon. 

==Notes==

==Bibliography==
* Marcel Schwob, tude sur largot franais. Paris: mile Bouillon, 1889.

==External links==
* 



[[Leon M. Lederman]]

Leon Max Lederman (born July 15, 1922) is an American experimental physicist who received, along with Martin Lewis Perl, the Wolf Prize in Physics in 1982, for their research on quarks and leptons, and the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1988, along with Melvin Schwartz and Jack Steinberger, for their research on neutrinos. He is Director Emeritus of Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (Fermilab) in Batavia, Illinois, USA. He founded the Illinois Mathematics and Science Academy, in Aurora, Illinois in 1986, and has served in the capacity of Resident Scholar since 1998. In 2012, he was awarded the Vannevar Bush Award for his extraordinary contributions to understanding the basic forces and particles of nature. National Science Board - Honorary Awards - Vannevar Bush Award Recipients 

==Early life and career==
Lederman was born in New York City, New York, the son of Minna (ne Rosenberg) and Morris Lederman, a laundryman. Fermilab: Physics, the Frontier, and Megascience - Lillian Hoddeson, Adrienne W. Kolb, Catherine Westfall - Google Books Lederman graduated from the James Monroe High School in the South Bronx. He received his bachelor's degree from the City College of New York in 1943, and received a Ph.D. from Columbia University in 1951. He then joined the Columbia faculty and eventually became Eugene Higgins Professor of Physics. He took an extended leave of absence from Columbia in 1979 to become director of Fermilab. Resigning from Columbia (and retiring from Fermilab) in 1989 to teach briefly at the University of Chicago, he then moved to the physics department of the Illinois Institute of Technology, where he currently serves as the Pritzker Professor of Science. In 1991, Lederman became President of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.

Lederman is also one of the main proponents of the "Physics First" movement. Also known as "Right-side Up Science" and "Biology Last," this movement seeks to rearrange the current high school science curriculum so that physics precedes chemistry and biology.

A former president of the American Physical Society, Lederman also received the National Medal of Science, the Wolf Prize and the Ernest O. Lawrence Medal. Lederman serves as President of the Board of Sponsors of The Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. He also served on the board of trustees for Science Service, now known as Society for Science & the Public, from 1989 to 1992.

Among his achievements are the discovery of the muon neutrino in 1962 and the bottom quark in 1977. These helped establish his reputation as among the top particle physicists.

In 1977, a group of physicists led by Leon Lederman announced that a particle with a mass of about 6.0 GeV was being produced by the Fermilab particle accelerator. The particle's initial name was the greek letter Upsilon (). After taking further data, the group discovered that this particle did not actually exist, and the "discovery" was named "Oops-Leon" as a pun on the original name (mispronounced ) and Lederman's first name.

As the director of Fermilab and subsequent Nobel physics prizewinner, Leon Lederman was a very prominent early supporter  some sources say the architect or proposer direct link:  of the Superconducting Super Collider project, which was endorsed around 1983, and was a major proponent and advocate throughout its lifetime. (direct link to article: ) Lederman later wrote his 1993 popular science book  which sought to promote awareness of the significance of such a project  in the context of the project's last years and the changing political climate of the 1990s. The increasingly moribund project was finally shelved that same year after some $2 billion of expenditure. 

In 1988, Lederman received the Nobel Prize for Physics along with Melvin Schwartz and Jack Steinberger "for the neutrino beam method and the demonstration of the doublet structure of the leptons through the discovery of the muon neutrino". Lederman also received the National Medal of Science (1965), the Elliott Cresson Medal for Physics (1976), the Wolf Prize for Physics (1982) and the Enrico Fermi Award (1992).

In 1995, he received the Chicago History Museum "Making History Award" for Distinction in Science Medicine and Technology.

Lederman was an early supporter of Science Debate 2008, an initiative to get the then-candidates for president, Barack Obama and John McCain, to debate the nation's top science policy challenges. In October 2010, Lederman participated in the USA Science and Engineering Festival's Lunch with a Laureate program where middle and high school students got to engage in an informal conversation with a Nobel Prize-winning Scientist over a brown bag lunch. Lederman was also a member of the USA Science and Engineering Festival's Advisory Board USA Science and Engineering Festival - Advisors and CRDF Global.

==Personal life==
Lederman was born in New York to a family of Jewish immigrants from Russia. . His father operated a hand laundry while encouraging Leon to pursue his education. He went to elementary school in New York City, continuing on to college and his doctorate in the city. Lederman, Leon M. "Leon M. Lederman  Autobiography." http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/1988/lederman-autobio.html Retrieved 06 April 2009. Published 1988, The Nobel Foundation. 

In his book,, Lederman writes that, although he was a chemistry major, he became fascinated with physics, because of the clarity of the logic and the unambiguous results from experimentation. His best friend during his college years, Martin Klein, convinced him of "the splendors of physics during a long evening over many beers." After that conversation he became resolute and unwavering regarding his desire to pursue physics. When he joined the Army with a B.S. in Chemistry, he was determined to become a physicist following his service. The God Particle: If the Universe is the Answer, What is the Question  page 5 by Leon Lederman with Dick Teresi (copyright 1993) Houghton Mifflin Company 

After three years in the U.S. Army during World War II, he took up physics
at Columbia University, and received his Masters in 1948.
Lederman began his Ph.D research working with Columbia's Nevis synchro-cyclotron, see High Energy Physics section on this page: http://www.columbia.edu/cu/physics/news/DeptHistory/index/ which was the most powerful particle accelerator in the world at that time. Dwight D. Eisenhower, then the president of Columbia University, and future president of the United States, cut the ribbon dedicating the synchro-cyclotron in June 1950. Eisenhower at ribbon cutting for the dedication of the Nevis syncho-cyclotron http://www.columbia.edu/cu/physics/images/columbia-cyclotron.jpeg These atom smashers were just coming of age at this time and created the new discipline of particle physics. 

After receiving his Ph.D and then becoming a faculty member at Columbia University he was promoted to full professor in 1958. The God Particle: If the Universe is the Answer, What is the Question  page 296 by Leon Lederman with Dick Teresi (copyright 1993) Houghton Mifflin Company 

In "The God Particle" he once wrote "The history of atomism is one of reductionism  the effort to reduce all the operations of nature to a small number of laws governing a small number of primordial objects." The God Particle: If the Universe is the Answer, What is the Question  page 87 by Leon Lederman with Dick Teresi (copyright 1993) Houghton Mifflin Company And this was the quest he undertook. This book shows that he pursued the quark, and hopes to find the Higgs boson. The top quark, which he and other physicists realized must exist according to the standard model, was, in fact, produced at Fermilab not long after this book was published. Observation of Top Quark Production in Collisions with the Collider Detector at Fermilab http://prola.aps.org/abstract/PRL/v74/i14/p2626_1 

He is known for his sense of humor in the physics community. The God Particle: If the Universe is the Answer, What is the Question  page 17  by Leon Lederman with Dick Teresi (copyright 1993) Houghton Mifflin Company On August 26, 2008 Lederman was video-recorded by a science focused organization called ScienCentral, on the street in a major U.S. city, answering questions from passersby. Street Corner Science with Leon Lederman, http://blogs.discovermagazine.com/cosmicvariance/2008/08/26/street-corner-science-with-leon-lederman He answered questions such as "What is the strong force?" and "What happened before the Big Bang?".

He has three children with his first wife, Florence Gordon, and now lives with his second wife, Ellen (Carr), in Batavia, Illinois. Lederman, Leon M. "Leon M. Lederman  Autobiography." http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/1988/lederman-autobio.html Retrieved 29.7.2008. Published 1988, The Nobel Foundation. 

He is an atheist. 

==Publications==
* by Leon M. Lederman, Dick Teresi (ISBN 0-385-31211-3)
* From Quarks to the Cosmos by Leon Lederman and David N. Schramm (ISBN 0-7167-6012-6)
* Portraits of Great American Scientists Leon M. Lederman, et al. (ISBN 1-57392-932-8)
* Symmetry and the Beautiful Universe Leon M. Lederman and Christopher T. Hill (ISBN 1-59102-242-8)
* What We'll Find Inside the Atom by Leon Lederman is an essay he wrote for the September 15, 2008 issue of Newsweek
* "Quantum Physics for Poets" Leon M. Lederman and Christopher T. Hill (ISBN 978-1616142339)

==Honorary degrees and awards==
* Election to the National Academy of Sciences, 1965.
*
* U.S. National Medal of Science, 1965.
*
* Member, American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 13 May 1970.
*
* Townsend Harris Medal, Alumni Association of the City College of New York, 1973.
*
* Elliot Cresson Prize of the Franklin Institute, 1976.
*
* President Jimmy Carter's Committee on the National Medal of Science, 21 March 1979.
*
* Wolf Foundation Prize in Physics, Israel, 1982.
*
* Doctor of Science, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, 10 June 1983.
*
* Doctor of Humane Letters and Science, IIT, Chicago, Illinois, 17 May 1987.
*
* Doctor of Science, Lake Forest College, Lake Forest, Illinois, 7 May 1988.
*
* Honorary Degree of Doctor of Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 15 May 1988.
*
* Department of Energy Distinguished Associate Award, May 1988.
*
* Doctor of Science, City College of New York, New York, New York, 8 June 1988.
*
* Nobel Prize in Physics, December 1988.
*
* La laurea honoris causa in Fisica, Universita' degli Studi di Pisa, 21 March 1989.
*
* Member, American Philosophical Society, 21 April 1989.
*
* Doctor of Science, honoris causae, Aurora University, Aurora, Illinois, 20 May 1989.
*
* Doctor of Humane Letters, Columbia College, Chicago, Illinois, 3 June 1989.
*
* Citation on the occasion of the dedication of IMSA (founded 1985) to the State of Illinois in honor of Leon Lederman and Gov. James Thompson, IMSA, Aurora, Illinois, 10 June 1989.
*
* Doctor of Humane Letters, Rush University, Chicago, Illinois, 10 June 1989.
*
* Doctor of Science, University of Illinois, Chicago, Illinois, 11 June 1989.
*
* Doctor en Filosofia  Fisica, Honoris Causa, Universidad de Guanajuato, Guanajuato, Mexico, 2 August 1989.
*
* Honorary Degree, Academia Nacional de Ciencias Exactas, Fisicas y Naturales, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 3 November 1989.
*
* Doctor of Philosophy of Physics, honoris causa, University of Guanajuato, Guanajuato, Mexico, 1989.
*
* Appointment as member of the Secretary of Energy Advisory Board, U.S. Department of Energy, Washington, DC, 15 February 1990.
*
* Laureate of the Lincoln Academy, State of Illinois, Springfield, Illinois, 21 April 1990.
*
* Doctor of Science, Bradley University, Peoria, Illinois, 19 May 1990.
*
* Doctor of Science, Columbia University, New York, New York, 26 September 1990.
*
* Public Affairs Committee Award, American Chemical Society, 22 March 1991.
*
* 1991 William Proctor Prize, Sigma Xi, The Scientific Research Society, 1991.
*
* Doctor of Humane Letters, honoris causa, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, The City University of New York, New York City, New York, 11 May 1992.
*
* Doctor of Science, Adelphi University, Long Island, New York, 17 May 1992.
*
* Doctor of Science, honoris causa, Saint Xavier University, Chicago, Illinois, 23 May 1992.
*
* Doctor of Science  honoris causa, University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom, 10 July 1992.
*
* Doctor of Science, honoris causa, Drury College, Springfield, Missouri, 14 October 1992.
*
* Enrico Fermi Prize of the U.S. Department of Energy, 1992.
*
* Doctor of Humane Letters, State University of New York, Geneseo, New York, 15 May 1993.
*
* Doctor of Science, honoris causa, Case-Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, 23 May 1993.
*
* President's Medal, The City College, The City University of New York, New York, New York, 28 May 1993.
*
* Doctor of Science, honoris causa, Marywood College, Scranton, Pennsylvania, 15 October 1993.
*
* Doctor of Humane Letters, honoris causa, Illinois Benedictine College, Lisle, Illinois, 21 May 1994.
*
* Appointment as a Tetelman Fellow at Jonathan Edwards College, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, 7 November 1994.
*
* Doctor of Humane Letters, University of Dallas, Dallas, Texas, 15 November 1994.
*
* The first Enrico Fermi History Maker Award, for distinction in Science, Medicine and Technology, Chicago Historical Society, Chicago, Illinois, 8 June 1995.
*
* Doctor of Humane Letters, DePaul University, Chicago, Illinois, 11 June 1995.
*
* Ordem Nacional do Merito Cientifico, Brasilia, Brazil, 13 June 1995.
*
* Universitario de la Universidad Nacional de San Antonio Abad Del Cusco, Cusco, Peru, Doctor, honoris causa, 16 August 1995.
*
* University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana, Doctor of Science, honoris causa, 18 May 1997.
*
* Doctor of Science, Bethany College, Bethany, Virginia, 24 May 1997.
*
* Doctor of Science, Illinois State University, Normal, Illinois, 17 May 1998.
*
* Doctor of Science, honoris causa, Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts, 17 May 1998.
*
* Doctor of Science, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania, December 1998.
*
* Doctor, honoris causa, Institute for High Energy Physics, Protvino, Russia, 15 July 1998.
*
* Member, President Bill Clinton's Commission on White House Fellowships, 13 April 1999.
*
* Diploma, Miembro Correspondiente, La Academia Mexicana de Ciencias, October 1999.
*
* 1999 Medallion, Division of Particles and Fields, Mexican Physical Society, Mrida, Yucatn, Mexico, 11 November 1999.
*
* Honorary Professor, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China, 5 November 2000.
*
* Doctor of Humane Letters, Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois, 21 January 2001.
*
* Doctor of Science, Florida Institute of Technology, Melbourne, Florida, May 2004.
*
* Doctor of Public Service, The George Washington University, Washington, D.C., 16 May 2004.
*
* Doctor of Science Education, honoris causa, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, 12 December 2004.
*
* Doctor of Humane Letters, Honoris Causa, Dominican University, River Forest, Illinois, 6 May 2006.
*
* Doctor of Science, Honoris Causa, Gustavus Adolphus College, St. Peter, Minnesota, 24 October 2008.
*
* Vannevar Bush Prize, 2012. Fermilab History and Archives Project | Leon M. Lederman Honorary Degrees and Awards 

==See also==
* List of Jewish Nobel laureates

==References==

==External links==

* Education, Politics, Einstein and Charm The Science Network interview with Leon Lederman
* Biography and Bibliographic Resources, from the Office of Scientific and Technical Information, United States Department of Energy
* Fermilab's Leon M. Lederman webpage
* The Nobel Prize in Physics 1988
* Video Interview with Lederman from the Nobel Foundation
* Leon M. Lederman  Autobiography
* Timeline of Nobel Prize Winners in Physics webpage for Leon Max Lederman
* Story of Leon by Leon Lederman
* Honeywell  Nobel Interactive Studio
* 1976 Cresson Medal recipient from The Franklin Institute.



[[LCD (disambiguation)]]

LCD may refer to:
*LCD (music act), a performance group
*Lacida, a cryptograph
*Lattice corneal dystrophy
*Lesotho Congress for Democracy, a political party
*Liquid crystal display, an electronic device
* Liquor carbonis detergens (medical coal tar)
*Lord Chancellor's Department, an English government department
*Loudest Common Denominator, an album by Drowning Pool
*Low-carbohydrate diet, a food regimen
*Lowest common denominator, a mathematical quantity



[[Louis the Pious]]

Louis the Pious (778  20 June 840), also called the Fair, and the Debonaire, , or , or , or . was the King of Aquitaine from 781. He was also King of the Franks and co-Emperor (as Louis I) with his father, Charlemagne, from 813. 

As the only surviving adult son of Charlemagne and Hildegard, he became the sole ruler of the Franks after his father's death in 814, a position which he held until his death, save for the period 83334, during which he was deposed. 

During his reign in Aquitaine, Louis was charged with the defence of the Empire's southwestern frontier. He conquered Barcelona from the Muslims in 801 and asserted Frankish authority over Pamplona and the Basques south of the Pyrenees in 812. As emperor he included his adult sons, Lothair, Pepin, and Louis, in the government and sought to establish a suitable division of the realm among them. The first decade of his reign was characterised by several tragedies and embarrassments, notably the brutal treatment of his nephew Bernard of Italy, for which Louis atoned in a public act of self-debasement. 

In the 830s his empire was torn by civil war between his sons, only exacerbated by Louis's attempts to include his son Charles by his second wife in the succession plans. Though his reign ended on a high note, with order largely restored to his empire, it was followed by three years of civil war. Louis is generally compared unfavourably to his father, though the problems he faced were of a distinctly different sort.

==Birth and rule in Aquitaine==
Louis was born while his father Charlemagne was on campaign in Spain, at the Carolingian villa of Cassinogilum, according to Einhard and the anonymous chronicler called Astronomus; the place is usually identified with Chasseneuil, near Poitiers. Einhard gives the name of his birthplace as Cassanoilum. In addition to Chasseneuil near Poitiers, scholars have suggested that Louis may have been born at Casseneuil (Lot et Garonne) or at Casseuil on the Garonne near La Role, where the Dropt flows into the Garonne. He was the third son of Charlemagne by his wife Hildegard. His grandfather was Pepin the Short.

Louis was crowned King of Aquitaine as a child in 781 and sent there with regents and a court. Charlemagne constituted the sub-kingdom in order to secure the border of his kingdom after the destructive war against the Aquitanians and Basques under Waifer (capitulated c. 768) and later Hunald II, which culminated in the disastrous Battle of Roncesvalles (778). Charlemagne wanted his son Louis to grow up in the area where he was to reign. However, in 785, wary of the customs his son may have been taking in Aquitaine, Charlemagne sent for him to Aquitaine and Louis presented himself at the Royal Council of Paderborn dressed up in Basque costumes along with other youths in the same garment, which may have made a good impression in Toulouse, since the Basques of Vasconia were a mainstay of the Aquitanian army.

In 794, Charlemagne settled four former Gallo-Roman villas on Louis, in the thought that he would take in each in turn as winter residence: Dou-la-Fontaine in today's Anjou, Ebreuil in Allier, Angeac-Charente, and the disputed Cassinogilum. Charlemagne's intention was to see all his sons brought up as natives of their given territories, wearing the national costume of the region and ruling by the local customs. Thus were the children sent to their respective realms at so young an age. Each kingdom had its importance in keeping some frontier, Louis's was the Spanish March. In 797, Barcelona, the greatest city of the Marca, fell to the Franks when Zeid, its governor, rebelled against Crdoba and, failing, handed it to them. The Umayyad authority recaptured it in 799. However, Louis marched the entire army of his kingdom, including Gascons with their duke Sancho I of Gascony, Provenals under Leibulf, and Goths under Bera, over the Pyrenees and besieged it for two years, wintering there from 800 to 801, when it capitulated. The sons were not given independence from central authority, however, and Charlemagne ingrained in them the concepts of empire and unity by sending them on military expeditions far from their home bases. Louis campaigned in the Italian Mezzogiorno against the Beneventans at least once.

Louis was one of Charlemagne's three legitimate sons to survive infancy, including his twin brother, Lothair. According to Frankish custom, Louis had expected to share his inheritance with his brothers, Charles the Younger, King of Neustria, and Pepin, King of Italy. In the Divisio Regnorum of 806, Charlemagne had slated Charles the Younger as his successor as emperor and chief king, ruling over the Frankish heartland of Neustria and Austrasia, while giving Pepin the Iron Crown of Lombardy, which Charlemagne possessed by conquest. To Louis's kingdom of Aquitaine, he added Septimania, Provence, and part of Burgundy.

But in the event, Charlemagne's other legitimate sons died  Pepin in 810 and Charles in 811  and Louis alone remained to be crowned co-emperor with Charlemagne in 813. On his father's death in 814, he inherited the entire Frankish kingdom and all its possessions (with the sole exception of Italy, which remained within Louis's empire, but under the direct rule of Bernard, Pepin's son).

Charlemagne crowns Louis the Pious

==Emperor==
He was in his villa of Dou-la-Fontaine, Anjou, when he received news of his father's death. Hurrying to Aachen, he crowned himself and was proclaimed by the nobles with shouts of Vivat Imperator Ludovicus.

In his first coinage type, minted from the start of his reign, he imitated his father Charlemagne's portrait coinage, giving an image of imperial power and prestige in an echo of Roman glory. S. Coupland, "Money and coinage under Louis the Pious", Francia 17.1 (1990), p 25. He quickly enacted a "moral purge", in which he sent all of his unmarried sisters to nunneries, forgoing their diplomatic use as hostage brides in favour of the security of avoiding the entanglements that powerful brothers-in-law might bring. He spared his illegitimate half-brothers and tonsured his father's cousins, Adalard and Wala, shutting them up in Noirmoutier and Corbie, respectively, despite the latter's initial loyalty.

His chief counsellors were Bernard, margrave of Septimania, and Ebbo, Archbishop of Reims. The latter, born a serf, was raised by Louis to that office, but ungratefully betrayed him later. He retained some of his father's ministers, such as Elisachar, abbot of St. Maximin near Trier, and Hildebold, Archbishop of Cologne. Later he replaced Elisachar with Hildwin, abbot of many monasteries.

He also employed Benedict of Aniane (the Second Benedict), a Septimanian Visigoth and monastic founder, to help him reform the Frankish church. One of Benedict's primary reforms was to ensure that all religious houses in Louis' realm adhered to the Rule of Saint Benedict, named for its creator, Benedict of Nursia (480550), the First Benedict.

In 816, Pope Stephen IV, who had succeeded Leo III, visited Reims and again crowned Louis. The Emperor thereby strengthened the papacy by recognising the importance of the pope in imperial coronations.

Denarius of Louis.

===Ordinatio imperii===
On Maundy Thursday 817, Louis and his court were crossing a wooden gallery from the cathedral to the palace in Aachen when the gallery collapsed, killing many. Louis, having barely survived and feeling the imminent danger of death, began planning for his succession; three months later he issued an Ordinatio Imperii, an imperial decree that laid out plans for an orderly succession. In 815, he had already given his two eldest sons a share in the government, when he had sent his elder sons Lothair and Pepin to govern Bavaria and Aquitaine respectively, though without the royal titles. Now, he proceeded to divide the empire among his three sons and his nephew, Bernard of Italy:

* Lothair was proclaimed and crowned co-emperor in Aachen by his father. He was promised the succession to most of the Frankish dominions (excluding the exceptions below), and would be the overlord of his brothers and cousin.
* Pepin was proclaimed King of Aquitaine, his territory including Gascony, the march around Toulouse, and the counties of Carcassonne, Autun, Avallon and Nevers.
* Louis, the youngest son, was proclaimed King of Bavaria and the neighbouring marches.
* Bernard, the son of Charlemagne's son Pepin of Italy, was confirmed as King of Italy, a title he had been allowed to inherit from his father by Charlemagne.

If one of the subordinate kings died, he was to be succeeded by his sons. If he died childless, Lothair would inherit his kingdom. In the event of Lothair dying without sons, one of Louis the Pious' younger sons would be chosen to replace him by "the people". Above all, the Empire would not be divided: the Emperor would rule supreme over the subordinate kings, whose obedience to him was mandatory.

With this settlement, Louis tried to combine his sense for the Empire's unity, supported by the clergy, while at the same time providing positions for all of his sons. Instead of treating his sons equally in status and land, he elevated his first-born son Lothair above his younger brothers and gave him the largest part of the Empire as his share.

Louis the Pious doing penance at Attigny in 822

===Bernard's rebellion and Louis's penance===
The ordinatio imperii of Aachen left Bernard of Italy in an uncertain and subordinate position as king of Italy, and he began plotting to declare independence upon hearing of it. Louis immediately directed his army towards Italy, and betook himself to Chalon-sur-Sane. Intimidated by the emperor's swift action, Bernard met his uncle at Chalon, under invitation, and surrendered. He was taken to Aachen by Louis, who there had him tried and condemned to death for treason. Louis had the sentence commuted to blinding, which was duly carried out; Bernard did not survive the ordeal, however, dying after two days of agony. Others also suffered: Theodulf of Orlans, in eclipse since the death of Charlemagne, was accused of having supported the rebellion, and was thrown into a monastic prison, but he died soon after  poisoned, it was rumoured. The Frankish Kingdoms, 814-898:the West, Janet L. Nelson, The New Cambridge Medieval History, 700900, Vol. II, ed. Rosamond McKitterick, (Cambridge University Press, 1995), 114. The fate of his nephew deeply marked Louis's conscience for the rest of his life.

In 822, as a deeply religious man, Louis performed penance for causing Bernard's death, at his palace of Attigny near Vouziers in the Ardennes, before Pope Paschal I, and a council of ecclesiastics and nobles of the realm that had been convened for the reconciliation of Louis with his three younger half-brothers, Hugo whom he soon made abbot of St-Quentin, Drogo whom he soon made Bishop of Metz, and Theodoric. This act of contrition, partly in emulation of Theodosius I, had the effect of greatly reducing his prestige as a Frankish ruler, for he also recited a list of minor offences about which no secular ruler of the time would have taken any notice. He also made the egregious error of releasing Wala and Adalard from their monastic confinements, placing the former in a position of power in the court of Lothair and the latter in a position in his own house.

Louis on a denarius from Sens, 818823

===Frontier wars===
At the start of Louis's reign, the many tribes  Danes, Obotrites, Slovenes, Bretons, Basques  which inhabited his frontierlands were still in awe of the Frankish emperor's power and dared not stir up any trouble. In 816, however, the Sorbs rebelled and were quickly followed by Slavomir, chief of the Obotrites, who was captured and abandoned by his own people, being replaced by Ceadrag in 818. Soon, Ceadrag too had turned against the Franks and allied with the Danes, who were to become the greatest menace of the Franks in a short time.

A greater Slavic menace was gathering on the southeast. There, Ljudevit Posavski, duke of Pannonia, was harassing the border at the Drava and Sava rivers. The margrave of Friuli, Cadolah, was sent out against him, but he died on campaign and, in 820, his margarvate was invaded by Slovenes. In 821, an alliance was made with Borna, duke of the Dalmatia, and Ljudevit was brought to heel. In 824 several Slav tribes in the north-western parts of Bulgaria acknowledged Louis's suzerainity and after he was reluctant to settle the matter peacefully with the Bulgarian ruler Omurtag, in 827 the Bulgarians attacked the Franks in Pannonia and regained their lands.

On the far southern edge of his great realm, Louis had to control the Lombard princes of Benevento whom Charlemagne had never subjugated. He extracted promises from Princes Grimoald IV and Sico, but to no effect.

On the southwestern frontier, problems commenced early when c. 812, Louis the Pious crossed the western Pyrenees 'to settle matters' in Pamplona. The expedition made its way back north, where it narrowly escaped an ambush attempt arranged by the Basques in the pass of Roncevaux thanks to the precautions he took, i.e. hostages. Sguin, duke of Gascony, was then deposed by Louis in 816, possibly for failing to suppress or collaborating with the Basque revolt south of the western Pyrenees, so sparking off a Basque uprising that was duly put down by the Frankish emperor in Dax. Seguin was replaced by Lupus III, who was dispossessed in 818 by the emperor. In 820 an assembly at Quierzy-sur-Oise decided to send an expedition against the Cordoban caliphate (827). The counts in charge of the army, Hugh, count of Tours, and Matfrid, count of Orlans, were slow in acting and the expedition came to naught.

===First civil war===
In 818, as Louis was returning from a campaign to Brittany, he was greeted by news of the death of his wife, Ermengarde. Ermengarde was the daughter of Ingerman, the duke of Hesbaye. Louis had been close to his wife, who had been involved in policymaking. It was rumoured that she had played a part in her nephew's death and Louis himself believed her own death was divine retribution for that event. It took many months for his courtiers and advisors to convince him to remarry, but eventually he did, in 820, to Judith, daughter of Welf, count of Altdorf. In 823 Judith gave birth to a son, who was named Charles.

The birth of this son damaged the Partition of Aachen, as Louis's attempts to provide for his fourth son met with stiff resistance from his older sons, and the last two decades of his reign were marked by civil war.

At Worms in 829, Louis gave Charles Alemannia with the title of king or duke (historians differ on this), thus enraging his son and co-emperor Lothair, Paired gold medallions of father and son had been struck on the occasion of the synod of Paris (825) that asserted Frankish claims as emperor, recently denigrated by the Byzantines; see Karl F. Morrison, "The Gold Medallions of Louis the Pious and Lothaire I and the Synod of Paris (825)" Speculum 36.4 (October 1961:592599). whose promised share was thereby diminished. An insurrection was soon at hand. With the urging of the vengeful Wala and the cooperation of his brothers, Lothair accused Judith of having committed adultery with Bernard of Septimania, even suggesting Bernard to be the true father of Charles. Ebbo and Hildwin abandoned the emperor at that point, Bernard having risen to greater heights than either of them. Agobard, Archbishop of Lyon, and Jesse, bishop of Amiens, too, opposed the redivision of the empire and lent their episcopal prestige to the rebels.

In 830, at Wala's insistence that Bernard of Septimania was plotting against him, Pepin of Aquitaine led an army of Gascons, with the support of the Neustrian magnates, all the way to Paris. At Verberie, Louis the German joined him. At that time, the emperor returned from another campaign in Brittany to find his empire at war with itself. He marched as far as Compigne, an ancient royal town, before being surrounded by Pepin's forces and captured. Judith was incarcerated at Poitiers and Bernard fled to Barcelona.

Then Lothair finally set out with a large Lombard army, but Louis had promised his sons Louis the German and Pepin of Aquitaine greater shares of the inheritance, prompting them to shift loyalties in favour of their father. When Lothair tried to call a general council of the realm in Nijmegen, in the heart of Austrasia, the Austrasians and Rhinelanders came with a following of armed retainers, and the disloyal sons were forced to free their father and bow at his feet (831). Lothair was pardoned, but disgraced and banished to Italy. Pepin returned to Aquitaine and Judith  after being forced to humiliate herself with a solemn oath of innocence  to Louis's court. Only Wala was severely dealt with, making his way to a secluded monastery on the shores of Lake Geneva. Though Hilduin, abbot of Saint Denis, was exiled to Paderborn and Elisachar and Matfrid were deprived of their honours north of the Alps; they did not lose their freedom.

===Second civil war===
The next revolt occurred a mere two years later (832). The disaffected Pepin was summoned to his father's court, where he was so poorly received he left against his father's orders. Immediately, fearing that Pepin would be stirred up to revolt by his nobles and desiring to reform his morals, Louis the Pious summoned all his forces to meet in Aquitaine in preparation of an uprising, but Louis the German garnered an army of Slav allies and conquered Swabia before the emperor could react. Once again the elder Louis divided his vast realm. At Jonac, he declared Charles king of Aquitaine and deprived Pepin (he was less harsh with the younger Louis), restoring the whole rest of the empire to Lothair, not yet involved in the civil war. Lothair was, however, interested in usurping his father's authority. His ministers had been in contact with Pepin and may have convinced him and Louis the German to rebel, promising him Alemannia, the kingdom of Charles.

Soon Lothair, with the support of Pope Gregory IV, whom he had confirmed in office without his father's support, joined the revolt in 833. While Louis was at Worms gathering a new force, Lothair marched north. Louis marched south. The armies met on the plains of the Rothfeld. There, Gregory met the emperor and may have tried to sow dissension amongst his ranks. Soon much of Louis's army had evaporated before his eyes, and he ordered his few remaining followers to go, because "it would be a pity if any man lost his life or limb on my account." The resigned emperor was taken to Saint Mdard at Soissons, his son Charles to Prm, and the queen to Tortona. The despicable show of disloyalty and disingenuousness earned the site the name Field of Lies, or Lgenfeld, or Campus Mendacii, ubi plurimorum fidelitas exstincta est . 

le Pieux sesquisolidus 814 840.jpg|thumb|Louis on a sesquisolidus, essentially Roman in design. Medieval European Coinage by Philip Grierson, Mark Blackburn, Lucia Travaini, p.329 [http://books.google.com/books?id=TGkz9NGFXIMC&pg=PA327&dq=manqush+coin#PPA329,M1 ]]

On 13 November 833, Ebbo of Rheims presided over a synod in the Church of Saint Mary in Soissons which deposed Louis and forced him to publicly confess many crimes, none of which he had, in fact, committed. In return, Lothair gave Ebbo the Abbey of Saint Vaast. Men like Rabanus Maurus, Louis' younger half-brothers Drogo and Hugh, and Emma, Judith's sister and Louis the German's new wife, worked on the younger Louis to make peace with his father, for the sake of unity of the empire. The humiliation to which Louis was then subjected at Notre Dame in Compigne turned the loyal barons of Austrasia and Saxony against Lothair, and the usurper fled to Burgundy, skirmishing with loyalists near Chalon-sur-Sane. Louis was restored the next year, on 1 March 834.

On Lothair's return to Italy, Wala, Jesse, and Matfrid, formerly count of Orlans, died of a pestilence and, on 2 February 835, the Synod of Thionville deposed Ebbo, Agobard, Bernard, Bishop of Vienne, and Bartholomew, Archbishop of Narbonne. Lothair himself fell ill; events had turned completely in Louis favour once again.

In 836, however, the family made peace and Louis restored Pepin and Louis, deprived Lothair of all save Italy, and gave it to Charles in a new division, given at the diet of Crmieu. At about that time, the Vikings terrorised and sacked Utrecht and Antwerp. In 837, they went up the Rhine as far as Nijmegen, and their king, Rorik, demanded the wergild of some of his followers killed on previous expeditions before Louis the Pious mustered a massive force and marched against them. They fled, but it would not be the last time they harried the northern coasts. In 838, they even claimed sovereignty over Frisia, but a treaty was confirmed between them and the Franks in 839. Louis the Pious ordered the construction of a North Sea fleet and the sending of missi dominici into Frisia to establish Frankish sovereignty there.

===Third civil war===
In 837, Louis crowned Charles king over all of Alemannia and Burgundy and gave him a portion of his brother Louis' land. Louis the German promptly rose in revolt, and the emperor redivided his realm again at Quierzy-sur-Oise, giving all of the young king of Bavaria's lands, save Bavaria itself, to Charles. Emperor Louis did not stop there, however. His devotion to Charles knew no bounds. When Pepin died in 838, Louis declared Charles the new king of Aquitaine. The nobles, however, elected Pepin's son Pepin II. When Louis threatened invasion, the third great civil war of his reign broke out. In the spring of 839, Louis the German invaded Swabia, Pepin II and his Gascon subjects fought all the way to the Loire, and the Danes returned to ravage the Frisian coast (sacking Dorestad for a second time).
Basilica of Saint-Pierre-aux-Nonnains in Metz, where Louis the Pious was buried.

Lothair, for the first time in a long time, allied with his father and pledged support at Worms in exchange for a redivision of the inheritance. By a final placitum issued there, Louis gave Bavaria to Louis the German and disinherited Pepin II, leaving the entire remainder of the empire to be divided roughly into an eastern part and a western. Lothair was given the choice of which partition he would inherit and he chose the eastern, including Italy, leaving the western for Charles. The emperor quickly subjugated Aquitaine and had Charles recognised by the nobles and clergy at Clermont-en-Auvergne in 840. Louis then, in a final flash of glory, rushed into Bavaria and forced the younger Louis into the Ostmark. The empire now settled as he had declared it at Worms, he returned in July to Frankfurt am Main, where he disbanded the army. The final civil war of his reign was over.

===Death===
Louis fell ill soon after his final victorious campaigns and went to his summer hunting lodge on an island in the Rhine, by his palace at Ingelheim. On 20 June 840, he died, in the presence of many bishops and clerics and in the arms of his half-brother Drogo, though Charles and Judith were absent in Poitiers. Soon dispute plunged the surviving brothers into a civil war that was only settled in 843 by the Treaty of Verdun, which split the Frankish realm into three parts, to become the kernels of France and Germany, with Burgundy and the Low Countries between them. The dispute over the kingship of Aquitaine was not fully settled until 860.

Louis was buried in the Abbey of Saint-Arnould in Metz. Metz, Steven Fanning, Medieval France:An Encyclopedia, Ed. William W. Kibler and Grover A. Zinn, (Routledge, 1995), 615. 

==Marriage and issue==
By his first wife, Ermengarde of Hesbaye (married ca. 79498), he had three sons and three daughters:
*Lothair (795855), king of Middle Francia
*Pepin (797838), king of Aquitaine
*Adelaide (b. c. 799)
*Rotrude (b. 800), married Gerard, Count of Auvergne, as his first wife
*Hildegard (or Matilda) (b. c. 802), married Gerard, Count of Auvergne, as his second wife
*Louis the German (c. 805875), king of East Francia

By his second wife, Judith of Bavaria, he had a daughter and a son:
*Gisela, married Eberhard I of Friuli
*Charles the Bald, king of West Francia

By Theodelinde of Sens, he had two illegitimate children:
*Arnulf of Sens
*Alpais

==Notes==

==Sources==
*Vita Hludovici Imperatoris , the main source for his reign, written c. 840 by an unknown author usually called "the Astronomer"
*Vita Hludowici Imperatoris by Thegan of Trier on-line Latin text

==Further reading==
*Booker, Courtney M. Past Convictions: The Penance of Louis the Pious and the Decline of the Carolingians, University of Pennsylvania Press, 2009, ISBN 978-0-8122-4168-6
*De Jong, Mayke. The Penitential State: Authority and Atonement in the Age of Louis the Pious, 814840. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2009.
*Depreux, Philippe. Prosopographie de l'entourage de Louis le Pieux (781840). Sigmaringen: Thorbecke, 1997. A useful prosopographical overview of Louis' household, court and other subordinates.
* Eichler, Daniel. Frnkische Reichsversammlungen unter Ludwig dem Frommen. Hannover: Hahnsche Buchhandlung, 2007 (Monumenta Germaniae Historica Studien und Texte, 45).
*Ganshof, Franois-Louis The Carolingians and the Frankish Monarchy. 1971.
*Godman, Peter, and Roger Collins (eds.). Charlemagne's Heir: New Perspectives on the Reign of Louis the Pious (814840). Oxford and New York: Clarendon Press, 1990.
*Oman, Charles. The Dark Ages 476918. London, 1914.

==External links==

*Cassinogilum: an argument for Casseneuil as Louis' birthplace
*Chasseneuil-du-Poitou and not Casseuil by Camille Jullian 



[[Liquid crystal]]

Schlieren texture of liquid crystal nematic phase

Liquid crystals (LCs) are matter in a state that has properties between those of conventional liquid and those of solid crystal. For instance, a liquid crystal may flow like a liquid, but its molecules may be oriented in a crystal-like way. There are many different types of liquid-crystal phases, which can be distinguished by their different optical properties (such as birefringence). When viewed under a microscope using a polarized light source, different liquid crystal phases will appear to have distinct textures. The contrasting areas in the textures correspond to domains where the liquid-crystal molecules are oriented in different directions. Within a domain, however, the molecules are well ordered. LC materials may not always be in a liquid-crystal phase (just as water may turn into ice or steam).

Liquid crystals can be divided into thermotropic, lyotropic and metallotropic phases. Thermotropic and lyotropic liquid crystals consist of organic molecules. Thermotropic LCs exhibit a phase transition into the liquid-crystal phase as temperature is changed. Lyotropic LCs exhibit phase transitions as a function of both temperature and concentration of the liquid-crystal molecules in a solvent (typically water). Metallotropic LCs are composed of both organic and inorganic molecules; their liquid-crystal transition depends not only on temperature and concentration, but also on the inorganic-organic composition ratio.

Examples of liquid crystals can be found both in the natural world and in technological applications. Most contemporary electronic displays use liquid crystals. Lyotropic liquid-crystalline phases are abundant in living systems. For example, many proteins and cell membranes are liquid crystals. Other well-known examples of liquid crystals are solutions of soap and various related detergents, as well as the tobacco mosaic virus.

==History==
In 1888, Austrian botanical physiologist Friedrich Reinitzer, working at the Karl-Ferdinands-Universitt, examined the physico-chemical properties of various derivatives of cholesterol which now belong to the class of materials known as cholesteric liquid crystals. Previously, other researchers had observed distinct color effects when cooling cholesterol derivatives just above the freezing point, but had not associated it with a new phenomenon. Reinitzer perceived that color changes in a derivative cholesteryl benzoate were not the most peculiar feature.Chemical structure of cholesteryl benzoate molecule He found that cholesteryl benzoate does not melt in the same manner as other compounds, but has two melting points. At 145.5 C it melts into a cloudy liquid, and at 178.5 C it melts again and the cloudy liquid becomes clear. The phenomenon is reversible. Seeking help from a physicist, on March 14, 1888, he wrote to Otto Lehmann, at that time a Privatdozent in Aachen. They exchanged letters and samples. Lehmann examined the intermediate cloudy fluid, and reported seeing crystallites. Reinitzer's Viennese colleague von Zepharovich also indicated that the intermediate "fluid" was crystalline. The exchange of letters with Lehmann ended on April 24, with many questions unanswered. Reinitzer presented his results, with credits to Lehmann and von Zepharovich, at a meeting of the Vienna Chemical Society on May 3, 1888. 

By that time, Reinitzer had discovered and described three important features of cholesteric liquid crystals (the name coined by Otto Lehmann in 1904): the existence of two melting points, the reflection of circularly polarized light, and the ability to rotate the polarization direction of light.

After his accidental discovery, Reinitzer did not pursue studying liquid crystals further. The research was continued by Lehmann, who realized that he had encountered a new phenomenon and was in a position to investigate it: In his postdoctoral years he had acquired expertise in crystallography and microscopy. Lehmann started a systematic study, first of cholesteryl benzoate, and then of related compounds which exhibited the double-melting phenomenon. He was able to make observations in polarized light, and his microscope was equipped with a hot stage (sample holder equipped with a heater) enabling high temperature observations. The intermediate cloudy phase clearly sustained flow, but other features, particularly the signature under a microscope, convinced Lehmann that he was dealing with a solid. By the end of August 1889 he had published his results in the Zeitschrift fr Physikalische Chemie. 

Otto Lehmann
Lehmann's work was continued and significantly expanded by the German chemist Daniel Vorlnder, who from the beginning of 20th century until his retirement in 1935, had synthesized most of the liquid crystals known. However, liquid crystals were not popular among scientists and the material remained a pure scientific curiosity for about 80 years. 

After World War II work on the synthesis of liquid crystals was restarted at university research laboratories in Europe. George William Gray, a prominent researcher of liquid crystals, began investigating these materials in England in the late 1940s. His group synthesized many new materials that exhibited the liquid crystalline state and developed a better understanding of how to design molecules that exhibit the state. His book Molecular Structure and the Properties of Liquid Crystals Gray, G. W. (1962) Molecular Structure and the Properties of Liquid Crystals, Academic Press became a guidebook on the subject. One of the first U.S. chemists to study liquid crystals was Glenn H. Brown, starting in 1953 at the University of Cincinnati and later at Kent State University. In 1965, he organized the first international conference on liquid crystals, in Kent, Ohio, with about 100 of the worlds top liquid crystal scientists in attendance. This conference marked the beginning of a worldwide effort to perform research in this field, which soon led to the development of practical applications for these unique materials. Liquid Crystals. kfupm.edu.sa 

Liquid crystal materials became a topic of research into the development of flat panel electronic displays beginning in 1962 at RCA Laboratories. When physical chemist Richard Williams applied an electric field to a thin layer of a nematic liquid crystal at 125 C, he observed the formation of a regular pattern that he called domains (now known as Williams Domains). This led his colleague George H. Heilmeier to perform research on a liquid crystal-based flat panel display to replace the cathode ray vacuum tube used in televisions. Unfortunately the para-Azoxyanisole that Williams and Heilmeier used exhibits the nematic liquid crystal state only above 116 C, which made it impractical to use in a commercial display product. A material that could be operated at room temperature was clearly needed.

In 1966, Joel E. Goldmacher and Joseph A. Castellano, research chemists in Heilmeier group at RCA, discovered that mixtures made exclusively of nematic compounds that differed only in the number of carbon atoms in the terminal side chains could yield room-temperature nematic liquid crystals. A ternary mixture of Schiff base compounds resulted in a material that had a nematic range of 22105 C. Goldmacher, Joel E. and Castellano, Joseph A. Electro-optical Compositions and Devices, , Issue date: November 17, 1970. Operation at room temperature enabled the first practical display device to be made. The team then proceeded to prepare numerous mixtures of nematic compounds many of which had much lower melting points. This technique of mixing nematic compounds to obtain wide operating temperature range eventually became the industry standard and is used to this very day to tailor materials to meet specific applications.

Chemical structure of N-(4-Methoxybenzylidene)-4-butylaniline (MBBA) molecule
In 1969, Hans Kelker succeeded in synthesizing a substance that had a nematic phase at room temperature, MBBA, which is one of the most popular subjects of liquid crystal research. The next step to commercialization of liquid crystal displays was the synthesis of further chemically stable substances (cyanobiphenyls) with low melting temperatures by George Gray. That work with Ken Harrison and the UK MOD (RRE Malvern), in 1973, led to design of new materials resulting in rapid adoption of small area LCDs within electronic products.

In 1991, when liquid crystal displays were already well established, Pierre-Gilles de Gennes working at the Universit Paris-Sud received the Nobel Prize in physics "for discovering that methods developed for studying order phenomena in simple systems can be generalized to more complex forms of matter, in particular to liquid crystals and polymers". 

==Design of liquid crystalline materials==
A large number of chemical compounds are known to exhibit one or several liquid crystalline phases. Despite significant differences in chemical composition, these molecules have some common features in chemical and physical properties. There are two types of thermotropic liquid crystals: discotics and rod-shaped molecules. Discotics are flat disc-like molecules consisting of a core of adjacent aromatic rings. This allows for two dimensional columnar ordering. Rod-shaped molecules have an elongated, anisotropic geometry which allows for preferential alignment along one spatial direction.

 The molecular shape should be relatively thin or flat, especially within rigid molecular frameworks. 
 The molecular length should be at least 1.3 nm, consistent with the presence of long alkyl group on many room-temperature liquid crystals. 
 The structure should not be branched or angular. 
 A low melting point is preferable in order to avoid metastable, monotropic liquid crystalline phases. Low-temperature mesomorphic behavior in general is technologically more useful, and alkyl terminal groups promote this.

An extended, structurally rigid, highly anisotropic shape seems to be the main criterion for liquid crystalline behavior, and as a result many liquid crystalline materials are based on benzene rings. 

==Liquid-crystal phases==
The various liquid-crystal phases (called mesophases) can be characterized by the type of ordering. One can distinguish positional order (whether molecules are arranged in any sort of ordered lattice) and orientational order (whether molecules are mostly pointing in the same direction), and moreover order can be either short-range (only between molecules close to each other) or long-range (extending to larger, sometimes macroscopic, dimensions). Most thermotropic LCs will have an isotropic phase at high temperature. That is that heating will eventually drive them into a conventional liquid phase characterized by random and isotropic molecular ordering (little to no long-range order), and fluid-like flow behavior. Under other conditions (for instance, lower temperature), a LC might inhabit one or more phases with significant anisotropic orientational structure and short-range orientational order while still having an ability to flow. 

 

 

The ordering of liquid crystalline phases is extensive on the molecular scale. This order extends up to the entire domain size, which may be on the order of micrometers, but usually does not extend to the macroscopic scale as often occurs in classical crystalline solids. However some techniques, such as the use of boundaries or an applied electric field, can be used to enforce a single ordered domain in a macroscopic liquid crystal sample. The ordering in a liquid crystal might extend along only one dimension, with the material being essentially disordered in the other two directions. 
 

===Thermotropic liquid crystals===

Thermotropic phases are those that occur in a certain temperature range. If the temperature rise is too high, thermal motion will destroy the delicate cooperative ordering of the LC phase, pushing the material into a conventional isotropic liquid phase. At too low temperature, most LC materials will form a conventional crystal. Many thermotropic LCs exhibit a variety of phases as temperature is changed. For instance, a particular type of LC molecule (called mesogen) may exhibit various smectic and nematic (and finally isotropic) phases as temperature is increased. An example of a compound displaying thermotropic LC behavior is para-azoxyanisole. 

====Nematic phase====

Alignment in a nematic phase.
Phase transition between a nematic (left) and smectic A (right) phases observed between crossed polarizers. The black color corresponds to isotropic medium.

One of the most common LC phases is the nematic. The word nematic comes from the Greek (nema), which means "thread". This term originates from the thread-like topological defects observed in nematics, which are formally called 'disclinations'. Nematics also exhibit so-called "hedgehog" topological defects. In a nematic phase, the calamitic or rod-shaped organic molecules have no positional order, but they self-align to have long-range directional order with their long axes roughly parallel. Thus, the molecules are free to flow and their center of mass positions are randomly distributed as in a liquid, but still maintain their long-range directional order. Most nematics are uniaxial: they have one axis that is longer and preferred, with the other two being equivalent (can be approximated as cylinders or rods). However, some liquid crystals are biaxial nematics, meaning that in addition to orienting their long axis, they also orient along a secondary axis. Nematics have fluidity similar to that of ordinary (isotropic) liquids but they can be easily aligned by an external magnetic or electric field. Aligned nematics have the optical properties of uniaxial crystals and this makes them extremely useful in liquid crystal displays (LCD). 

====Smectic phases====
Schematic of alignment in the smectic phases. The smectic A phase (left) has molecules organized into layers. In the smectic C phase (right), the molecules are tilted inside the layers.
The smectic phases, which are found at lower temperatures than the nematic, form well-defined layers that can slide over one another in a manner similar to that of soap. The word "smectic" originates from the Latin word "smecticus", meaning cleaning, or having soap like properties. 
 
The smectics are thus positionally ordered along one direction. In the Smectic A phase, the molecules are oriented along the layer normal, while in the Smectic C phase they are tilted away from the layer normal. These phases are liquid-like within the layers. There are many different smectic phases, all characterized by different types and degrees of positional and orientational order. 

====Chiral phases====
Schematic of ordering in chiral liquid crystal phases. The chiral nematic phase (left), also called the cholesteric phase, and the smectic C* phase (right).
The chiral nematic phase exhibits chirality (handedness). This phase is often called the cholesteric phase because it was first observed for cholesterol derivatives. Only chiral molecules (i.e., those that have no internal planes of symmetry) can give rise to such a phase. This phase exhibits a twisting of the molecules perpendicular to the director, with the molecular axis parallel to the director. The finite twist angle between adjacent molecules is due to their asymmetric packing, which results in longer-range chiral order. In the smectic C* phase (an asterisk denotes a chiral phase), the molecules have positional ordering in a layered structure (as in the other smectic phases), with the molecules tilted by a finite angle with respect to the layer normal. The chirality induces a finite azimuthal twist from one layer to the next, producing a spiral twisting of the molecular axis along the layer normal. 

Chiral nematic phase; p refers to the chiral pitch (see text)
The chiral pitch, p, refers to the distance over which the LC molecules undergo a full 360 twist (but note that the structure of the chiral nematic phase repeats itself every half-pitch, since in this phase directors at 0 and 180 are equivalent). The pitch, p, typically changes when the temperature is altered or when other molecules are added to the LC host (an achiral LC host material will form a chiral phase if doped with a chiral material), allowing the pitch of a given material to be tuned accordingly. In some liquid crystal systems, the pitch is of the same order as the wavelength of visible light. This causes these systems to exhibit unique optical properties, such as Bragg reflection and low-threshold laser emission, and these properties are exploited in a number of optical applications. 
 For the case of Bragg reflection only the lowest-order reflection is allowed if the light is incident along the helical axis, whereas for oblique incidence higher-order reflections become permitted. Cholesteric liquid crystals also exhibit the unique property that they reflect circularly polarized light when it is incident along the helical axis and elliptically polarized if it comes in obliquely. 

====Blue phases====
Blue phases are liquid crystal phases that appear in the temperature range between a chiral nematic phase and an isotropic liquid phase. Blue phases have a regular three-dimensional cubic structure of defects with lattice periods of several hundred nanometers, and thus they exhibit selective Bragg reflections in the wavelength range of visible light corresponding to the cubic lattice. It was theoretically predicted in 1981 that these phases can possess icosahedral symmetry similar to quasicrystals. 

 

Although blue phases are of interest for fast light modulators or tunable photonic crystals, they exist in a very narrow temperature range, usually less than a few kelvin. Recently the stabilization of blue phases over a temperature range of more than 60 K including room temperature (260326 K) has been demonstrated. Blue phases stabilized at room temperature allow electro-optical switching with response times of the order of 104 s. 

In May 2008, the first Blue Phase Mode LCD panel had been developed. 

====Discotic phases====
Disk-shaped LC molecules can orient themselves in a layer-like fashion known as the discotic nematic phase. If the disks pack into stacks, the phase is called a discotic columnar. The columns themselves may be organized into rectangular or hexagonal arrays. Chiral discotic phases, similar to the chiral nematic phase, are also known.

===Lyotropic liquid crystals===

Structure of lyotropic liquid crystal. The red heads of surfactant molecules are in contact with water, whereas the tails are immersed in oil (blue): bilayer (left) and micelle (right).
A lyotropic liquid crystal consists of two or more components that exhibit liquid-crystalline properties in certain concentration ranges. In the lyotropic phases, solvent molecules fill the space around the compounds to provide fluidity to the system. In contrast to thermotropic liquid crystals, these lyotropics have another degree of freedom of concentration that enables them to induce a variety of different phases.

A compound that has two immiscible hydrophilic and hydrophobic parts within the same molecule is called an amphiphilic molecule. Many amphiphilic molecules show lyotropic liquid-crystalline phase sequences depending on the volume balances between the hydrophilic part and hydrophobic part. These structures are formed through the micro-phase segregation of two incompatible components on a nanometer scale. Soap is an everyday example of a lyotropic liquid crystal.

The content of water or other solvent molecules changes the self-assembled structures. At very low amphiphile concentration, the molecules will be dispersed randomly without any ordering. At slightly higher (but still low) concentration, amphiphilic molecules will spontaneously assemble into micelles or vesicles. This is done so as to 'hide' the hydrophobic tail of the amphiphile inside the micelle core, exposing a hydrophilic (water-soluble) surface to aqueous solution. These spherical objects do not order themselves in solution, however. At higher concentration, the assemblies will become ordered. A typical phase is a hexagonal columnar phase, where the amphiphiles form long cylinders (again with a hydrophilic surface) that arrange themselves into a roughly hexagonal lattice. This is called the middle soap phase. At still higher concentration, a lamellar phase (neat soap phase) may form, wherein extended sheets of amphiphiles are separated by thin layers of water. For some systems, a cubic (also called viscous isotropic) phase may exist between the hexagonal and lamellar phases, wherein spheres are formed that create a dense cubic lattice. These spheres may also be connected to one another, forming a bicontinuous cubic phase.

The objects created by amphiphiles are usually spherical (as in the case of micelles), but may also be disc-like (bicelles), rod-like, or biaxial (all three micelle axes are distinct). These anisotropic self-assembled nano-structures can then order themselves in much the same way as thermotropic liquid crystals do, forming large-scale versions of all the thermotropic phases (such as a nematic phase of rod-shaped micelles).

For some systems, at high concentrations, inverse phases are observed. That is, one may generate an inverse hexagonal columnar phase (columns of water encapsulated by amphiphiles) or an inverse micellar phase (a bulk liquid crystal sample with spherical water cavities).

A generic progression of phases, going from low to high amphiphile concentration, is:
* Discontinuous cubic phase (micellar cubic phase)
* Hexagonal phase (hexagonal columnar phase) (middle phase)
* Lamellar phase
* Bicontinuous cubic phase
* Reverse hexagonal columnar phase
* Inverse cubic phase (Inverse micellar phase)

Even within the same phases, their self-assembled structures are tunable by the concentration: for example, in lamellar phases, the layer distances increase with the solvent volume. Since lyotropic liquid crystals rely on a subtle balance of intermolecular interactions, it is more difficult to analyze their structures and properties than those of thermotropic liquid crystals.

Similar phases and characteristics can be observed in immiscible diblock copolymers.

===Metallotropic liquid crystals===

Liquid crystal phases can also be based on low-melting inorganic phases like ZnCl2 that have a structure formed of linked tetrahedra and easily form glasses. The addition of long chain soap-like molecules leads to a series of new phases that show a variety of liquid crystalline behavior both as a function of the inorganic-organic composition ratio and of temperature. This class of materials has been named metallotropic. 

===Laboratory analysis of mesophases===

Thermotropic mesophases are detected and characterized by two major methods, the original method was use of thermal optical microscopy, in which a small sample of the material was placed between two crossed polarizers; the sample was then heated and cooled. As the isotropic phase would not significantly affect the polarization of the light, it would appear very dark, whereas the crystal and liquid crystal phases will both polarize the light in a uniform way, leading to brightness and color gradients. This method allows for the characterization of the particular phase, as the different phases are defined by their particular order, which must be observed. The second method, Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC), allows for more precise determination of phase transitions and transition enthalpies. In DSC, a small sample is heated in a way that generates a very precise change in temperature with respect to time. During phase transitions, the heat flow required to maintain this heating or cooling rate will change. These changes can be observed and attributed to various phase transitions, such as key liquid crystal transitions.

Lyotropic mesophases are analyzed in a similar fashion, through these experiments are somewhat more complex, as the concentration of mesogen is a key factor. These experiments are run at various concentrations of mesogen in order to analyze that impact.

==Biological liquid crystals==
Lyotropic liquid-crystalline phases are abundant in living systems, the study of which is referred to as lipid polymorphism. Accordingly, lyotropic liquid crystals attract particular attention in the field of biomimetic chemistry. In particular, biological membranes and cell membranes are a form of liquid crystal. Their constituent molecules (e.g. phospholipids) are perpendicular to the membrane surface, yet the membrane is flexible. These lipids vary in shape (see page on lipid polymorphism). The constituent molecules can inter-mingle easily, but tend not to leave the membrane due to the high energy requirement of this process. Lipid molecules can flip from one side of the membrane to the other, this process being catalyzed by flippases and floppases (depending on the direction of movement). These liquid crystal membrane phases can also host important proteins such as receptors freely "floating" inside, or partly outside, the membrane, e.g. CCT.

Many other biological structures exhibit liquid-crystal behavior. For instance, the concentrated protein solution that is extruded by a spider to generate silk is, in fact, a liquid crystal phase. The precise ordering of molecules in silk is critical to its renowned strength. DNA and many polypeptides can also form LC phases and this too forms an important part of current academic research.

==Pattern formation in liquid crystals==

Anisotropy of liquid crystals is a property not observed in other fluids. This anisotropy makes flows of liquid crystals behave more differentially than those of ordinary fluids. For example, injection of a flux of a liquid crystal between two close parallel plates (viscous fingering), causes orientation of the molecules to couple with the flow, with the resulting emergence of dendritic patterns. This anisotropy is also manifested in the interfacial energy (surface tension) between different liquid crystal phases. This anisotropy determines the equilibrium shape at the coexistence temperature, and is so strong that usually facets appear. When temperature is changed one of the phases grows, forming different morphologies depending on the temperature change. Since growth is controlled by heat diffusion, anisotropy in thermal conductivity favors growth in specific directions, which has also an effect on the final shape. 

==Theoretical treatment of liquid crystals==
Microscopic theoretical treatment of fluid phases can become quite complicated, owing to the high material density, meaning that strong interactions, hard-core repulsions, and many-body correlations cannot be ignored. In the case of liquid crystals, anisotropy in all of these interactions further complicates analysis. There are a number of fairly simple theories, however, that can at least predict the general behavior of the phase transitions in liquid crystal systems.

===Director===

As we already saw above, the nematic liquid crystals are composed of rod-like molecules with the long axes of neighboring molecules aligned approximately to one another. To allow this anisotropic structure, a dimensionless unit vector n called the director, is introduced to represent the direction of preferred orientation of molecules in the neighborhood of any point. Because there is no physical polarity along the director axis, n and -n are fully equivalent. 

===Order parameter===

The local nematic director, which is also the local optical axis, is given by the spatial and temporal average of the long molecular axes

The description of liquid crystals involves an analysis of order. A second rank symmetric traceless tensor order parameter is used to describe the orientational order of a nematic liquid crystal, although a scalar order parameter is usually sufficient to describe uniaxial nematic liquid crystals. To make this quantitative, an orientational order parameter is usually defined based on the average of the second Legendre polynomial:

:

where is the angle between the liquid-crystal molecular axis and the local director (which is the 'preferred direction' in a volume element of a liquid crystal sample, also representing its local optical axis). The brackets denote both a temporal and spatial average. This definition is convenient, since for a completely random and isotropic sample, S=0, whereas for a perfectly aligned sample S=1. For a typical liquid crystal sample, S is on the order of 0.3 to 0.8, and generally decreases as the temperature is raised. In particular, a sharp drop of the order parameter to 0 is observed when the system undergoes a phase transition from an LC phase into the isotropic phase. The order parameter can be measured experimentally in a number of ways; for instance, diamagnetism, birefringence, Raman scattering, NMR and EPR can be used to determine S. 

The order of a liquid crystal could also be characterized by using other even Legendre polynomials (all the odd polynomials average to zero since the director can point in either of two antiparallel directions). These higher-order averages are more difficult to measure, but can yield additional information about molecular ordering. 

A positional order parameter is also used to describe the ordering of a liquid crystal. It is characterized by the variation of the density of the center of mass of the liquid crystal molecules along a given vector. In the case of positional variation along the z-axis the density is often given by:

:

The complex positional order parameter is defined as and the average density. Typically only the first two terms are kept and higher order terms are ignored since most phases can be described adequately using sinusoidal functions. For a perfect nematic and for a smectic phase will take on complex values. The complex nature of this order parameter allows for many parallels between nematic to smectic phase transitions and conductor to superconductor transitions. 

===Onsager hard-rod model===

A simple model which predicts lyotropic phase transitions is the hard-rod model proposed by Lars Onsager. This theory considers the volume excluded from the center-of-mass of one idealized cylinder as it approaches another. Specifically, if the cylinders are oriented parallel to one another, there is very little volume that is excluded from the center-of-mass of the approaching cylinder (it can come quite close to the other cylinder). If, however, the cylinders are at some angle to one another, then there is a large volume surrounding the cylinder which the approaching cylinder's center-of-mass cannot enter (due to the hard-rod repulsion between the two idealized objects). Thus, this angular arrangement sees a decrease in the net positional entropy of the approaching cylinder (there are fewer states available to it). 

The fundamental insight here is that, whilst parallel arrangements of anisotropic objects lead to a decrease in orientational entropy, there is an increase in positional entropy. Thus in some case greater positional order will be entropically favorable. This theory thus predicts that a solution of rod-shaped objects will undergo a phase transition, at sufficient concentration, into a nematic phase. Although this model is conceptually helpful, its mathematical formulation makes several assumptions that limit its applicability to real systems. 

===MaierSaupe mean field theory===
This statistical theory, proposed by Alfred Saupe and Wilhelm Maier, includes contributions from an attractive intermolecular potential from an induced dipole moment between adjacent liquid crystal molecules. The anisotropic attraction stabilizes parallel alignment of neighboring molecules, and the theory then considers a mean-field average of the interaction. Solved self-consistently, this theory predicts thermotropic nematic-isotropic phase transitions, consistent with experiment. 

===McMillan's model===
McMillan's model, proposed by William McMillan, is an extension of the MaierSaupe mean field theory used to describe the phase transition of a liquid crystal from a nematic to a smectic A phase. It predicts that the phase transition can be either continuous or discontinuous depending on the strength of the short-range interaction between the molecules. As a result, it allows for a triple critical point where the nematic, isotropic, and smectic A phase meet. Although it predicts the existence of a triple critical point, it does not successfully predict its value. The model utilizes two order parameters that describe the orientational and positional order of the liquid crystal. The first is simply the average of the second Legendre polynomial and the second order parameter is given by:
:
The values zi, i, and d are the position of the molecule, the angle between the molecular axis and director, and the layer spacing. The postulated potential energy of a single molecule is given by:
:
Here constant  quantifies the strength of the interaction between adjacent molecules. The potential is then used to derive the thermodynamic properties of the system assuming thermal equilibrium. It results in two self-consistency equations that must be solved numerically, the solutions of which are the three stable phases of the liquid crystal. 

===Elastic continuum theory===
In this formalism, a liquid crystal material is treated as a continuum; molecular details are entirely ignored. Rather, this theory considers perturbations to a presumed oriented sample. The distortions of the liquid crystal are commonly described by the Frank free energy density. One can identify three types of distortions that could occur in an oriented sample: (1) twists of the material, where neighboring molecules are forced to be angled with respect to one another, rather than aligned; (2) splay of the material, where bending occurs perpendicular to the director; and (3) bend of the material, where the distortion is parallel to the director and molecular axis. All three of these types of distortions incur an energy penalty. They are distortions that are induced by the boundary conditions at domain walls or the enclosing container. The response of the material can then be decomposed into terms based on the elastic constants corresponding to the three types of distortions. Elastic continuum theory is a particularly powerful tool for modeling liquid crystal devices and lipid bilayers. 

==External influences on liquid crystals==
Scientists and engineers are able to use liquid crystals in a variety of applications because external perturbation can cause significant changes in the macroscopic properties of the liquid crystal system. Both electric and magnetic fields can be used to induce these changes. The magnitude of the fields, as well as the speed at which the molecules align are important characteristics industry deals with. Special surface treatments can be used in liquid crystal devices to force specific orientations of the director.

===Electric and magnetic field effects===
The ability of the director to align along an external field is caused by the electric nature of the molecules. Permanent electric dipoles result when one end of a molecule has a net positive charge while the other end has a net negative charge. When an external electric field is applied to the liquid crystal, the dipole molecules tend to orient themselves along the direction of the field.

Even if a molecule does not form a permanent dipole, it can still be influenced by an electric field. In some cases, the field produces slight re-arrangement of electrons and protons in molecules such that an induced electric dipole results. While not as strong as permanent dipoles, orientation with the external field still occurs.
The effects of magnetic fields on liquid crystal molecules are analogous to electric fields. Because magnetic fields are generated by moving electric charges, permanent magnetic dipoles are produced by electrons moving about atoms. When a magnetic field is applied, the molecules will tend to align with or against the field.

===Surface preparations===
In the absence of an external field, the director of a liquid crystal is free to point in any direction. It is possible, however, to force the director to point in a specific direction by introducing an outside agent to the system. For example, when a thin polymer coating (usually a polyimide) is spread on a glass substrate and rubbed in a single direction with a cloth, it is observed that liquid crystal molecules in contact with that surface align with the rubbing direction. The currently accepted mechanism for this is believed to be an epitaxial growth of the liquid crystal layers on the partially aligned polymer chains in the near surface layers of the polyimide.

===Fredericks transition===
The competition between orientation produced by surface anchoring and by electric field effects is often exploited in liquid crystal devices. Consider the case in which liquid crystal molecules are aligned parallel to the surface and an electric field is applied perpendicular to the cell. At first, as the electric field increases in magnitude, no change in alignment occurs. However at a threshold magnitude of electric field, deformation occurs. Deformation occurs where the director changes its orientation from one molecule to the next. The occurrence of such a change from an aligned to a deformed state is called a Fredericks transition and can also be produced by the application of a magnetic field of sufficient strength.

The Fredericks transition is fundamental to the operation of many liquid crystal displays because the director orientation (and thus the properties) can be controlled easily by the application of a field.

==Effect of chirality==
As already described, chiral liquid-crystal molecules usually give rise to chiral mesophases. This means that the molecule must possess some form of asymmetry, usually a stereogenic center. An additional requirement is that the system not be racemic: a mixture of right- and left-handed molecules will cancel the chiral effect. Due to the cooperative nature of liquid crystal ordering, however, a small amount of chiral dopant in an otherwise achiral mesophase is often enough to select out one domain handedness, making the system overall chiral.

Chiral phases usually have a helical twisting of the molecules. If the pitch of this twist is on the order of the wavelength of visible light, then interesting optical interference effects can be observed. The chiral twisting that occurs in chiral LC phases also makes the system respond differently from right- and left-handed circularly polarized light. These materials can thus be used as polarization filters. 

It is possible for chiral LC molecules to produce essentially achiral mesophases. For instance, in certain ranges of concentration and molecular weight, DNA will form an achiral line hexatic phase. An interesting recent observation is of the formation of chiral mesophases from achiral LC molecules. Specifically, bent-core molecules (sometimes called banana liquid crystals) have been shown to form liquid crystal phases that are chiral. In any particular sample, various domains will have opposite handedness, but within any given domain, strong chiral ordering will be present. The appearance mechanism of this macroscopic chirality is not yet entirely clear. It appears that the molecules stack in layers and orient themselves in a tilted fashion inside the layers. These liquid crystals phases may be ferroelectric or anti-ferroelectric, both of which are of interest for applications. 

Chirality can also be incorporated into a phase by adding a chiral dopant, which may not form LCs itself. Twisted-nematic or super-twisted nematic mixtures often contain a small amount of such dopants.

==Applications of liquid crystals==

Structure of liquid crystal display: 1  vertical polarization filter, 2,4  glass with electrodes, 3  liquid crystals, 5  horizontal polarization filter, 6  reflector

Liquid crystals find wide use in liquid crystal displays, which rely on the optical properties of certain liquid crystalline substances in the presence or absence of an electric field. In a typical device, a liquid crystal layer (typically 10 m thick) sits between two polarizers that are crossed (oriented at 90 to one another). The liquid crystal alignment is chosen so that its relaxed phase is a twisted one (see Twisted nematic field effect). This twisted phase reorients light that has passed through the first polarizer, allowing its transmission through the second polarizer (and reflected back to the observer if a reflector is provided). The device thus appears transparent. When an electric field is applied to the LC layer, the long molecular axes tend to align parallel to the electric field thus gradually untwisting in the center of the liquid crystal layer. In this state, the LC molecules do not reorient light, so the light polarized at the first polarizer is absorbed at the second polarizer, and the device loses transparency with increasing voltage. In this way, the electric field can be used to make a pixel switch between transparent or opaque on command. Color LCD systems use the same technique, with color filters used to generate red, green, and blue pixels. Similar principles can be used to make other liquid crystal based optical devices. 

Liquid crystal tunable filters are used as electrooptical devices, e.g., in hyperspectral imaging.

Thermotropic chiral LCs whose pitch varies strongly with temperature can be used as crude liquid crystal thermometers, since the color of the material will change as the pitch is changed. Liquid crystal color transitions are used on many aquarium and pool thermometers as well as on thermometers for infants or baths. Plimpton, R. Gregory "Pool thermometer" Issued on April 19, 1988 Other liquid crystal materials change color when stretched or stressed. Thus, liquid crystal sheets are often used in industry to look for hot spots, map heat flow, measure stress distribution patterns, and so on. Liquid crystal in fluid form is used to detect electrically generated hot spots for failure analysis in the semiconductor industry. 

Liquid crystal lasers use a liquid crystal in the lasing medium as a distributed feedback mechanism instead of external mirrors. Emission at a photonic bandgap created by the periodic dielectric structure of the liquid crystal gives a low-threshold high-output device with stable monochromatic emission. 

Polymer Dispersed Liquid Crystal (PDLC) sheets and rolls are available as adhesive backed Smart film which can be applied to windows and electrically switched between transparent and opaque to provide privacy.

Many common fluids, such as soapy water, are in fact liquid crystals. Soap forms a variety of LC phases depending on its concentration in water. 

==See also==

* Biaxial nematic
* Columnar phase
* Chromonic
* LCD classification
* Liquid crystal display
* Liquid crystal polymer
* Liquid crystal tunable filter
* Lyotropic liquid crystal
* Pattern formation
* Plastic crystallinity
* Smart glass
* Thermochromics
* Thermotropic crystal
* Twisted nematic field effect
* Nematicon
* Liquid crystal thermometer
* Mood ring

==References==

==External links==

* 
* Definitions of basic terms relating to low-molar-mass and polymer liquid crystals (IUPAC Recommendations 2001)
* An intelligible introduction to liquid crystals from Case Western Reserve University
* Liquid Crystal Physics tutorial from the Liquid Crystals Group, University of Colorado
* Liquid Crystals & Photonics Group  Ghent University (Belgium), good tutorial
* Simulation of light propagation in liquid crystals, free program
* Liquid Crystals Interactive Online
* Liquid Crystal Institute Kent State University
* Liquid Crystals a journal by Taylor&Francis
* Molecular Crystals and Liquid Crystals a journal by Taylor & Francis
* Hot-spot detection techniques for ICs
* What are liquid crystals? from Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden
* 
* Progress in liquid crystal chemistry Thematic series in the Open Access Beilstein Journal of Organic Chemistry
* DoITPoMS Teaching and Learning Package- "Liquid Crystals"



[[Long gun]]

Haganah paramilitaries in 1948 using long guns.
A long gun is a category of firearms and cannons with longer barrels than other classes. In small arms, a long gun is designed to be fired braced against the shoulder, in contrast to a handgun, while in artillery a long gun would be contrasted with a howitzer or carronade. 

==Small arms==
The actual length of the barrels of a long gun are subject various laws in many jurisdictions, for example by the National Firearms Act in the United States, which sets a minimum length of 16 inches (40 cm) for rifle barrels and 18 inches (45 cm) for shotgun barrels. Canada has a limit of 18.5 inches (47 cm) for either. In addition, Canada puts a minimum fireable length for long guns with detachable or folding stocks of 26 inches (66 cm). In the United States, the minimum length for long guns with detachable or folding stocks is 26 in with the stock in the extended position.

Examples of various classes of small arms generally considered long arms include, but are not limited to: rifles, shotguns, muskets, blunderbusses, carbines, wall guns, and musketoons.

===Advantages and disadvantages of long guns===
Almost all long-arms have front grips (forearms) and shoulder stocks, which provides the user the ability to hold the firearm more steadily than a handgun. In addition, the long barrel of a long gun usually provides a longer sight plane for iron sights, providing the user with more precision when aiming. The presence of a stock makes the use of a telescopic sight or red dot sight more practical than with a hand gun.

The mass of a long gun is usually greater than that of a short gun, making the long gun more expensive to transport, and more difficult and tiring to carry. The increased moment of inertia makes the long gun slower and more difficult to traverse and elevate, and it is thus slower and more difficult to adjust the aim. However, this also results in greater stability in aiming. The greater amount of material in a long gun tends to make it more expensive to manufacture, other factors being equal. The greater size makes it more difficult to conceal, and more inconvenient to use in confined quarters, as well as requiring a larger storage space.

Shotguns are long guns that are designed to fire many small projectiles at once. This makes them very effective at close ranges, but with diminished usefulness at long range.

==Naval long guns==

Long guns on display in front of the Prfecture maritime in Toulon
In historical navy usage, a long gun was the standard type of cannon mounted by a sailing vessel, called such to distinguish it from the much shorter carronades. In informal usage, the length was combined with the weight of shot, yielding terms like "long 9s", referring to full length cannons firing a 9-pound round shot.

==See also==

* Supergun

==References==
 



[[Law of definite proportions]]

In chemistry, the law of definite proportions, sometimes called Proust's Law, states that a chemical compound always contains exactly the same proportion of elements by mass. An equivalent statement is the law of constant composition, which states that all samples of a given chemical compound have the same elemental composition by mass. For example, oxygen makes up about 8/9 of the mass of any sample of pure water, while hydrogen makes up the remaining 1/9 of the mass. Along with the law of multiple proportions, the law of definite proportions forms the basis of stoichiometry. Zumdahl, S. S. Chemistry Heath, 1986: Lexington, MA. ISBN 0-669--04529-2. 

==History==
This observation was first made by the French chemist Joseph Proust, based on several experiments conducted between 1798 and 1804. For example: Proust, J.-L. (1799). Researches on copper, Ann. chim., 32:26-54. Excerpt, in Henry M. Leicester and Herbert S. Klickstein, A Source Book in Chemistry, 1400-1900, Cambridge, MA: Harvard, 1952. Accessed 2008-05-08. Based on such observations, Proust made statements like this one, in 1806:

The law of definite proportions might seem obvious to the modern chemist, inherent in the very definition of a chemical compound. At the end of the 18th century, however, when the concept of a chemical compound had not yet been fully developed, the law was novel. In fact, when first proposed, it was a controversial statement and was opposed by other chemists, most notably Proust's fellow Frenchman Claude Louis Berthollet, who argued that the elements could combine in any proportion. See Dalton, J. (1808). op. cit., ch. II, that Berthollet held the opinion that in all chemical unions, there exist insensible gradations in the proportions of the constituent principles. The existence of this debate demonstrates that, at the time, the distinction between pure chemical compounds and mixtures had not yet been fully developed. Proust argued that compound applies only to materials with fixed proportions: Proust, J.-L. (1806). Sur les mines de cobalt, nickel et autres, Journal de Physique, 63:566-8. Excerpt, from Maurice Crosland, ed., The Science of Matter: a Historical Survey, Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin, 1971. Accessed 2008-05-08. 

The law of definite proportions contributed to, and was placed on a firm theoretical basis by, the atomic theory that John Dalton promoted beginning in 1803, which explained matter as consisting of discrete atoms, that there was one type of atom for each element, and that the compounds were made of combinations of different types of atoms in fixed proportions. Dalton, J. (1808). A New System of Chemical Philosophy, volume 1, Manchester. Excerpt. Accessed 2008-05-08. 

A related early idea was Prout's hypothesis, formulated by English chemist William Prout, who proposed that the hydrogen atom was the fundamental atomic unit. From this hypothesis was derived the whole number rule, which was the rule of thumb that atomic masses were whole number multiples of the mass of hydrogen. This was later rejected in the 1820s and 30s following more refined measurements of atomic mass, notably by Jns Jacob Berzelius, which revealed in particular that the atomic mass of chlorine was 35.45, which was incompatible with the hypothesis. Since the 1920s this discrepancy has been explained by the presence of isotopes; the atomic mass of any isotope is very close to satisfying the whole number rule, with the mass defect caused by differing binding energies being significantly smaller.

==Non-stoichiometric compounds==

Although very useful in the foundation of modern chemistry, the law of definite proportions is not universally true. There exist non-stoichiometric compounds whose elemental composition can vary from sample to sample. An example is the iron oxide wstite, which can contain between 0.83 and 0.95 iron atoms for every oxygen atom, and thus contain anywhere between 23% and 25% oxygen by mass. The ideal formula is FeO, but due to crystallographic vacancies it is reduced to about Fe0.95O. In general, Proust's measurements were not accurate enough to detect such variations.

In addition, the isotopic composition of an element can vary depending on its source, hence its contribution to the mass of even a pure stoichiometric compound may vary. This variation is used in geochemical dating since astronomical, atmospheric, oceanic, crustal and deep Earth processes may concentrate lighter or heavier isotopes preferentially. With the exception of hydrogen and its isotopes, the effect is usually small, but is measurable with modern instrumentation.

An additional note: many natural polymers vary in composition (for instance DNA, proteins, carbohydrates) even when "pure". Polymers are generally not considered "pure chemical compounds" except when their molecular weight is uniform (monodisperse) and their stoichiometry is constant. In this unusual case, they still may violate the law due to isotopic variations.

==See also==
* Law of multiple proportions
* Law of reciprocal proportions

==References==



[[Limbo]]

Christ in Limbo (1575) by anonymous follower of Hieronymous Bosch http://www.imamuseum.org/collections/artwork/christ-limbo-bosch-hieronymus 

In the theology of the Catholic Church, Limbo (Latin limbus, edge or boundary, referring to the "edge" of Hell) is a speculative idea about the afterlife condition of those who die in Original Sin without being assigned to the Hell of the Damned. Limbo is not an official doctrine of the Catholic Church. Medieval theologians, in western Europe, described the underworld ("hell", "hades", "infernum") as divided into four distinct parts: Hell of the Damned (which some call Gehenna), Purgatory, Limbo of the Fathers or Patriarchs, and Limbo of the Infants.

==Limbo of the Patriarchs==

Jesus in Limbo by Domenico Beccafumi

The "Limbo of the Patriarchs" or "Limbo of the Fathers" (Latin limbus patrum) is seen as the temporary state of those who, in spite of the personal sins they may have committed, died in the friendship of God, but could not enter Heaven until redemption by Jesus Christ made it possible. The term "Limbo of the Fathers" was a medieval name for the part of the underworld (Hades) where the patriarchs of the Old Testament were believed to be kept until Christ's soul descended into it by his death "Christ's soul descended only into that part of hell wherein the just were detained." Thomas Aquinas, http://www.newadvent.org/summa/4052.htm#2 through crucifixion and freed them (see Harrowing of Hell). The Catechism of the Catholic Church describes Christ's descent into hell as meaning primarily that "the crucified one sojourned in the realm of the dead prior to his resurrection. This was the first meaning given in the apostolic preaching to Christ's descent into hell: that Jesus, like all men, experienced death and in his soul joined the others in the realm of the dead." It adds: "But he descended there as Saviour, proclaiming the Good News to the spirits imprisoned there." It does not use the word "Limbo". Catechism of the Catholic Church, 633 

This concept of Limbo affirms that one can get into heaven only through Jesus Christ but does not portray Moses, etc., as being punished eternally in Hell. Like other religious terms, such as "Trinity" or even the very name "Bible", the term "Limbo" does not appear in the Bible. And like other religious concepts, that of the Limbo of the Patriarchs is not spelled out in Scripture, but is seen by some as implicit in various references.

 speaks of the "bosom of Abraham", which both the Roman Catholic Church and the Eastern Orthodox Church, following early Christian writers, understand as a temporary state of souls awaiting entrance into Heaven. The end of that state is set either at the Resurrection of the Dead, the most common interpretation in the East, or at the Harrowing of Hell, the most common interpretation in the West, but adopted also by some in the East. See Bishop Hilarion Alfeyev: Christ the Conqueror of Hell 

Jesus told the Good Thief that the two of them would be together "this day" in "Paradise" (; see also ); but between on the Sunday of his resurrection he said that he had "not yet ascended to the Father" (). Some say that the descent of Jesus to the abode of the dead, his presence among them, turned it into a paradise. Others understand the text to mean not "I say to you, This day you will be with me in paradise", but "I say to you this day, You will be with me in paradise". Timothy Radcliffe explained the "today" as a reference to the "Today of eternity". 

Jesus is also described as preaching to "the spirits in prison" (1 Pet 3:19). Medieval drama sometimes portrayed Christ leading a dramatic assaultThe Harrowing of Hellduring the three days between the Crucifixion and the resurrection. In this assault, Jesus freed the souls of the just and escorted them triumphantly into heaven. This imagery is still used in the Eastern Orthodox Church's Holy Saturday liturgy (between Good Friday and Pascha) and in Eastern Orthodox icons of the Resurrection of Jesus.

The doctrine expressed by the term "Limbo of the Fathers" was taught, for instance, by Clement of Alexandria, who maintained: "It is not right that these should be condemned without trial, and that those alone who lived after the coming (of Christ) should have the advantage of the divine righteousness." Stromata, book VI, chapter VI 

Eastern depiction of Christ in his resurrection raising also Adam and Eve

==Limbo of Infants==
The Limbo of Infants (Latin limbus infantium or limbus puerorum) is a hypothesis about the permanent status of the unbaptized who die in infancy, too young to have committed personal sins, but not having been freed from original sin. The fundamental importance, in Roman Catholic theology, of the sacrament of water baptism gives rise to the argument that, because original sin excludes from the beatific vision enjoyed by the souls in heaven, those who have not been freed from it either by the sacrament or by baptism of desire or baptism of blood are not eligible for entry into heaven.

Since at least the time of Augustine, theologians, considering baptism to be necessary for the salvation of those to whom it can be administered, have debated the fate of unbaptized innocents, and the theory of the Limbo of Infants is one of the hypotheses that have been formulated as a proposed solution. Some who hold this theory regard the Limbo of Infants as a state of maximum natural happiness, others as one of "mildest punishment" consisting at least of privation of the beatific vision and of any hope of obtaining it. This theory, in any of its forms, has never been dogmatically defined by the Church, but it is permissible to hold it. 

Recent Catholic theological speculation tends to stress the hope, though not the certainty, that these infants may attain heaven instead of the supposed state of Limbo. 

While the Catholic Church has a defined doctrine on original sin, it has none on the eternal fate of unbaptized infants, leaving theologians free to propose different theories, which Catholics are free to accept or reject. Limbo is one such theory. Study by International Theological Commission, 22 April 2007, 3240 Catechism of the Catholic Church, 1261 

===Latin Fathers===
Saint Augustine of Hippo held that because of original sin, "such infants as quit the body without being baptized will be involved in the mildest condemnation of all. That person, therefore, greatly deceives both himself and others, who teaches that they will not be involved in condemnation; whereas the apostle says: 'Judgment from one offence to condemnation' (), and again a little after: 'By the offence of one upon all persons to condemnation' ()." On Merit and the Forgiveness of Sins, and the Baptism of Infants, ; cf. Study by the International Theological Commission, 22 April 2007], 1518] 

The Council of North African bishops, which included Augustine of Hippo, held at Carthage in 418 did not explicitly endorse all aspects of Augustine's stern view about the destiny of infants who die without baptism, but said in a section of one canon (not found in all manuscripts) Study by the International Theological Commission, 22 April 2007, footnote 41] that there is no "intermediate or other happy dwelling place for children who have left this life without Baptism, without which they cannot enter the kingdom of heaven, that is, eternal life". Study by the International Theological Commission, 22 April 2007, 19] Canon 110 of the Code of Canons of the African Church However, the other Latin Fathers of the 5th and 6th centuries did adopt his position. Study by the International Theological Commission, 22 April 2007, 20 

===Medieval theologians===
In the later medieval period, some theologians continued to hold Augustine's view. In the 12th century, Peter Abelard (10791142) said that these infants suffered no material torment or positive punishment, just the pain of loss at being denied the beatific vision. Others held that unbaptized infants suffered no pain at all: unaware of being deprived of the beatific vision, they enjoyed a state of natural, not supernatural happiness. This theory was associated with but independent of the term "Limbo of Infants", which was forged about the year 1300. Study by the International Theological Commission, 22 April 2007, 2125] 

If heaven is a state of supernatural happiness and union with God, and hell is understood as a state of torture and separation from God then, in this view, the Limbo of Infants, although technically part of hell (the outermost part, "limbo" meaning "outer edge" or "hem") is seen as a sort of intermediate state.

The question of Limbo is not treated in the parts of the Summa Theologica written by Saint Thomas Aquinas himself, but is dealt with in an appendix to the Supplement added after his death by Fra Rainaldo da Piperino. Summa Theologiae, Supplement to the Third Part, EDITOR'S NOTE The Limbo of Infants is there described as an eternal state of natural joy, untempered by any sense of loss at how much greater their joy might have been had they been baptized: "Every man who has the use of free-will is adapted to obtain eternal life, because he can prepare himself for grace whereby to merit eternal life; so that if he fail in this, his grief will be very great, since he has lost what he was able to possess. But children were never adapted to possess eternal life, since neither was this due to them by virtue of their natural principles, for it surpasses the entire faculty of nature, nor could they perform acts of their own whereby to obtain so great a good. Hence they will nowise grieve for being deprived of the divine vision; nay, rather will they rejoice for that they will have a large share of God's goodness and their own natural perfections. Nor can it be said that they were adapted to obtain eternal life, not indeed by their own action, but by the actions of others around them, since they could be baptized by others, like other children of the same condition who have been baptized and obtained eternal life: for this is of superabundant grace that one should be rewarded without any act of one's own. Wherefore the lack of such a grace will not cause sorrow in children who die without Baptism, any more than the lack of many graces accorded to others of the same condition makes a wise man to grieve." Summa Theologica, Supplement 1 to the Third Part, article 2 

The natural happiness possessed in this place would consist in the perception of God mediated through creatures. Feingold, Lawrence. The Natural Desire to See God According to St. Thomas and His Interpreters. 2nd edition. Ave Maria: Sapientia Press of Ave Maria University. 2010. As stated in the International Theological Commission's document on the question: 

:Because children below the age of reason did not commit actual sin, theologians came to the common view that these unbaptized children feel no pain at all or even that they enjoy a full, though only natural, happiness through their mediated union with God in all natural goods (Thomas Aquinas, Duns Scotus). The Hope of Salvation for Infants Who Die Without Being Baptized, 23 

In some ways, this state bears a strong resemblance to the goal of Ignatian spiritualityseeing God in all thingsand would be a form of happiness rarely attained by any human walking the earth.

===Modern era===
The Ecumenical Council of Florence (1442) spoke of baptism as necessary even for children and required that they be baptised soon after birth. Council of Florence Session 11 (Bull Cantate Domino): "With regard to children, since the danger of death is often present and the only remedy available to them is the sacrament of baptism by which they are snatched away from the dominion of the devil and adopted as children of God, it admonishes that sacred baptism is not to be deferred for forty or eighty days or any other period of time..." This had earlier been affirmed at the local Council of Carthage in 417. The Council of Florence also stated that those who die in original sin alone go to hell. Council of Florence Session 6 "..the souls of those who depart this life in actual mortal sin, or in original sin alone, go down straightaway to hell to be punished, but with unequal pains." John Wycliffe's attack on the necessity of infant baptism was condemned by another general council, the Council of Constance. Session 15, 6 July 1415 The Council of Trent in 1547 explicitly stated that baptism (or desire for baptism) was the means by which one is transferred "from that state wherein man is born a child of the first Adam, to the state of grace, and of the adoption of the sons of God, through the second Adam, Jesus Christ, our Saviour. Council of Trent, Session 6 

If adults could effectively be baptised through a desire for the sacrament when prevented from actually receiving it, some speculated that perhaps sacramentally unbaptised infants too might be saved by some waterless equivalent of ordinary baptism when prevented. Thomas Cajetan, a major 16th-century theologian, suggested that infants dying in the womb before birth, and so before ordinary sacramental baptism could be administered, might be saved through their mother's wish for their baptism. Thus, there was no clear consensus that the Council of Florence had excluded salvation of infants by such extra-sacramental equivalents of baptism.

Through the 18th and 19th centuries, individual theologians (Bianchi in 1768, H. Klee in 1835, Caron in 1855, H. Schell in 1893) continued to formulate theories of how children who died unbaptised might still be saved. By 1952 a theologian such as Ludwig Ott could, in a widely used and well-regarded manual, openly teach the possibility that children who die unbaptised might be saved for heaven "Other emergency means of baptism for children dying without sacramental baptism, such as prayer and the desire of the parents or the Church (vicarious baptism of desireCajetan), or the attainment of the use of reason in the moment of death, so that the dying child can decide for or against God (baptism of desireH. Klee), or suffering and death of the child as quasi-Sacrament (baptism of sufferingH. Schell), are indeed possible, but their actuality cannot be proved from Revelation. Cf. Denzinger 712." Ludwig Ott, Fundamentals of Catholic Dogma, Book 2, Section 2,  25 (p. 114 of the 1963 edition) though he still represented their going to limbo as the commonly taught opinion. In its 1980 instruction on children's baptism the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith stated that "with regard to children who die without having received baptism, the Church can only entrust them to the mercy of God, as indeed she does in the funeral rite established for them," leaving all theories as to their fate, including Limbo, as viable options. Pastoralis Actio, 13 And in 1984, when Joseph Ratzinger, then Cardinal Prefect of that Congregation, stated that he rejected the claim that children who die unbaptised cannot attain salvation, he was speaking for many academic theologians of his training and background.

The Church's teaching expressed in the 1992 Catechism of the Catholic Church is that "Baptism is necessary for salvation for those to whom the Gospel has been proclaimed and who have had the possibility of asking for this sacrament." It adds that "God has bound salvation to the sacrament of Baptism, but he himself is not bound by his sacraments". It recalls that, apart from the sacrament, "baptism of blood" (as in the case of the martyrs) and in the case of catechumens who die before receiving the sacrament, explicit desire for baptism, together with repentance for their sins, and charity, ensures salvation. It states that, since Christ died for all and all are called to the same divine destiny, "every man who is ignorant of the Gospel of Christ and of his Church, but seeks the truth and does the will of God in accordance with his understanding of it, can be saved", seeing that, if they had known of the necessity of baptism, they would have desired it explicitly. Catechism of the Catholic Church, 1257-1260 

It then states: "As regards children who have died without Baptism, the Church can only entrust them to the mercy of God, as she does in her funeral rites for them. Indeed, the great mercy of God who desires that all men should be saved, and Jesus' tenderness toward children which caused him to say: 'Let the children come to me, do not hinder them,' ; cf. allow us to hope that there is a way of salvation for children who have died without Baptism. All the more urgent is the Church's call not to prevent little children coming to Christ through the gift of holy Baptism." Catechism of the Catholic Church, 1261 Merely stating that one can "hope" in a way of salvation other than baptism, the Church thus urgently reiterates its appeal to baptize infants, the only certain means to "not prevent" their "coming to Christ" for salvation.

On April 22, 2007, the advisory body known as the International Theological Commission released a document, originally commissioned by Pope John Paul II, entitled "The Hope of Salvation for Infants Who Die without Being Baptized." The Hope of Salvation for Infants Who Die without Being Baptised, ITC, April 22, 2007. After tracing the history of the various opinions that have been and are held on the eternal fate of unbaptized infants, including that connected with the theory of the Limbo of Infants, and after examining the theological arguments, the document stated its conclusion as follows:

:Our conclusion is that the many factors that we have considered above give serious theological and liturgical grounds for hope that unbaptized infants who die will be saved and enjoy the beatific vision. We emphasize that these are reasons for prayerful hope, rather than grounds for sure knowledge. There is much that simply has not been revealed to us. cf. We live by faith and hope in the God of mercy and love who has been revealed to us in Christ, and the Spirit moves us to pray in constant thankfulness and joy. cf. 

:What has been revealed to us is that the ordinary way of salvation is by the sacrament of baptism. None of the above considerations should be taken as qualifying the necessity of baptism or justifying delay in administering the sacrament. Rather, as we want to reaffirm in conclusion, they provide strong grounds for hope that God will save infants when we have not been able to do for them what we would have wished to do, namely, to baptize them into the faith and life of the Church.

Pope Benedict XVI authorized publication of this document, indicating that he considers it consistent with the Church's teaching, though it is not an official expression of that teaching. Catholic News Service (April 20, 2007). "Vatican commission: Limbo reflects 'restrictive view of salvation'". Retrieved 2007-04-20. Media reports that by the document "the Pope closed Limbo" New York Times (April 21, 2007) "Vatican City: Pope Closes Limbo" are thus without foundation. In fact, the document explicitly states that "the theory of limbo, understood as a state which includes the souls of infants who die subject to original sin and without baptism, and who, therefore, neither merit the beatific vision, nor yet are subjected to any punishment, because they are not guilty of any personal sin. This theory, elaborated by theologians beginning in the Middle Ages, never entered into the dogmatic definitions of the Magisterium. Still, that same Magisterium did at times mention the theory in its ordinary teaching up until the Second Vatican Council. It remains therefore a possible theological hypothesis" (second preliminary paragraph); and in paragraph 41 it repeats that the theory of Limbo "remains a possible theological opinion". The document thus allows the hypothesis of a limbo of infants to be held as one of the existing theories about the fate of children who die without being baptised, a question on which there is "no explicit answer" from Scripture or tradition. It ought also to be mentioned here that the traditional theological alternative to Limbo was not Heaven, but rather some degree of suffering in Hell. At any rate, these theories are not the official teaching of the Catholic Church, but are only opinions that the Church does not condemn, permitting them to be held by its members, just as is the theory of possible salvation for infants dying without baptism.

==In other denominations and religions==
The Old Testament righteous follow Christ from Hades to Heaven (Russian icon)

Neither the Eastern Orthodox Church nor Protestantism accepts the concept of a limbo of infants; Limbo: Recent statements by the Catholic church, and Protestant views at Religioustolerance.org but, while not using the expression "Limbo of the Patriarchs", the Eastern Orthodox Church lays much stress on the resurrected Christ's action of liberating Adam and Eve and other righteous figures of the Old Testament, such as Abraham and David, from Hades (see Harrowing of Hell).

Some Protestants have a similar understanding of those who died as believers prior to the crucifixion of Jesus residing in a place that is not Heaven, but not Hell. The doctrine holds that Hades has two "compartments", one an unnamed place of torment, the other named Abraham's Bosom. Luke 16:1926 speaks of a chasm fixed between the two which cannot be crossed. Those in the unnamed "compartment" have no hope, and will ultimately be consigned to hell. Those in Abraham's bosom are those of whom it is written of Jesus, "When He ascended on high, He led captive a host of captives..." (Eph. 4:8, quoting Psa. 68:18). These individuals, the captives, now reside with God in Heaven. Both "Compartments" still exist, but Abraham's Bosom is now empty, while the other chamber is not, according to this doctrine.

Mormons teach that "all who have died without a knowledge of gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God." D&C 137:7 See Baptism for the Dead Jehovah's Witnesses, Christadelphians, and others have taught that the dead are unconscious (or even nonexistent), awaiting their destiny on Judgment Day.

The Zoroastrian concept of hamistagan is similar to limbo. Hamistagan is a neutral state in which a soul that was neither good nor evil awaits Judgment Day.

In Islam, which denies the existence of Original Sin in totality, the concept of Limbo exists as Barzakh, the state which exists after death, prior to the day of resurrection. During this period sinners are punished and the faithful rest in comfort. The concept of underage children is that they go exempt of sin and that they are classed as Muslims and after death they go to heaven where they are cared for by Abraham. Al-Bukhary, Volume 9, Book 87, Number 171 

==Cultural references==
* In the Divine Comedy poem Inferno, Dante depicts Limbo as the first circle of Hell. The virtuous pagans of classical history and mythology inhabit a brightly lit and beautifulbut sombercastle which is seemingly a medieval version of Elysium. They include Hector, Julius Caesar, Virgil, Electra, and Orpheus. Virtuous non-Christians, such as the Muslim Saladin, were also described as among its residents.
* One of Nobel Prize-winning poet Seamus Heaney's best known works is titled Limbo. 
* In the Artemis Fowl series, "Limbo" is the timeless plane of existence where demons live.
* In the film Inception, Limbo is a deep subconscious level, far beyond false awakening, and a state in which the characters may be trapped indefinitely. 
* In The Monster Squad, a 1987 comedy/horror film written by Shane Black and Fred the aim to defeat the Monsters is to open a hole in the universe and cast the monsters into Limbo.
* In The Matrix Revolutions, third and last installment of The Matrix series, Neo gets trapped in a train station named Mobil Ave. He learns that the station (located "nowhere") is a sort of borderworld, passage between the Matrix and the real world. Mobil is an anagram of Limbo.
* In the final episode of the BBC time travel/cop show Ashes to Ashes (Series 3, Episode 8), it is revealed that the world that Alex Drake awoke to after being shot, which Sam Tyler described and that other major characters inhabit, is a kind of Limbo, one seemingly specifically for members of the police force, who had died in violent or sudden ways.
* In the indie game Limbo, a boy walks through a black and white world searching for his sister. Interview with Leight Alexander 
*In , Limbo is the name of a city that drags its victims into a demonic version of its human world counterpart.
* In Marvel Comics, Limbo is a section outside time, ruled over by a future version of Kang the Conqueror called Immortus.
* "In Limbo" is the 11th track on Genesis' debut album "From Genesis to Revelation".
* "In Limbo" is the 7th track on Radiohead's 2000 album "Kid A".
* In the BBC CW TV series The Vampire Diaries, a form of limbo called "The Other Side" is created by a powerful witch named Qetsiyah, creating it as a Purgatory for all supernatural (vampires, witches, werewolves, doppelgngers, hybrids, etc.) beings go in death, it prevents any supernatural being from reaching a form of Heaven called "Peace".

==Non-religious usages==
Differing slightly from the original meaning, in colloquial speech, "limbo" is any status where a person or project is held up, and nothing can be done until another action happens. For example, a construction project might be described as "in limbo" if political considerations delay its permit.

A "legal limbo" may occur when varying laws or court rulings leave a person without recourse. For example, a person may earn "too much" to receive public assistance from the government, but not enough to actually pay for basic necessities. Likewise, various parties in a dispute may be pointing blame at each other, rather than fixing the problem, and leaving the person or group suffering from the problem to continue to suffer in limbo.

The Amstrad PCW's bundled word processing software, LocoScript, used the term "in limbo" to refer to files which had been deleted but which could still be restored, a concept similar to that later implemented by the Trash in the Apple Macintosh and the Recycle Bin in Microsoft Windows 95. 

In the licensing of houses in multiple occupation (HMOs), properties registered under a previous scheme, but would not be licensable under mandatory arrangements, would go into a state of limbo when they expire, until the status of any potential additional licensing scheme is fully resolved.

==See also==

* Hades in Christianity
* Heaven
* Hell in Christian beliefs 
* Intermediate state
* Liminality
* Sheol
* Spirit world (Latter Day Saints)
* Spirits in prison

==References==
Notes

==External links==

*
* The Hope of Salvation for Infants Who Die Without Being Baptized (document of the International Theological Commission)
* Unbaptized Infants Suffer Fire and Limbo is a Heretical Pelagian Fable (a Traditionalist sedevacantist perspective)



[[Lethe]]

In Greek mythology, Lethe (Greek: , Lth; Classical Greek , modern Greek: ) was one of the five rivers of Hades. Also known as the Ameles potamos (river of unmindfulness), the Lethe flowed around the cave of Hypnos and through the Underworld, where all those who drank from it experienced complete forgetfulness. Lethe was also the name of the Greek spirit of forgetfulness and oblivion, with whom the river was often identified.

In Classical Greek, the word lethe literally means "oblivion", "forgetfulness", or "concealment". . It is related to the Greek word for "truth", aletheia (), which through the privative alpha literally means "un-forgetfulness" or "un-concealment".

==Mythology==

===River===
Lethe, the river of forgetfulness, was one of the five rivers of the Greek underworld, the other four being Styx (the river of hate), Akheron (the river of sorrow), Kokytos (the river of lamentation) and Phlegethon (the river of fire). According to Statius, it bordered Elysium, the final resting place of the virtuous. Ovid wrote that the river flowed through the cave of Hypnos, god of sleep, where its murmuring would induce drowsiness. 

The shades of the dead were required to drink the waters of the Lethe in order to forget their earthly life. In the Aeneid, Virgil writes that it is only when the dead have had their memories erased by the Lethe that they may be reincarnated. 

===Goddess===
Lethe was also the name of the personification of forgetfulness and oblivion, with whom the river was often associated. Hesiod's Theogony identifies her as the daughter of Eris ("strife"), and the sister of Ponos ("toil"), Limos ("starvation"), the Algea ("pains"), the Hysminai ("fightings"), the Makhai ("battles"), the Phonoi ("murders"), the Androktasiai ("man-slaughters"), the Neikea ("quarrels"), the Pseudologoi ("lies"), the Amphilogiai ("disputes"), Dysnomia ("lawlessness"), At ("ruin"), and Horkos ("oath"). 

==Role in religion and philosophy==
Some ancient Greeks believed that souls were made to drink from the river before being reincarnated, so they would not remember their past lives. The Myth of Er at the end of Plato's Republic tells of the dead arriving at the "plain of Lethe", through which the river Ameles ("careless") runs. A few mystery religions taught the existence of another river, the Mnemosyne; those who drank from the Mnemosyne would remember everything and attain omniscience. Initiates were taught that they would receive a choice of rivers to drink from after death, and to drink from Mnemosyne instead of Lethe. These two rivers are attested in several verse inscriptions on gold plates dating to the 4th century BC and onward, found at Thurii in Southern Italy and elsewhere throughout the Greek world. There were rivers of Lethe and Mnemosyne at the oracular shrine of Trophonius in Boeotia, from which worshippers would drink before making oracular consultations with the god. More recently, Martin Heidegger used "lth" to symbolize the "concealment of Being" or "forgetting of Being" that he saw as a major problem of modern philosophy. Examples are found in his books on Nietzsche (Vol 1, p. 194) and on Parmenides.

==Real rivers==
Lima Bridge on Lima River in Ponte de Lima, Portugal

Amongst authors in Antiquity, the tiny Limia River between Northern Portugal and Galicia (Spain) was said to have the same properties of memory loss as the legendary Lethe River, being mistaken by it. In 138 BC, the Roman general Decimus Junius Brutus sought to dispose of the myth, as it impeded his military campaigns in the area. He was said to have crossed the Limia and then called his soldiers on the other side, one by one, by name. The soldiers, astonished that their general remembered their names, crossed the river as well without fear. This act proved that the Limia was not as dangerous as the local myths described. Strabo iii. p. 153; Mela, iii, 1; Pliny the Elder H.N. iv. 22 s. 35 

In Cadiz (Spain), the river Guadalete was originally named Lethe by local Greek and Phoenician colonists who, about to go to war, solved instead their differences by diplomacy and named the river Lethe to forever forget their former differences. When the Arabs conquered the region much later, their name for the river became Guadalete (River Lethe, in Arabic).

In Alaska, a river which runs through the Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes is called River Lethe.

==See also==
*Oblivion (eternal)
*River Lethe in popular culture
*The Golden Bough (mythology)

==References==

==External links==

* Theoi Project: Lethe, Greek goddess of the underworld river of oblivion
* Theoi Project: Lethe, Greek goddess or spirit of forgetfulness and oblivion



[[Laurence Sterne]]

Laurence Sterne (24 November 1713  18 March 1768) was an Anglo-Irish novelist and an Anglican clergyman. He is best known for his novels The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman and A Sentimental Journey Through France and Italy; but he also published many sermons, wrote memoirs, and was involved in local politics. Sterne died in London after years of fighting consumption.

==Early life and education==
Sterne was born in Clonmel, County Tipperary. His father, Roger Sterne, was an ensign in a British regiment recently returned from Dunkirk, which was disbanded on the day of Sterne's birth. Within six months the family had returned to Yorkshire, and in July 1715 they moved back to Ireland, having "decamped with Bag & Baggage for Dublin", in Sterne's words. Barfoot, C.C. and Theo D'haen The Clash of Ireland: Literary Contrasts and Connections. Amsterdam/Atlanta: Rodopi, 1989. 49. 

The first decade of Sterne's life was spent moving from place to place as his father was reassigned throughout Ireland. During this period Sterne never lived in one place for more than a year. In addition to Clonmel and Dublin, his family also lived in, among other places, Wicklow Town, Annamoe (County Wicklow), Drogheda (County Louth), Castlepollard (County Westmeath), and Carrickfergus (County Antrim). Barfoot, C.C. and Theo D'haen The Clash of Ireland: Literary Contrasts and Connections. Amsterdam/Atlanta: Rodopi, 1989. 48-51; Cash, Arthur. Laurence Sterne: The Early and Middle Years. London: Methuen, 1975. 2-22. In 1724, his father took Sterne to Roger's wealthy brother, Richard, so that Sterne could attend Hipperholme Grammar School near Halifax; Sterne never saw his father again as Roger was ordered to Jamaica where he died of a fever in 1731. Sterne was admitted to a sizarship at Jesus College, Cambridge, in July 1733 at the age of 20. His great-grandfather Richard Sterne had been the Master of the college as well as the Archbishop of York. Sterne graduated with a degree of Bachelor of Arts in January 1737; and returned in the summer of 1740 to be awarded his Master of Arts degree. 

==Early career==
Sterne was ordained as a deacon in March 1737 and as a priest in August, 1738. Shortly thereafter Sterne was awarded the vicarship living of Sutton-on-the-Forest in Yorkshire. Sterne married Elizabeth Lumley in 1741. Both were ill with consumption. In 1743, he was presented to the neighbouring living of Stillington by Rev. Richard Levett, Prebendary of Stillington, who was patron of the living. Cross (1908), chap. 2 Marriage and Settlement at Sutton-on-the-Forest, p.53 Subsequently Sterne did duty both there and at Sutton. He was also a prebendary of York Minster. Sterne's life at this time was closely tied with his uncle, Dr. Jaques Sterne, the Archdeacon of Cleveland and Precentor of York Minster. Sterne's uncle was an ardent Whig, and urged Sterne to begin a career of political journalism which resulted in some scandal for Sterne and, eventually, a terminal falling-out between the two men.

Jaques Sterne was a powerful clergyman but a mean-tempered man and a rabid politician. In 174142 Sterne wrote political articles supporting the administration of Sir Robert Walpole for a newspaper founded by his uncle but soon withdrew from politics in disgust. His uncle became his archenemy, thwarting his advancement whenever possible.

Sterne lived in Sutton for twenty years, during which time he kept up an intimacy which had begun at Cambridge with John Hall-Stevenson, a witty and accomplished bon vivant, owner of Skelton Hall in the Cleveland district of Yorkshire.

==Writing==
In 1759, to support his dean in a church squabble, Sterne wrote A Political Romance (later called The History of a Good Warm Watch-Coat), a Swiftian satire of dignitaries of the spiritual courts. At the demands of embarrassed churchmen, the book was burned. Thus, Sterne lost his chances for clerical advancement but discovered his real talents; until the completion of this first work, "he hardly knew that he could write at all, much less with humour so as to make his reader laugh". Cross (1908), chap. 8, The Publication of Trisram Shandy: Volumes I and II, p.178 

Having discovered his talent, at the age of 46, he turned over his parishes to a curate, and dedicated himself to writing for the rest of his life. It was while living in the countryside, having failed in his attempts to supplement his income as a farmer and struggling with tuberculosis, that Sterne began work on his most famous novel, The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman, the first volumes of which were published in 1759. Sterne was at work on his celebrated comic novel during the year that his mother died, his wife was seriously ill, and his daughter was also taken ill with a fever. "Cross (1908), chap. 8, The Publication of Tristram Shandy: Volumes I and II, p.197 He wrote as fast as he possibly could, composing the first 18 chapters between January and March 1759. 

An initial, sharply satiric version was rejected by Robert Dodsley, the London printer, just when Sterne's personal life was upset. His mother and uncle both died. His wife had a nervous breakdown and threatened suicide. Sterne continued his comic novel, but every sentence, he said, was "written under the greatest heaviness of heart." In this mood, he softened the satire and recounted details of Tristram's opinions, eccentric family and ill-fated childhood with a sympathetic humour, sometimes hilarious, sometimes sweetly melancholica comedy skirting tragedy.

The publication of Tristram Shandy made Sterne famous in London and on the continent. He was delighted by the attention, and spent part of each year in London, being fted as new volumes appeared. Indeed, Baron Fauconberg rewarded Sterne by appointing him as the perpetual curate of Coxwold, North Yorkshire.

==Foreign travel==

Sterne painted in watercolour by French artist Louis Carrogis Carmontelle, ca. 1762
Sterne continued to struggle with his illness, and departed England for France in 1762 in an effort to find a climate that would alleviate his suffering. Sterne was lucky to attach himself to a diplomatic party bound for Turin, as England and France were still adversaries in the Seven Years' War. Sterne was gratified by his reception in France where reports of the genius of Tristram Shandy had made him a celebrity. Aspects of this trip to France were incorporated into Sternes second novel, A Sentimental Journey Through France and Italy, which was published at the beginning of 1768. The novel was written during a period in which Sterne was increasingly ill and weak.

==Death and "resurrection"==
Less than a month after Sentimental Journey was published, early in 1768, Sterne's strength failed him, and he died in his lodgings at 41 Old Bond Street on the 18 March, at the age of 54. He was buried in the churchyard of St George's, Hanover Square.

It was widely rumoured that Sterne's body was stolen shortly after it was interred and sold to anatomists at Cambridge University. Circumstantially, it was said that his body was recognised by somebody who knew him and discreetly reinterred back in St George's, in an unknown plot. A year later some fellow Freemasons erected a memorial stone with a rhyming epitaph near to his original burial place. A second stone was erected in 1893, correcting some factual errors on the memorial stone. When the churchyard of St. George's was redeveloped in 1969, amongst 11,500 skulls disinterred, several were identified with drastic cuts from anatomising or a post-mortem examination. One was identified to be of a size that matched a bust of Sterne made by Nollekens. 

The skull was held up to be his, albeit with "a certain area of doubt". Along with nearby skeletal bones, these remains were transferred to Coxwold churchyard in 1969 by the Laurence Sterne Trust. Alas, Poor Yorick, Letters, The Times, 16 June 1969, Kenneth Monkman, Laurence Sterne Trust. "If we have reburied the wrong one, nobody,I feel beyond reasonable doubt, would enjoy the situation more than Sterne" 

The story of the reinterment of Sterne's skull in Coxwold is alluded to in Malcolm Bradbury's novel To The Hermitage.

==Works==
Sterne's early works were letters, he had two ordinary sermons published (in 1747 and 1750), and tried his hand at satire. He was involved in, and wrote about, local politics in 1742. His major publication prior to Tristram Shandy was the satire A Political Romance (1759), aimed at conflicts of interest within York Minster. A posthumously published piece on the art of preaching, A Fragment in the Manner of Rabelais, appears to have been written in 1759. Sterne did not begin work on Tristram Shandy until he was 46 years old. Rabelais was by far Sterne's favourite author, and in his correspondence he made clear that he considered himself as Rabelais' successor in humor writing, distancing himself from Jonathan Swift: Huntington Brown (1967) Rabelais in English literature pp.190-1 Cross (1908), chap. 8, The Publication of Trisram Shandy: Volumes I and II, p.179 

I ... deny I have gone as far as Swift: he keeps a due distance from Rabelais; I keep a due distance from him.

Sterne is best known for his novel The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman, for which he became famous not only in England, but throughout Europe. Translations of the work began to appear in all the major European languages almost upon its publication, and Sterne influenced European writers as diverse as Diderot and the German Romanticists. His work had also noticeable influence over Brazilian author Machado de Assis, who made exceptional (and outstandingly original) usage of the digressive technique in the masterful novel The Posthumous Memoirs of Bras Cubas. Indeed, the novel, in which Sterne manipulates narrative time and voice, parodies accepted narrative form, and includes a healthy dose of "bawdy" humor, was largely dismissed in England as being too corrupt. Samuel Johnson's verdict in 1776 was that "Nothing odd will do long. Tristram Shandy did not last." This is strikingly different from the views of European critics of the day, who praised Sterne and Tristram Shandy as innovative and superior. Voltaire called it "clearly superior to Rabelais", and later Goethe praised Sterne as "the most beautiful spirit that ever lived." Both during his life and for a long time after, efforts were made by many to reclaim Sterne as an arch-sentimentalist; parts of Tristram Shandy, such as the tale of Le Fever, were excerpted and published separately to wide acclaim from the moralists of the day. The success of the novel and its serialized nature also allowed many imitators to publish pamphlets concerning the Shandean characters and other Shandean-related material even while the novel was yet unfinished.

The novel itself is difficult to describe. The story starts with the narration, by Tristram, of his own conception. It proceeds by fits and starts, but mostly by what Sterne calls "progressive digressions" so that we do not reach Tristram's birth before the third volume. The novel is rich in characters and humor, and the influences of Rabelais and Cervantes are present throughout. The novel ends after 9 volumes, published over a decade, but without anything that might be considered a traditional conclusion. Sterne inserts sermons, essays and legal documents into the pages of his novel; and he explores the limits of typography and print design by including marbled pages and, most famously, an entirely black page within the narrative. Many of the innovations that Sterne introduced, adaptations in form that should be understood as an exploration of what constitutes the novel, were highly influential to Modernist writers like James Joyce and Virginia Woolf, and more contemporary writers such as Thomas Pynchon and David Foster Wallace. Italo Calvino referred to Tristram Shandy as the "undoubted progenitor of all avant-garde novels of our century." The Russian Formalist writer Viktor Shklovsky regarded Tristram Shandy as the archetypal, quintessential novel, of which all other novels are mere subsets: "Tristram Shandy is the most typical novel of world literature." http://andromeda.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/Biblio/shandy.html 

However, the leading critical opinions of Tristram Shandy tend to be markedly polarised in their evaluations of its significance. Since the 1950s, following the lead of D.W. Jefferson, there are those who argue that, whatever its legacy of influence may be, Tristram Shandy in its original context actually represents a resurgence of a much older, Renaissance tradition of "Learned Wit"  owing a debt to such influences as the Scriblerian approach.

A Sentimental Journey Through France and Italy is a less influential book, although it was better received by English critics of the day. The book has many stylistic parallels with Tristram Shandy, and indeed, the narrator is one of the minor characters from the earlier novel. Although the story is more straightforward, A Sentimental Journey can be understood to be part of the same artistic project to which Tristram Shandy belongs.

Two volumes of Sterne's Sermons were published during his lifetime; more copies of his Sermons were sold in his lifetime than copies of Tristram Shandy, and for a while he was better known in some circles as a preacher than as a novelist. The sermons, though, are conventional in both style and substance. Several volumes of letters were published after his death, as was Journal to Eliza, a more sentimental than humorous love letter to a woman Sterne was courting during the final years of his life. Compared to many eighteenth-century authors, Sterne's body of work is quite small.

===Abolitionists===

In 1766, at the height of the debate about slavery, Ignatius Sancho wrote to Sterne encouraging him to use his pen to lobby for the abolition of the slave trade. 

"That subject, handled in your striking manner, would ease the yoke (perhaps) of manybut if only oneGracious God!what a feast to a benevolent heart!"

In July, 1766 Sancho's letter was received by Sterne shortly after he had just finished writing a conversation between his fictional characters Corporal Trim and his brother Tom in Tristram Shandy wherein Tom described the oppression of a black servant in a sausage shop in Lisbon which he had visited. Laurence Sterne's widely publicized July 27, 1766 response to Sancho's letter, became an integral part of 18th century abolitionist literature.

"There is a strange coincidence, Sancho, in the little events (as well as in the great ones) of this world: for I had been writing a tender tale of the sorrows of a friendless poor negro-girl, and my eyes had scarce done smarting with it, when your letter of recommendation in behalf of so many of her brethren and sisters, came to mebut why her brethren?or yours, Sancho! any more than mine? It is by the finest tints, and most insensible gradations, that nature descends from the fairest face about St. Jamess, to the sootiest complexion in Africa: at which tint of these, is it, that the ties of blood are to cease? and how many shades must we descend lower still in the scale, ere mercy is to vanish with them?but tis no uncommon thing, my good Sancho, for one half of the world to use the other half of it like brutes, & then endeavor to make em so." 

==Bibliography==
His works, first collected in 1779, were edited, with newly discovered letters, by J. P. Browne (London, 1873). A less complete edition was edited by G. Saintsbury (London, 1894). The Florida Edition of Sterne's works is currently the leading scholarly edition  although the final volume (Sterne's letters) has yet to be published.

* Ren Bosch, Labyrinth of Digressions: Tristram Shandy as Perceived and Influenced by Sterne's Early Imitators (Amsterdam, 2007)
* W. M. Thackeray, in English Humourists of the Eighteenth Century (London, 1853; new edition, New York, 1911)
* Percy Fitzgerald, Life of Laurence Sterne (London, 1864; second edition, London, 1896)
* Paul Stapfer, Laurence Sterne, sa personne et ses ouvrages (second edition, Paris, 1882)
* H. D. Traill, Laurence Sterne, "English Men of Letters", (London, 1882) http://www.archive.org/details/sterne010824mbp 
* Texte, Rousseau et le cosmopolitisme littraire au XVIIIme sicle (Paris, 1895)
* H. W. Thayer, Laurence Sterne in Germany (New York, 1905)
* P. E. More, Shelburne Essays (third series, New York, 1905)
* Wilbur Lucius Cross Life and Times of Sterne, New York 1909 http://www.archive.org/details/lifetimesoflaure00crosuoft 
* W. S. Sichel, Sterne; A Study (New York, 1910)
* L. S. Benjamin, Life and Letters (two volumes, 1912)
* Arthur Cash, Laurence Sterne: The Early and Middle Years (ISBN 0-416-82210-X, 1975) and Laurence Sterne: The Later Years (ISBN 0-416-32930-6, 1986)
* Rousseau, George S. (2004). Nervous Acts: Essays on Literature, Culture and Sensibility. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 1-4039-3454-1
* D. W. Jefferson, "Tristram Shandy and the Tradition of Learned Wit" in Essays in Criticism, 1(1951), 22548.
*Ryan J. Stark, "Tristram Shandy and the Devil," in Theology and Literature in the Age of Johnson, ed. Melvyn New and Gerard Reedy (University of Delaware Press, 2012), 203-18.
*Tristram Shandy: An Annotated Bibliography by Jack Lynch 
*The Cambridge History of English and American Literature in 18 Volumes (190721). Vol. 10. The Age of Johnson. III. Sterne, and the Novel of His Times. Bibliography. http://www.bartleby.com/220/0300.html 
*Bibliography for the study of Laurence Sterne http://post.queensu.ca/~cjf1/SterneBibliography.htm 
*Articles on Laurence Sterne. http://post.queensu.ca/~cjf1/SterneArticles.htm 

==References==

==External links==

*The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy & A Sentimental Journey. Munich: Edited by Gnter Jrgensmeier, 2005
*From Sterne to Baldessari: The Illustration of Tristram Shandy, 17601996
*Laurence Sterne in Cyberspace
**includes links to various e-texts of both Tristram Shandy and A Sentimental Journey
*
*Works by Laurence Sterne on Internet Archive.
*Ron Schuler's Parlour Tricks: The Scrapbook Mind of Laurence Sterne
*
*Karslyan, Karen: Sterne's Art of Playing On Clock Hands" (in Russian)
*Asterisk*: a site inspired by Sterne dedicated to the study of innovative narrative
*Tristramshandyweb.it: The Tristram Shandy Web  Annotated edition of "Tristram Shandy", in hypertext format. With bibliography. Criticism.
*Laurence Sterne Resource
*Laurence Sterne at the Google Books Search
* Sterne at The Internet Archive Text Search
*Sterne's entry at the Irish writers database at the Princess Grace Irish Library in Monaco
*The Shandean: A Journal Devoted to the Works of Laurence Sterne (tables of contents available online)
*Laurence Sterne at the National Portrait Gallery, London



[[Linear A]]

Linear A is one of two currently undeciphered writing systems used in ancient Crete. Cretan hieroglyphic is the other. Linear A was the primary script used in palace and religious writings of the Minoan civilization. It was discovered by archaeologist Arthur Evans. It is the origin of the Linear B script, which was later used by the Mycenaean civilization.

In the 1950s, Linear B was largely deciphered and found to encode an early form of Greek. Although the two systems share many symbols, this did not lead to a subsequent decipherment of Linear A. Using the values associated with Linear B in Linear A mainly produces unintelligible words. If it uses the same or similar syllabic values as Linear B, then its underlying language appears unrelated to any known language. This has been dubbed the Minoan language.

==The script==
Linear A has hundreds of signs. They are believed to represent syllabic, ideographic, and semantic values in a manner similar to Linear B. While many of those assumed to be syllabic signs are similar to ones in Linear B, approximately 80% of Linear A's logograms are unique. 

==Corpus==
Linear A incised on tablets found in Akrotiri, Santorini.
Linear A tablet - Chania Archaeological Museum
 
Linear A has been unearthed chiefly on Crete, but also at other sites in Greece, as well as Turkey and Israel. The extant corpus, comprising some 1427 specimens totalling 7362-7396 signs, if scaled to standard type, would fit on a single sheet of paper. Younger "if there are 4002 characters (font Times, pitch 12, no spaces) on an 8 1/2 x 11 inch sheet of paper with 1 inch margins, all extant Linear A would take up 1.84 pages." 14.34 pages for Linear B. 

===Crete===
According to Ilse Schoep, on Crete, the main discoveries of Linear A tablets have been at three sites:

Haghia Triadha in the Mesara with 147 tablets; Zakro/Zakros, a port town in the far east of the island with 31 tablets; and Khania/Chania, a port town in the northwest of the island with 94 tablets. Ilse Schoep, Tablets and Territories? Reconstructing Late Minoan IB Political Geography through Undeciphered Documents. American Journal of Archaeology, Vol. 103, No. 2 (Apr., 1999), pp. 201-221 

Discoveries have been made at the following locations on Crete,

*Apoudoulou
*Archanes
*Arkalochori
*Armenoi
*Chania
*Gournia
*Hagia Triada (largest cache)
*Hagios Stephanos
*Kardamoutsa
*Kato Simi (also spelled Kato Syme)
*Knossos
*Kophinas
*Larani
*Mallia
*Mochlos (also spelled Mokhlos)
*Mount Juktas (also spelled Iouktas)
*Myrtos Pyrgos
*Nerokourou
*Palaikastro
*Petras
*Petsophas
*Phaistos
*Platanos
*Poros, Heraklion
*Prassa
*Pseira
*Psychro (also spelled Psykhro)
*Pyrgos Tylissos
*Sitia
*Skhinias
*Skotino cave
*Traostalos
*Troulos (or Trulos)
*Vrysinas
*Zakros

===Outside of Crete===
Prior to 1973, only one Linear A tablet was known to be found outside of Crete (on Kea). Margalit Finkelberg, Bronze Age Writing: Contacts between East and West. In E. H. Cline and D. Harris-Cline (eds.). The Aegean and the Orient in the Second Millennium. Proceedings of the 50th Anniversary Symposium, Cincinnati, 1820 April 1997. Lige 1998. Aegeum 18 (1998) 265-272. Since then, other locations yielded inscriptions.

;Other Greek Islands
*Kea
*Kythera
*Melos
*Samothrace
*Thera

;Mainland Greece
*Mycenae
*Tiryns
*Laconia

;Bulgaria
*Eastern Rhodopes mountains Linear A script from the Eastern Rhodopes? (May 2005) 

;Turkey
*Miletus

;Israel
*Tel Haror
*Tel Lachish

According to Finkelberg, mostif not allinscriptions found outside of Crete were made locally. This is indicated by such factors as the composition of the material on which the inscriptions were made. Also, close analysis of the inscriptions found outside of Crete indicates the use of a script that is somewhere in between Linear A and Linear B, combining the elements of both.

==Chronology==

Linear A was a contemporary and possible child of Cretan hieroglyphs and the ancestor of Linear B. The sequence and the geographical spread of Cretan hieroglyphs, Linear A and Linear B, the three overlapping, but distinct writing systems on Bronze Age Crete and the Greek mainland can be summarized as follows: 

 Writing system Geographical area Time span 
 Cretan Hieroglyphic Crete c. 16251500 BC 
 Linear A Aegean islands (Kea, Kythera, Melos, Thera), and Greek mainland (Laconia) c. 18001450 BC 
 Linear B Crete (Knossos), and mainland (Pylos, Mycenae, Thebes, Tiryns) c. 14501200 BC 

==Discovery==

Archaeologist Arthur Evans named the script 'Linear' because its characters consisted simply of lines inscribed in clay, in contrast to the more pictographic and three-dimensional characters in Cretan hieroglyphs that were used during the same period. Andrew Robinson, Writing and Script: A Very Short Introduction, Oxford University Press, 2009, p. 54 

Several tablets inscribed in signs similar to Linear A were found in the Troad. While their status is disputed, they may be imports, as there is no evidence of Minoan presence in Troad. Classification of these signs as a unique Trojan script (proposed by contemporary Russian linguist Nikolai Kazansky) is not accepted by other linguists.

==Theories of decipherment==
Linear A incised on a vase, also found in Akrotiri.

It is difficult to evaluate a given analysis of Linear A as there is little point of reference for reading its inscriptions. The simplest approach to decipherment may be to presume that the values of Linear A match more or less the values given to the deciphered Linear B script, used for Mycenean Greek. A site maintained by John Younger of Kansas University has a comprehensive list of known texts written in Linear A. 

===Greek===
Vladimir I. Georgiev published his Le dchiffrement des inscriptions crtoises en linaire A ("The decipherment of Cretan inscriptions in Linear A") in 1957 stating that Linear A contains Greek linguistic elements. . In 1963, he published an article, "Les deux langues des inscriptions crtoises en linaire A" ("The two languages of Cretan inscriptions in Linear A"), suggesting that the language of the Hagia Triada tablets was Greek but that the rest of the Linear A corpus was in Hittite-Luwian. 

===Luwian===
Since the 1960s, a theory based on Linear B phonetic values suggests that Linear A language could be an Anatolian language, close to Luwian. See the works of Sir Leonard R. Palmer. In 1997, Gareth Alun Owens published a collection of essays entitled Kritika Daidalika, which support the view that Linear A might represent an archaic relative of Luwian. Owens based this assertion on the perceived Indo-European but non-Greek roots of a small number of words he was able to read by using the known Linear B or Cypriot sound values of certain Linear A signs. He does not claim a systematic decipherment of Linear A, and remarks in the book that he intended his Luwian hypothesis to provoke discussion rather than to settle the issue.

The theory for the Luwian origin of Minoan, however, failed to gain universal support for the following reasons:

*There is no remarkable resemblance between Minoan and Hitto-Luwian morphology.
*None of the existing theories of the origin of Hitto-Luwian peoples and their migration to Anatolia (either from the Balkans or from the Caucasus) are related to Crete.
*There was a lack of direct contacts between Hitto-Luwians and Minoan Crete; the latter was never mentioned in Hitto-Luwian inscriptions. Small states located along the western coast of ancient Asia Minor were natural barriers between Hitto-Luwians and Minoan Crete.
*Obvious anthropological differences between Hitto-Luwians and the Minoans may be considered as another indirect testimony against this hypothesis.

===Phoenician===
In 2001, the journal Ugarit-Forschungen, Band 32 published the article "The First Inscription in Punic &mdash; Vowel Differences in Linear A and B" by Jan Best, claiming to demonstrate how and why Linear A notates an archaic form of Phoenician. Dietrich, Manfried and Loretz, Oswald (ed.) Ugarit-Forschungen, Band 32: Internationales Jahrbuch fur die Altertumskunde Syrien-Palastinas. Verlag Butzon & Bercker, 2001. ISBN 3-934628-00-1. This was a continuation of attempts by Cyrus Gordon in finding connections between Minoan and West Semitic languages. His methodology drew widespread criticism. While one or two terms may apparently be of Semitic origin (such as KU-RO indicating totals corresponding to Semitic kullu "all"), there is yet not enough evidence to secure a connection between the language of Linear A and Semitic idioms. Contrary to most other scripts used for Semitic languages, Linear A presents many written vowels.

===Indo-Iranian===
Another recent interpretation, based on the frequencies of the syllabic signs and on complete palaeographic comparative studies, suggests that the Minoan Linear A language belongs to the Indo-Iranian family of Indo-European languages. La Marle, Hubert. Linaire A, la premire criture syllabique de Crte. Geuthner, Paris, 4 volumes, 19971999, 2006; Introduction au linaire A. Geuthner, Paris, 2002; L'aventure de l'alphabet: les critures cursives et linaires du Proche-Orient et de l'Europe du sud-est  l'ge du Bronze. Geuthner, Paris, 2002; Les racines du crtois ancien et leur morphologie: communication  l'Acadmie des Inscriptions et Belles Lettres, 2007. Studies by Hubert La Marle include a presentation of the morphology of the language, avoid the complete identification of phonetic values between Linear A and B, and also avoid comparing Linear A with Cretan Hieroglyphs. La Marle uses the frequency counts to identify the type of syllables written in Linear A, and takes into account the problem of loanwords in the vocabulary. However, the La Marle interpretation of Linear A has been rejected by John Younger of Kansas University showing that La Marle has invented erroneous and arbitrary new transcriptions based on resemblances with many different script systems at will (as Phoenician, Hieroglyphic Egyptian, Hieroglyphic Hittite, Ethiopian, Cypro-Minoan, etc.), ignoring established evidence and internal analysis, while for some words he proposes religious meanings inventing names of gods and rites. Younger, John G. Linear A Texts. University of Kansas. 15 August 2009 (Retrieved 22 December 2009). Younger, John. Critique of Decipherments by Hubert La Marle and Kjell Aartun. University of Kansas. 15 August 2009; last update: 5 July 2010 (Retrieved 25 August 2011): Marle "assigns phonetic values to Linear signs based on superficial resemblances to signs in other scripts (the choice of scripts being already prejudiced to include only those from the eastern Mediterranean and northeast Africa), as if "C looks like O so it must be O.". It is important, however, to read La Marle's rebuttal entitled "An answer to John G. Younger's remarks on Linear A". An answer to John G. Younger's remarks on Linear A by Hubert La Marle (September, 2010) -- www.academia.edu 

Indo-Iranian hypothesis also has support among some other scholars. For example, in 2006, speaking at "The Cretan Literature Centre", Dr Gareth Owens said:

..we recognise a clear relationship between Linear A and Sanskrit, the ancient language of India. The Language of the Minoans cretegazette.com 

===Tyrrhenian===
G. M. Facchetti has attempted to link Linear A to the Tyrrhenian language family comprising Etruscan, Rhaetic, and Lemnian. This family is reasoned to be a pre-Indo-European Mediterranean substratum of the 2nd millennium BC, sometimes referred to as Pre-Greek. G. M. Facchetti proposed some possible similarities between the Etruscan language and ancient Lemnian, and other Aegean languages like Minoan. Facchetti, Giulio M. & Negri, Mario. Creta Minoica. Sulle tracce delle pi antiche scritture d'Europa. Leo S. Olschki Editore, 'Biblioteca dell'Archivum Romanicum. Serie II: Linguistica' n 55, 2003. ISBN 88-222-5291-8. Michael Ventris who, along with John Chadwick, successfully deciphered Linear B, also believed in a link between Minoan and Etruscan. . "The basic idea was to find a language which might not be related to Minoan. Ventris' candidate was Etruscan; not a bad guess, because the Etruscans, according to ancient tradition, came from the Aegean to Italy." The same perspective is supported by S. Yatsemirsky in Russia. Yatsemirsky, Sergei A. Opyt sravnitel'nogo opisaniya minoyskogo, etrusskogo i rodstvennyh im yazykov (Tentative comparative description of Minoan, Etruscan and related languages). Moscow, Yazyki slavyanskoy kul'tury, 2011. ISBN 978-5-9551-0479-9 

===Single word decipherment attempts===
Some researchers suggest that a few words or word elements may be recognised, without (yet) enabling any conclusion about relationship with other languages. In general, they use analogy with Linear B in order to propose phonetic values of the syllabic sounds. John Younger, in particular, thinks that place names usually appear in certain positions in the texts, and notes that the proposed phonetic values often correspond to known place names as given in Linear B texts (and sometimes to modern Greek names). For example, he proposes that three syllables, read as KE-NI-SO, might be the indigenous form of Knossos. Likewise, in Linear A, MA+RU is suggested to mean wool, and to correspond both to a Linear B pictogram with this meaning, and to the classical Greek word  with the same meaning (in that case a loan word from Minoan). 

==Unicode==

Linear A will be added to the Unicode Standard in fall 2014, with the release of version 7.0. 

The block reserved for Linear A is U+10600 ... U+107FF.

==See also==
* Aegean numbers
* Cypro-Minoan syllabary
* Phaistos Disc

==References==

===Notes===

===Citations===

===Sources===
*
*
*

===Further reading===
*
* Packard, D.W. (1974) Minoan Linear A. University of California Press.ISBN 0-520-02580-6.
* (Review.)

==External links==

*Linear A Texts in Phonetic Transcription by John Younger (last update: 20 February 2010).
*Linear A research by La Marle 
*DAIDALIKA - Scripts and Languages of Minoan and Mycenaean Crete
*Omniglot: Writing Systems & Languages of the World
*Mnamon: Antiche Scritture del Mediterraneo, (Antique writings of the Mediterranean) - a guide to online resources, including a link to GORILA
*GORILA volume 1



[[LucasArts]]

LucasArts Entertainment Company, LLC is an American video game publisher and licensor. Until 2013, it was also a video game developer. LucasArts is best known for its graphic adventure games, as well as games based on the Star Wars and Indiana Jones franchises. Its headquarters are located in San Francisco, California.

It was founded in May 1982 by George Lucas as Lucasfilm Games, the video game development group of his film company, Lucasfilm. Lucas initially served as the company's chairman. During a 1990 reorganization of Lucas companies, the Lucasfilm Games division was renamed LucasArts.

LucasArts was acquired by The Walt Disney Company through the acquisition of its parent company Lucasfilm in 2012. On April 3, 2013, Disney halted all internal development at LucasArts and laid off most of its staff. However, LucasArts remained open so that it could retain its function as a licensor. 

Development of games based on the Star Wars license will be performed by Electronic Arts, through an exclusive license, for the core gaming market. Disney Interactive Studios retained the ability to develop, and LucasArts retained the ability to license, the franchise for the casual gaming market. Development of video games based upon other Lucasfilm properties will now be assumed by Disney Interactive Studios or licensed to third parties. 

==History==
The company was founded in May 1982 as the video game development group of Lucasfilm Limited, the film production company of George Lucas. Lucas wanted his company to branch out into other areas of entertainment, so he created the Lucasfilm Games Group as part of the Lucasfilm computer division.

===The first decade===
The Lucasfilm Games Group originally cooperated with Atari, which helped fund the video game group's founding, to produce video games. The first results of this collaboration were unique action games like Ballblazer in 1984, and Rescue on Fractalus!. Beta versions of both games were leaked to pirate bulletin boards exactly one week after Atari had received unprotected copies for a marketing review, and were in wide circulation months before the original release date. In 1984, they were released for the Atari 5200 under the Lucasfilm Games label. Versions for home computers were not released until 1985, by publisher Epyx. Lucasfilm's next two games were Koronis Rift and The Eidolon. Their first games were only developed by Lucasfilm, and a publisher would distribute the games. Atari published their games for Atari systems, Activision and Epyx would do their computer publishing. Maniac Mansion was the first game to be published and developed by Lucasfilm Games. 

The early charter of Lucasfilm Games was to make experimental, innovative, and technologically advanced video games. Habitat, an early online role-playing game, was one such title. It was only released as a beta test in 1986 by Quantum Link, an online service for the Commodore 64. Quantum Link could not provide the bandwidth at the time to support the game, so the full Habitat was never released outside of the beta test. However, Lucasfilm Games recouped the cost of development by releasing a sized down version called Club Caribe in 1988. Lucasfilm later licensed the software to Fujitsu, who released it in Japan as Fujitsu Habitat in 1990. Fujitsu later licensed Habitat for worldwide distribution, and released an updated version called WorldsAway in 1996. The latest iteration of Habitat is VZones, which was released in 2003. 

In 1990, in a reorganization of the Lucas companies, the Games Division of Lucasfilm became part of the newly created LucasArts Entertainment Company, together with Industrial Light & Magic and Skywalker Sound. Later ILM and Skywalker Sound were consolidated in Lucas Digital Ltd. and LucasArts became the official name of the former Games Division.

===iMUSE===

iMUSE (Interactive MUsic Streaming Engine) is an interactive music system used in a number of LucasArts video games. It synchronizes music with the visual action in the game, and transitions from one musical theme to another. iMUSE was developed in the early 1990s by composers Michael Land and Peter McConnell while working at LucasArts. The iMUSE system is patented by LucasArts, and was added to the SCUMM game engine in 1991. The first game to use iMUSE was and it has been used in all LucasArts adventure games since. It has also been used for some non-adventure LucasArts titles, including (DOS version), (DOS version), and .

===Adventure games===

The first adventure game developed by Lucasfilm Games was Labyrinth in 1986, based on the Lucasfilm movie of the same name. The 1987 title Maniac Mansion introduced SCUMM, the scripting language behind most of the company's later adventure offerings. The adventures released in the following years, such as Zak McKracken and the Alien Mindbenders in 1988, in 1989, and the 1990 titles LOOM and the critically acclaimed The Secret of Monkey Island, helped Lucasfilm Games build a reputation as one of the leading developers in the genre. The original five adventure games created with SCUMM were released in a compilation titled LucasArts Classic Adventures in 1992. 

LucasArts was often referred to as one of the two big names in the field, competing with Sierra On-line as a developer of high quality adventures. The first half of the 1990s was the heyday for the company's adventure fame, with classic titles such as in 1991, Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis in 1992, and in 1993, and the 1995 titles Full Throttle and The Dig.

In the latter half of the decade, the popularity of adventure games faded and the costs associated with game development increased as high-resolution art and CD quality audio became standard fare. The PC market wanted titles that would show off expensive new graphics cards to best effect, a change replicated in the home console market as the 3D capabilities of the PlayStation, Sega Saturn and Nintendo 64 dictated the nature of the majority of games produced for those platforms. The adventure genre failed to find popularity with the masses of new gamers.

Despite their declining popularity, LucasArts still continued to release adventure titles. In 1997, The Curse of Monkey Island, the last LucasArts adventure game to retain traditional two-dimensional graphics and point-and-click interface, was released. This was followed by Grim Fandango in 1998, LucasArts' first attempt to convert a 2D adventure to a 3D environment. The highly stylised visuals, superb voice acting and sophisticated writing earned Grim Fandango many plaudits, including GameSpot's Game of the Year award. Escape from Monkey Island (2000), the fourth installment in the Monkey Island series, featured the same control scheme as Grim Fandango, and was generally well received. It is the last original adventure game the company has released.

Two sequels to existing franchises, Throttle (1995 video game)#Canceled sequels|Full Throttle: Hell on Wheels] and , were announced to be in development but these projects were cancelled, in 2003 and 2004 respectively, before the games were finished. When the rights to the Sam and Max franchise expired in 2005, the creator of Sam and Max, Steve Purcell, regained ownership. He then licensed Sam and Max to Telltale Games to be developed into an episodic game. Telltale Games is made up primarily of former LucasArts employees who had worked on the Sam and Max sequel and were let go after the project was canceled. 

LucasArts halted adventure game development for the next five years, focusing instead on their Star Wars games. They remained silent and did not re-release their old games on digital distribution platforms, as other studios were doing at the time. However, in 2002, the company pledged that at least fifty percent of its releases would have nothing to do with Star Wars. It was not until 2009 that they returned to the genre. On June 1, 2009, LucasArts announced both The Secret of Monkey Island Special Edition, a high definition remake of the original game with updated graphics, music and voice work, and Tales of Monkey Island, a new episodic installment in the Monkey Island series that was developed by Telltale Games.

Then, on July 6, 2009, they announced that they would be re-releasing a number of their classic games, including Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis and LOOM, on Steam. The re-releases were, for the first time, native versions built for Microsoft Windows. This was the first time in many years that the studio had offered any support for its classic adventure titles.

The second game in the Monkey Island series also received a high definition remake, entitled Island 2: LeChuck's Revenge#Special Edition|Monkey Island 2: LeChuck's Revenge Special Edition] in 2010. Both Monkey Island special edition games were released in a compilation, Monkey Island Special Edition Collection, exclusively in Europe in 2011.

The release of the unofficial SCUMM virtual machine, ScummVM, has led to something of a resurgence for LucasArts adventure games among present-day gamers. Using ScummVM, legacy adventure titles can easily be run on modern computers and even more unusual platforms such as video game consoles, mobile phones and PDAs.

===Simulation games===
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, Lucasfilm Games developed a series of military vehicle simulation games, the first of which were the naval simulations PHM Pegasus in 1986 and Strike Fleet in 1987. These two titles were published by Electronic Arts for a variety of computer platforms, including PC, Commodore 64 and Apple II.

In 1988, Battlehawks 1942 launched a trilogy of World War II air combat simulations, giving the player a chance to fly as an American or Japanese pilot in the Pacific Theater. Battlehawks 1942 was followed by in 1989, recreating the battle between the Luftwaffe and RAF for Britain's air supremacy. The trilogy ended with Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe in 1991, in which the player could choose to fly on either the American or German side. The trilogy was lauded for its historical accuracy and detailed supplementary materialSecret Weapons of the Luftwaffe, for instance, was accompanied by a 224-page historical manual. The World War II trilogy was released with cover art by illustrator Marc Ericksen, in a compilation titled Air Combat Classics in 1994. 

The World War II trilogy was created by a team led by Lawrence Holland, a game designer who later founded Totally Games. Totally Games would continue to develop games almost exclusively to LucasArts, the most noted outcome of the symbiosis being Wars: X-Wing (series)|the X-Wing series]. They were also responsible for LucasArts' 2003 return to the aerial battles of World War II with Secret Weapons Over Normandy, a title released on PlayStation 2, Xbox and PC.

In 1996, LucasArts released Afterlife, a sim game in which the player builds their own Heaven and Hell, with several jokes and puns (such as a prison in Hell called San Quentin Tarantino).

===First Star Wars games===
Even though LucasArts had created games based on other Lucasfilm properties before (Labyrinth, Indiana Jones), they did not use the Star Wars license until the early 1990s: Star Wars games began appearing in the 1980s, but were developed by other companies for LucasArts because the license for the games had been sold before LucasArts was formed. The first in-house development was the space combat simulator Wars: X-Wing|X-Wing], developed by Larry Holland's independent team, which went on to spawn a Wars: X-Wing (series)|successful series].

The CD-ROM-only Star Wars game Wars: Rebel Assault|Rebel Assault] became one of the biggest successes of the company and was considered a killer app for CD-ROM drives in the early 1990s.

===First-person shooters===
After the unprecedented success of id Software's Doom the PC gaming market shifted towards production of three-dimensional first person shooters. LucasArts contributed to this trend with the 1995 release of , a first person shooter that successfully transplanted the Doom formula to a Star Wars setting. The Dark Forces Strategy guide claims that development was well underway before Doom was released and that the game was pushed back once Doom hit shelves so that it could be polished. The game was well received and spawned a new franchise: the Jedi Knight games. This began with the sequel to Dark Forces, released in 1997; this game reflected the changing face of PC gaming, being one of the first games to appreciably benefit when used in conjunction with a dedicated 3D graphics card like 3dfx's Voodoo range. The game received an expansion pack, Mysteries of the Sith, in 1998 and a full sequel in 2002 with . 2003's can be seen as a spin-off from the series, but was less well received by reviewers, who complained that the franchise was becoming formulaic.

Apart from Star Wars-themed 3D shooters, LucasArts also created the western-themed game Outlaws in 1997 and Armed and Dangerous (in collaboration with Planet Moon Studios) in 2003.

===In the new millennium===
As the quantity of Star Wars games increased, many critics felt the quality began to drop; this was especially noted with the titles released since the cinematic release of The Phantom Menace.

In 2002, LucasArts recognized that the over-reliance on Star Wars was reducing the quality of its output, and announced that future releases would be at least 50% non-Star Wars-related. However, many of the original titles were either unsuccessful or even cancelled before release, and since then LucasArts again had mainly Star Wars titles in production.

Also in 2002, LucasArts released a compilation CD filled with music from their past games. The album is titled The Best of LucasArts Original Soundtracks and features music from the Monkey Island series, Grim Fandango, Outlaws, and The Dig.

2003 saw the fruitful collaboration of LucasArts and BioWare on the exceptionally well reviewed role-playing game, Wars: Knights of the Old Republic|Knights of the Old Republic]. Combining modern 3D graphics with high-quality storytelling and a sophisticated role-playing game system, this game reinvigorated the Star Wars franchise. Its 2004 sequel Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II: The Sith Lords|Knights of the Old Republic II: The Sith Lords] continued in the same vein, but LucasArts was criticized for forcing the developer Obsidian Entertainment to release the sequel unfinished, resulting in a significant amount of cut content, a disappointing ending and numerous bugs.

In 2003 LucasArts and the Star Wars franchise also branched out in a new directionthe world of the MMORPG, with the creation of Star Wars Galaxies. After a successful launch, the first expansion, Jump to Lightspeed, was released in 2004. The new expansion featured the addition of real-time space combat. This was continued in Rage of the Wookies, an additional expansion which added an additional planet for users to explore. Also, a new expansion, Trials of Obi-Wan was released on November 1, 2005 consisting of several new missions focusing on the Episode 3 planet, Mustafar. While Star Wars Galaxies still retains a devoted following, it has also alienated many players. Star Wars Galaxies has chosen to ignore the timeline established in the original films, during which the game is set, and has allowed players to play as Jedi characters. The game has also undergone several major redesigns, which have been received with decidedly mixed reactions by players.

===Restructuring under Jim Ward===
In April 2004, Jim Ward, VP of marketing, online and global distributions at Lucasfilm, was appointed president of LucasArts. Ward performed a top-to-bottom audit of LucasArts infrastructure, describing the company's state as "quite a mess." Smith, Rogue Leaders, 176. In 2003, LucasArts had reportedly grossed just over $100 million according to NPD, primarily from its Star Wars titlessignificantly less than the grosses from the year's top single titles such as Halo. Ward produced a five-year investment plan to refit the company. Previous Star Wars games had been produced by external developers such as Raven Software, Bioware and Obsidian; Ward now prioritized making LucasArts' internal game development work effectively and adapt to the evolving games industry. , , and Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith (video game)|Star Wars: Episode III] survived cuts that closed down other in-development games and reduced staff from about 450 to 190 employees. 

In 2004, LucasArts released , based on the same formula as the popular Battlefield series of games. It ended up becoming the best-selling Star Wars game of all time to that point, aided by a marketing tie-in with the original trilogy DVD release. Smith, Rogue Leaders, 177179. Its sequel, , was released November 1, 2005 and features new locales such as Episode III planets Mustafar, Mygeeto, etc., in addition to space combat, playable Jedi, and new special units like Bothan spies and Imperial officers. In this same year, the second "Knights of the Old Republic" game was in production. LucasArts told Obsidian Entertainment that the project needed to be finished by that year's holiday season. Obsidian was forced to cut huge amounts of content from the game, resulting in a rushed, unfinished KotOR II.

In March 2005, LucasArts published , the first game in the popular Lego video game franchise by Traveller's Tales. It was based on the Star Wars prequel trilogy. In May 2005, LucasArts released Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith (video game)|Revenge of the Sith], a third person action game based on the film. Also in 2005, LucasArts released , and one of their few non-Star Wars games, Mercenaries, developed by Pandemic Studios.

On February 16, 2006, LucasArts released , a real-time strategy game developed by Petroglyph. September 12, 2006 saw the release of , the sequel to the popular Lego Star Wars: The Video Game. Lego Star Wars II, once again developed by Traveller's Tales and published by LucasArts, follows the same basic format as the first game, but, as the name indicates, covers the original Star Wars trilogy.

A video game titled Traxion was announced. Traxion was a rhythm game which was under development for the PlayStation Portable by British developer Kuju Entertainment, scheduled to be released in Q4 2006 by LucasArts, but was instead cancelled in January 2007. The game was to feature a number of minigames, and would support imported songs from the player's own mp3 library as well as the game's bundled collection.

In May 2007, LucasArts announced Fracture and stated that "new intellectual properties serve a vital role to the growth of LucasArts". was labelled the number one new IP in 2005 and Thrillville the number one new children's IP in 2006. Fracture was released on 7 October 2008 to average reviews. was released on January 11, 2005 to critical and commercial success which led to a sequel, . Thrillville was released on November 21, 2006, and was released on October 16, 2007.

On September 16, 2008, was released to mixed reviews, though it quickly became the fastest selling Star Wars game of all time. 

The rapid scaling down of internal projects at LucasArts was also reflected in its handling of games developed by external developers. During the tenure of John Ward, Free Radical was contracted to produce Battlefront 3 and had been in production for 2 years. Free Radical co-founder Steve Ellis described how working with LucasArts evolved from being "the best relationship we'd ever had with a publisher" to withholding money for 6 months and abusing the independent developer's position to withhold the full project cancellation feeultimately resulting in Free Radical entering administration. 

===Last years as part of an independent Lucasfilm===
Jim Ward left the company early February 2008, for personal reasons. He was replaced by Howard Roffman as interim president. Darrell Rodriguez, who came from Electronic Arts, took Roffman's place in April 2008. About a month prior to release of LucasArts scaled down the internal development studio. The aforementioned game received a mediocre score from some media outlets such as IGN, Gamespot and GameTrailers. After release, minor adjustment in staffing resulted in even more layoffs. 

The successor to Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II: The Sith Lords, in the form of the MMORPG , was announced on October 21, 2008, at an invitation-only press event. developed by BioWare. It was released in December 2011.

They also published in 2009 for all current systems. The game is a tie-in to Wars: The Clone Wars (2008 TV series)|The Clone Wars] television series and was released on October 6, 2009, receiving generally negative reviews. 

During television network G4's coverage of the 2006 E3 Convention, a LucasArts executive was asked about the return of popular franchises such as Monkey Island. The executive responded that the company was currently focusing on new franchises, and that LucasArts may return to the "classic franchises" in 2015, though it was unclear as to whether the date was put forwards as an actual projection, or hyperbole. This turned out to be hyperbole, as LucasArts and Telltale Games announced new adventure games in a joint press release in 2009. The games announced were Tales of Monkey Island, which was to be developed by Telltale, and a LucasArts-developed enhanced remake of the 1990 title The Secret of Monkey Island, with the intent of bringing the old game to a new audience. According to LucasArts, this announcement was "just the start of LucasArts new mission to revitalize its deep portfolio of beloved gaming franchises". Following the success of this, LucasArts released the sequel, Island 2: LeChuck's Revenge#Special Edition|Monkey Island 2  Special Edition] in the summer of 2010. 

The company began experiencing turnovers in layoffs in 2010. Darrell Rodriguez, left in May after just two years on the job. A Lucasfilm board of Directors and a games industry veteran, Jerry Bowerman, filled in during the transition. Rodriguez was ultimately replaced in June by Paul Meegan, formerly of Gears of War developer Epic Games.

In July 2010, Haden Blackman, who served as creative director on the original Star Wars: The Force Unleashed, LucasArts' most successful internally produced title of recent years, and the sequel, unexpectedly left. However, the company scored a surprise coup in August 2010 when Clint Hocking, a high-profile game director from Ubisoft, announced that he would be joining LucasArts. His tenure at LucasArts was short lived however, as Clint Hocking left LucasArts in June 2012 before the game he was working on was released. In September 2010, a third of the employees at LucasArts were fired. 

In March 2011, LucasArts published a sequel to the popular Lego Star Wars series, , based on the Wars: The Clone Wars (2008 TV series)|Clone Wars animated series], once again developed by Traveller's Tales. Sony Online Entertainment announced in June 2011 that Star Wars Galaxies would be shutting down at the end of 2011. Star Wars Galaxies Shutting Down Dec. 15 Its services were terminated December 15, 2011. 

On April 26, 2011, LucasArts announced that it had acquired a license from Epic Games to develop a number of future titles using the Unreal Engine 3 for a number of platforms. Star Wars 1313, a proposed action-adventure about a bounty hunter navigating Coruscant's subterranean level 1313 underworld, was confirmed to use the Unreal Engine 3. However, the game was cancelled as a result of the soon-to-be closure of the development arm of LucasArts. 

In April 2012, LucasArts published Kinect Star Wars, developed by Terminal Reality, for the Xbox 360. It was poorly reviewed by critics, receiving an aggregated score of 53.32% on GameRankings and 55/100 on Metacritic. 

In August 2012, Paul Meegan, who replaced Rodriguez as president in 2010, also left his position at LucasArts after just two years on the job. Kevin Parker and Gio Corsi were named to co-lead the studio until the studio would choose a permanent president, with the former as interim head of business operations and the latter as interim head of studio production. 

The last game released through LucasArts as a subsidiary of an independent Lucasfilm was Angry Birds Star Wars, a game that gave the Angry Birds characters costumes and abilities based on the original Star Wars trilogy. It was released on November 8, 2012, before the Disney acquisition of Lucasfilm was finalized. The game was developed and published by Rovio Entertainment, and licensed by LucasArts. 

===Acquisition by Disney and halting internal development===
On October 30, 2012, LucasArts was acquired by The Walt Disney Company through the acquisition of its parent company Lucasfilm in a deal for $4.05 billion. A Disney representative stated that its intent at the time was for all employees at Lucasfilm and its subsidiaries to remain at their present positions. A LucasArts representative said that "for the time being, all projects are business as usual". 

On December 4, 2012, the acquisition of Lucasfilm was approved by the Federal Trade Commission, allowing the deal to be finalized without dealing with antitrust problems. On December 21, 2012, the deal was completed, and Lucasfilm and all of its subsidiaries became wholly owned by Disney. 

Information that surfaced in March 2013 suggested that Star Wars games already in development, such as Star Wars 1313 and First Assault, may have been put on hold in order to put more focus on Star Wars Episode VII. At the time, LucasArts also had three untitled games in development: an open-world RPG, an FPS, and an aerial combat game. According to a job listing posted via the Lucasfilm website, LucasArts was also planning on creating a new online service which they claimed would "revolutionize the industry." 

On April 3, 2013, a Disney representative confirmed that LucasArts would cease to operate as a video game developer. Future video games based on its properties will either be developed by Disney Interactive Studios or licensed to third-party developers. As a result, all of its future internal projects were cancelled, and most of its staff were laid off from the company. However, LucasArts remained open with a skeleton staff of fewer than ten employees so it could retain its function as a video game licensor. Disney indicated that the new business model would " the company's risk while achieving a broad portfolio of quality Star Wars games." Around 150 staff members lost their jobs as a result of the closure. The layoffs at LucasArts also resulted in layoffs at fellow visual effects subsidiary Industrial Light & Magic; as many of LucasArts' employees also worked for ILM, the company was left overstaffed. 

===After the acquisition===
On May 6, 2013, it was revealed that Electronic Arts would develop Star Wars games, through an exclusive license, for the core gaming market. Through this agreement, Disney Interactive Studios retained the ability to develop, and LucasArts retained the ability to license, the franchise for the casual gaming market. 

On July 15, 2013, a sequel to Angry Birds Star Wars based on the Star Wars prequel trilogy, titled Angry Birds Star Wars II, was announced. It was the first game released through LucasArts under Disney ownership when it launched for mobile platforms on September 18, 2013. 

On October 4, 2013, Disney Interactive announced , a Star Wars game for mobile devices based on Tiny Tower. It was developed by Disney Mobile and NimbleBit, and was published by LucasArts for mobile devices on November 8, 2013. 

On December 17, 2013, Disney Interactive announced , a Star Wars space combat simulation game developed by Area 52 games in conjunction with Disney Mobile and LucasArts. A closed beta period began in North America on January 14, 2014. 

The first Star Wars game announced under Electronic Arts' exclusive license was Wars: Battlefront (2015 video game)|Star Wars: Battlefront], a reboot of the Wars: Battlefront (series)|Star Wars: Battlefront series], being developed by DICE. The game is scheduled for release in the third quarter of 2015. 

At the 2014 Electronic Entertainment Expo, Sony Computer Entertainment announced that they would be publishing Grim Fandango Remastered, which will be developed by Double Fine Productions and released for PlayStation 4 and PlayStation Vita. 

===Impact on the San Francisco game development industry===
Ex-LucasArts developers have founded numerous San Francisco game development studios such as Double Fine (2000), Telltale Games (2004), Munky Fun (2008), Dynamighty (2011), and SoMa Play (2013), playing a significant role in the continued development of computer games in the Bay area.

==Logo==
The "Gold Guy" LucasArts logo (19912005)

The original Lucasfilm Games logo was based upon the existing Lucasfilm movie logo. There were a number of variations on it.

The long-lived LucasArts logo, affectionately known as the "Gold Guy", was introduced in 1991 and consisted of a crude gold-colored figure resembling a petroglyph, standing on a purple letter "L" inscribed with the company name. The figure had its hands up in the air, as if a sun were rising from behind him. It was also said to resemble an eye, with the rays of the sun as eyelashes. The logo was revised in late 2005, losing the letter "L" pedestal and introducing a more rounded version of the gold-colored figure. In the games, the figure sometimes does an action like throw a lightsaber or cast Force Lightning.The disputed Remedy Entertainment logo
In 1998, LucasArts approached Finnish game developer Remedy Entertainment, citing that their logo was copied from the top portion of the LucasArts logo, and threatened legal action. Remedy was by that time already in the process of redesigning their logo, so they complied by taking their old logo offline from their website, and introducing their new logo a little later.

==See also==
*List of LucasArts games
*List of Star Wars video games
*LucasArts adventure games
*LucasArts Archives
*SCUMM
*GrimE
*SITH
*INSANE
*1982 in video gaming

==Notes==

==References==
*

==External links==
*Official LucasArts website
*The Workshop  Official LucasArts Blog
*The International House of Mojo fan-site
*LucasArts on MobyGames
*
*



[[Lafcadio Hearn]]

Patrick Lafcadio Hearn (; 27 June 1850  26 September 1904), known also by the Japanese name , was an international writer, known best for his books about Japan, especially his collections of Japanese legends and ghost stories, such as . In the United States, Hearn is also known for his writings about the city of New Orleans based on his ten-year stay in that city.

==Life==

=== Early life ===
Hearn was born in Lefkada (the origin of his middle name), one of the Greek Ionian Islands. He was the son of Surgeon-Major Charles Bush Hearn (of County Offaly, Ireland) and Rosa Antoniou Kassimati, a Greek woman of noble Kytheran lineage through her father, Anthony Kassimatis. His father was stationed in Lefkada during the British occupation of the islands, where he was the highest-ranking surgeon in his regiment. Lafcadio was baptized Patricios Lefcadios Hearn (  ) in the Greek Orthodox Church, but he seems to have been called "Patrick Lefcadio Tessima Charles Hearn" in English. It is not known whether Hearn's parents were ever legally married, and the Irish Protestant relatives on his father's side considered him to have been born out of wedlock. This may, however, have been because they did not recognize the legitimacy of a Greek Orthodox marriage ceremony for a Protestant. Cott, Jonathan (1992), Wandering Ghost: The Odyssey of Lafcadio Hearn, Kodansha International. 

When his father was posted to the British West Indies, Hearn relocated to Dublin, Ireland, at the age of two years, where he was brought up in the suburb of Rathmines. His mother faced some difficulties in relating to the culture of a foreign land and her husband's family, but was taken under the wing of Sara Brennan, the sympathetic spouse of one of her husband's relatives. Other members of his family also had artistic interests. His father's brother Richard was at one time a well-known member of the Barbizon set of artists, although he did not become well known as a painter, possibly due to a lack of personal ambition. Young Hearn had a rather casual education, but in 1865 was attending the Roman Catholic Ushaw College, Durham. He was injured in a playground accident during his teens, suffering the loss of vision in his left eye.

===Immigration===
The religious faith in which he was educated was soon lost, and at 19 he was sent to live in the United States, where he settled in Cincinnati, Ohio. For a time, he was impoverished. He eventually befriended the English printer and communalist Henry Watkin. With Watkin's help, Hearn did low-grade journalism work.

By the strength of his talent as a writer, Hearn soon obtained a job as a reporter for the Cincinnati Daily Enquirer, working for the newspaper from 1872 to 1875. Writing with creative freedom in one of Cincinnati's largest circulating newspapers, he became known for his lurid accounts of local murders, developing a reputation as the paper's premier sensational journalist, as well as the author of sensitive accounts of some of the disadvantaged people of Cincinnati. The Library of America selected one of these murder accounts, "Gibbeted," for inclusion in its two-century retrospective of American True Crime, published in 2008.

Hearn continued to occupy himself with journalism and with observation and reading, and meanwhile his erratic, romantic, and rather morbid idiosyncrasies developed. While in Cincinnati, he married Alethea ("Mattie") Foley, a black American woman, an illegal act at the time. When the scandal was discovered and publicized, he was dismissed from the Enquirer and went to work for the rival newspaper The Cincinnati Commercial. Hearn divorced in 1877.

In 1874 Hearn and the young Henry Farny, later a renowned painter of the American West, wrote, illustrated, and published a weekly journal of art, literature and satire they titled Ye Giglampz that was published for nine issues. (The Cincinnati Public Library reprinted a facsimile of all nine issues in 1983).

===New Orleans===
thumb
During the autumn of 1877, Hearn left Cincinnati for New Orleans, Louisiana, where he initially wrote dispatches on his discoveries in the "Gateway to the Tropics" for the Cincinnati Commercial.

He lived in New Orleans for nearly a decade, writing first for the newspaper Daily City Item and later for the Times Democrat. The vast number of his writings about New Orleans and its environs, many of which have not been collected, include the city's Creole population and distinctive cuisine, the French Opera, and Louisiana Voodoo. His writings for national publications, such as Harper's Weekly and Scribner's Magazine, helped create the popular reputation of New Orleans as a place with a distinct culture more akin to that of Europe and the Caribbean than to the rest of North America. His best-known Louisiana works are , Little Dictionary of Creole Proverbs in Six Dialects (1885); La Cuisine Crole (1885), a collection of culinary recipes from leading chefs and noted Creole housewives who helped make New Orleans famous for its cuisine; and , a novella based on the hurricane of 1856 first published in Harper's Monthly in 1888. He also published in Harper's Weekly the first known written article (1883) about Filipinos in the United States, the Manilamen or Tagalags, one of whose villages he had visited at Saint Malo, southeast of Lake Borgne in Saint Bernard Parish, Louisiana.

Hearn's former home on Cleveland Avenue in New Orleans is preserved as a registered historic place.
Hearn was little known then, and even now he is little known for his writing about New Orleans, except by local cultural devotees. However, more books have been written about him than any former resident of New Orleans except Louis Armstrong. . 

Hearn's writings for the New Orleans newspapers included impressionistic descriptions of places and characters and many stern, vigorous editorials denouncing political corruption, street crime, violence, intolerance, and the failures of public health and hygiene officials. Despite the fact that he is credited with "inventing" New Orleans as an exotic and mysterious place, his obituaries of the vodou leaders Marie Laveau and Doctor John Montenet are matter-of-fact and debunking. A selection of Hearn's writings was collected in S. Fredrick Starr's book Inventing New Orleans: Writings of Lafcadio Hearn, published by the University Press of Mississippi. Starr, S. Frederick (2001), Inventing New Orleans: Writings of Lafcadio Hearn, University Press of Mississippi, ISBN 1-57806-353-1 

Harper's sent Hearn to the West Indies as a correspondent in 1887. He spent two years in Martinique and produced two books: Two Years in the French West Indies and Youma, The Story of a West-Indian Slave, both in 1890.

===Later life in Japan===
Lafcadio Hearn, shown with Koizumi Setsu. Note the way he is facinghe always preferred to be photographed this way so that his left eye could not be seen.

In 1890, Hearn went to Japan with a commission as a newspaper correspondent, which was quickly terminated. It was in Japan, however, that he found a home and his greatest inspiration. Through the goodwill of Basil Hall Chamberlain, Hearn gained a teaching position during the summer of 1890 at the Shimane Prefectural Common Middle School and Normal School in Matsue, a town in western Japan on the coast of the Sea of Japan. The Lafcadio Hearn Memorial Museum and his old residence are still two of Matsue's most popular tourist attractions. During his fifteen-month stay in Matsue, Hearn married Koizumi Setsu, the daughter of a local samurai family, with whom he had four children. Kazuo, Iwao, Kiyoshi, and Suzuko: Katharine Chubbuck, Hearn, (Patricio) Lafcadio Carlos (18501904), Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004 He became a naturalized Japanese, assuming the name Koizumi Yakumo, in 1896 after accepting a teaching position in Tokyo.

During late 1891, Hearn obtained another teaching position in Kumamoto, Kysh, at the Fifth Higher Middle School, where he spent the next three years and completed his book Glimpses of Unfamiliar Japan (1894). In October 1894, he secured a journalism job with the English-language newspaper Kobe Chronicle, and in 1896, with some assistance from Chamberlain, he began teaching English literature at Tokyo Imperial University, a job he had until 1903. In 1904, he was a professor at Waseda University. On 26 September 1904, he died of heart failure at the age of 54 years. His grave is at the Zshigaya Cemetery in Toshima, Tokyo.

In the late 19th century, Japan was still largely unknown and exotic to Westerners. However, with the introduction of Japanese aesthetics, particularly at the Paris Exposition Universelle of 1900, Japanese styles became fashionable in Western countries. Consequently, Hearn became known to the world by his writings concerning Japan. In later years, some critics would accuse Hearn of exoticizing Japan, but because he offered the West some of its first descriptions of pre-industrial and Meiji Era Japan, his work has historical value. Komakichi, Nohara, The True Face of Japan, (1936, 1st ed.) Guo, Nanyang (2000), Interpreting Japan's interpreters: the problem of Lafcadio Hearn, New Zealand Journal of Asian Studies 3 (1), 106-118 Askew, Rie (2009), The Critical Reception of Lafcadio Hearn outside Japan, New Zealand Journal of Asian Studies 11 (2), 44-71 

==Legacy==
Lafcadio's grave, in Zshigaya Cemetery.
Admirers of Hearn's work have included Ben Hecht, . John Erskine, and Malcolm Cowley. . 

The Japanese director Masaki Kobayashi adapted four Hearn tales into his 1965 film, Kwaidan. Some of his stories have been adapted by Ping Chong into his puppet theatre, including the 1999 Kwaidan and the 2002 OBON: Tales of Moonlight and Rain.

Hearn's life and works were celebrated in The Dream of a Summer Day, a play that toured Ireland during April and May 2005, which was staged by the Storytellers Theatre Company and directed by Liam Halligan. It is a detailed dramatization of Hearn's life, with four of his ghost stories included.

Yone Noguchi is quoted as saying about Hearn, "His Greek temperament and French culture became frost-bitten as a flower in the North." Noguchi, Yone (1910), Lafcadio Hearn in Japan, New York: Mitchell Kennerley. 

There is also a cultural center named for Hearn at the University of Durham.

Hearn was a major translator of the short stories of Guy de Maupassant. . 

In Ian Flemings 1964 novel You Only Live Twice, James Bond retorts to his nemesis Blofeld's comment of "Have you ever heard the Japanese expression kirisute gomen?" with "Spare me the Lafcadio Hearn, Blofeld."

==Works==
Books written by Hearn on Japanese subjects
* (1894). Glimpses of Unfamiliar Japan, 
* (1895). Out of the East: Reveries and Studies in New Japan, 
* (1896). Kokoro: Hints and Echoes of Japanese Inner Life, 
* (1897). Gleanings in Buddha-Fields: Studies of Hand and Soul in the Far East, 
* (1897). The Boy who Drew Cats, (Houghton Mifflin, Boston).
* (1898). Exotics and Retrospectives, 
* (1898). Japanese Fairy Tales, (and sequels).
* (1899). In Ghostly Japan,
* (1900). Shadowings, 
* (1900). Japanese Lyrics,
* (1901). A Japanese Miscellany, 
* (1902). Kott: Being Japanese Curios, with Sundry Cobwebs, 
* (1903). (Later made into the movie Kwaidan by Masaki Kobayashi)
* (1904). Japan: An Attempt at Interpretation, 
* (1905). The Romance of the Milky Way and other studies and stories, 
Posthumous Anthologies 
* (1918). Karma,
* (1966). Japan's Religions: Shinto and Buddhism,
* (1984). Writings from Japan: An anthology, (Penguin Books)
* (2007). Lafcadio Hearn's Japan: An Anthology of His Writings on the Country and Its People, (Tuttle)
Other
* (1882). One of Cleopatra's Nights and Other Fantastic Romances (translation of stories by Thophile Gautier), Richard Worthington.
* (1911). Leaves from the Diary of an Impressionist, Houghton Mifflin Company.
* (1915). Interpretations of Literature, Dodd, Mead and Company.
* (1921). On Reading in Relation to Literature, The Atlantic Monthly Press, Inc.
* (1928). Lectures on Shakespeare, Hokuseido Press.
* (1968). Books and Habits; from the Lectures of Lafcadio Hearn, Books for Libraries Press.
* (2002). Lafcadio Hearn's America: Ethnographic Sketches and Editorials, University Press of Kentucky.
* (2009). American Writings, Library of America.

==See also==

* Goryo Hamaguchi
* Lafcadio Hearn Memorial Museum
* List of horror fiction authors

==References==
* 

==Further reading==
* Amenomori, Nobushige (1905). "Lafcadio Hearn, the Man," The Atlantic Monthly, October 1905.
* Bisland, Elizabeth (1906). The Life and Letters of Lafcadio Hearn, Vol. II, New York: Houghton, Mifflin & Company.
* .
* .
* Dawson, Carl (1992). Lafcadio Hearn and the Vision of Japan, Johns Hopkins University Press.
* .
* .
* .
* .
* Kunst, Arthur E. (1969). Lafcadio Hearn, Twayne Publishers.
* Langton, D. H. (1912). "Lafcadio Hearn: Journalist and Writer on Japan," The Manchester Quarterly, Vol. XXXI.
* .
* Mais, S. P. B. (1920). "Lafcadio Hearn." In Books and their Writers, Grant Richards, Ltd.
* McWilliams, Vera (1946). Lafcadio Hearn, Houghton Mifflin Company.
* Miner, Earl Roy (1958). The Japanese Tradition in British and American Literature, Princeton University Press.
* Monaham, Michael (1922). "Lafcadio Hearn," An Attic Dreamer, Mitchell Kennerley.
* More, Paul Elmer (1905). "Lafcadio Hearn." In Shelburne Essays, Second Series, G. P. Putnam's Sons.
* . 
* Noguchi, Yone (1905). "Lafcadio Hearn, A Dreamer," National Magazine, Vol. XXII, No. 1.
* .
* .
* .
* ; republished in .
* Setsu, Koizumi (1918). Reminiscences of Lafcadio Hearn, Houghton Mifflin Company.
* .
* Thomas, Edward (1912). Lafcadio Hearn, Houghton Mifflin Company.

==External links==

* Works by Lafcadio Hearn, at Internet Archive
* Works by Lafcadio Hearn, at Unz.org
* 
* Works by Lafcadio Hearn, at Hathi Trust
* .
* .
* Hearn's influence in literature
* .
* .
* Lafcadio Hearn's papers at the Albert and Shirley Small Special Collections Library, University of Virginia
* Japan and the Japanese as Seen by Foreigners
* Lafcadio Hearn
*Two Years in the French West Indies From the Collections at the Library of Congress



[[Learning theory (education)]]

A classroom in Norway. Learning also takes places in many other settings.
Learning theories are conceptual frameworks that describe how information is absorbed, processed, and retained during learning. Cognitive, emotional, and environmental influences, as well as prior experience, all play a part in how understanding, or a world view, is acquired or changed, and knowledge and skills retained. 

Behaviorists look at learning as an aspect of conditioning and will advocate a system of rewards and targets in education. Educators who embrace cognitive theory believe that the definition of learning as a change in behavior is too narrow and prefer to study the learner rather than her environment, and in particular the complexities of human memory. Those who advocate constructivism believe that a learner's ability to learn relies to a large extent on what he already knows and understands, and that the acquisition of knowledge should be an individually tailored process of construction. Transformative learning theory focuses upon the often-necessary change that is required in a learner's preconceptions and world view.

Outside the realm of educational psychology, techniques to directly observe the functioning of the brain during the learning process, such as event-related potential and functional magnetic resonance imaging, are used in educational neuroscience. , such studies are beginning to support a theory of multiple intelligences, where learning is seen as the interaction between dozens of different functional areas in the brain, each with their own individual strengths and weaknesses in any particular human learner.

==Educational psychology==

=== Behaviorism ===

The term "behaviorism" was coined by John Watson (18781959). Watson believed that theorizing thoughts, intentions or other subjective experiences was unscientific and insisted that psychology must focus on measurable behaviors. For behaviorism, learning is the acquisition of a new behavior through conditioning.
====Conditioning====
There are two types of conditioning:

* Classical conditioning, where the behavior becomes a reflex response to stimulus.
* Operant conditioning, where there is reinforcement of the behavior by a reward or a punishment.

Classical conditioning was noticed by Ivan Pavlov when he saw that if dogs come to associate the delivery of food with a white lab coat or with the ringing of a bell, they will produce saliva, even when there is no sight or smell of food. Classical conditioning regards this form of learning to be the same whether in dogs or in humans. Operant conditioning, or radical behaviorism, reinforces this behavior with a reward or a punishment. A reward increases the likelihood of the behavior recurring, a punishment decreases its likelihood. 

Behaviorists view the learning process as a change in behavior, and will arrange the environment to elicit desired responses through such devices as behavioral objectives, Competency-based learning, and skill development and training. Educational approaches such as applied behavior analysis, curriculum-based measurement, and direct instruction have emerged from this model. Kim, T and Axelrod, S. (2005): "Direct Instruction: An Educators' Guide and a Plea for Action" - The Behavior Analyst Today, 6.(2), p. 111 

===Cognitivism===

Cognitive theories grew out of Gestalt psychology, developed in Germany in the early 1900s and brought to America in the 1920s. The German word gestalt is roughly equivalent to the English configuration or pattern and emphasizes the whole of human experience. Over the years, the Gestalt psychologists provided demonstrations and described principles to explain the way we organize our sensations into perceptions. 

Gestalt psychologists criticize behaviorists for being too dependent on overt behavior to explain learning. They propose looking at the patterns rather than isolated events. Gestalt views of learning have been incorporated into what have come to be labeled cognitive theories. Two key assumptions underlie this cognitive approach: that the memory system is an active organized processor of information and that prior knowledge plays an important role in learning. Cognitive theories look beyond behavior to consider how human memory works to promote learning, and an understanding of short term memory and long term memory is important to educators influenced by cognitive theory. They view learning as an internal mental process (including insight, information processing, memory and perception) where the educator focuses on building intelligence and cognitive development. The individual learner is more important than the environment.

Once memory theories like the Atkinson-Shiffrin memory model and Baddeley's working memory model were established as a theoretical framework in cognitive psychology, new cognitive frameworks of learning began to emerge during the 1970s, 80s, and 90s. Today, researchers are concentrating on topics like cognitive load and information processing theory. These theories of learning play a role in influencing instructional design. Cognitive theory is used to explain such topics as social role acquisition, intelligence and memory as related to age.

=== Constructivism ===

Built on the work of Jean Piaget and Jerome Bruner, constructivism emphasizes the importance of the active involvement of learners in constructing knowledge for themselves, and building new ideas or concepts based upon current knowledge and past experience. It asks why students do not learn deeply by listening to a teacher, or reading from a textbook. To design effective teaching environments, it believes, one needs a good understanding of what children already know when they come into the classroom. The curriculum should be designed in a way that builds on what the pupil already knows and is allowed to develop with them. Smith, M. K. (2002). "Jerome Bruner and the Process of Education." Retrieved 26 August 2007, fromhttp://www.infed.org/thinkers/bruner.htm. Begin with complex problems and teach basic skills while solving these problems. This requires an understanding of children's cognitive development, and constructivism draws heavily on psychological studies of cognitive development.

The learning theories of John Dewey, Maria Montessori, and David Kolb serve as the foundation of constructivist learning theory. Constructivism has many varieties: Active learning, discovery learning, and knowledge building are three, but all versions promote a student's free exploration within a given framework or structure. The teacher acts as a facilitator who encourages students to discover principles for themselves and to construct knowledge by working to solve realistic problems.

===Transformative learning theory===

Transformative learning theory seeks to explain how humans revise and reinterpret meaning. Transformative learning is the cognitive process of effecting change in a frame of reference. A frame of reference defines our view of the world. The emotions are often involved. Adults have a tendency to reject any ideas that do not correspond to their particular values, associations and concepts. 

Our frames of reference are composed of two dimensions: habits of mind and points of view. Habits of mind, such as ethnocentrism, are harder to change than points of view. Habits of mind influence our point of view and the resulting thoughts or feelings associated with them, but points of view may change over time as a result of influences such as reflection, appropriation and feedback. Transformative learning takes place by discussing with others the reasons presented in support of competing interpretations, by critically examining evidence, arguments, and alternative points of view. When circumstances permit, transformative learners move toward a frame of reference that is more inclusive, discriminating, self-reflective, and integrative of experience. 

==Educational neuroscience==

American Universities such as Harvard, Johns Hopkins, University of Southern California and others, in the first decade of the twenty-first century, began offering majors and degrees dedicated to educational neuroscience or neuroeducation. Such studies seek to link an understanding of brain processes with classroom instruction and experiences. Neuroeducation seeks to analyze the biological changes that take place in the brain as new information is processed. It looks at what environmental, emotional and social situations are best in order for new information to be retained and stored in the brain via the linking of neurons, rather than allowing the dendrites to be reabsorbed and the information lost. The 1990s were designated "The Decade of the Brain," and advances took place in neuroscience at an especially rapid pace. The three dominant methods for measuring brain activities are: event-related potential, functional magnetic resonance imaging and magnetoencephalography (MEG). 

The integration and application to education of what we know about the brain was strengthened in 2000 when the American Federation of Teachers stated: "It is vital that we identify what science tells us about how people learn in order to improve the education curriculum." What is exciting about this new field in education is that modern brain imaging techniques now make it possible, in some sense, to watch the brain as it learns, and the question then arises: can the results of neuro-scientific studies of brains as they are learning usefully inform practice in this area? Although the field of neuroscience is young, it is expected that with new technologies and ways of observing learning, the paradigms of what students need and how students learn best will be further refined with actual scientific evidence. In particular, students who may have learning disabilities will be taught with strategies that are more informed.

===A brain-based theory of learning===
The differences of opinion and theory in psychology indicate that the learning process is not yet understood. Neuroscience shows that the brain can be modelled not with a central processor where 'intelligence' lies, but in having perhaps 70 functional areas. Mental activity requires several areas to work together. What appear as different types of intelligence result from different combinations of well-developed functional areas. Learning is a process by which neurons join by developing the synapses between them. Knowledge is arranged hierarchically, with new knowledge being linked to existing neural networks.

==Multiple intelligences==

The existence of multiple intelligences is proposed by psychologist Howard Gardner, who suggests that different kinds of intelligence exists in human beings. Allen, I. E., J. Seaman, et al. (2007). Blending In: The Extent and Promise of Blended Education in the United States. Needham, M.A., The Sloan Consortium. It is a theory that has been fashionable in continuous professional development (CPD) training courses for teachers.

==Multimedia learning==
A multimedia classroom at Islington College, in the United Kingdom

Multimedia learning refers to the use of visual and auditory teaching materials that may include video, computer and other information technology. Multimedia learning theory focuses on the principles that determine the effective use of multimedia in learning, with emphasis on using both the visual and auditory channels for information processing.

The auditory channel deals with information that is heard, and the visual channel processes information that is seen. The visual channel holds less information than the auditory channel. If both the visual and auditory channels are presented with information, more knowledge is retained. However, if too much information is delivered it is inadequately processed, and long term memory is not acquired. Multimedia learning seeks to give instructors the ability to stimulate both the visual and auditory channels of the learner, resulting in better progress. "Understanding multimedia learning: Integrating multimedia in the k-12 classroom." (n.d.). Retrieved from http://s4.brainpop.com/new_common_images/files/76/76426_BrainPOP_White_Paper-20090426.pdf 

==Other learning theories==
Other learning theories have also been developed for more specific purposes. For example, andragogy is the art and science to help adults learn. Connectivism is a recent theory of networked learning which focuses on learning as making connections.

===Learning style theory===

Learning style theory proposes that individuals learn in different ways, that there are four distinct learning styles &ndash; feeling, watching, thinking and doing &ndash; and that knowledge of a learner's preferred learning style will lead to faster and more satisfactory improvement. Smith, M., M. Doyle, et al. (2007). "David a. kolb on experiential learning." Retrieved 24 August 2007, fromhttp://www.infed.org/biblio/b-explrn.htm. 

===Informal and post-modern theories===
In theories that make use of cognitive restructuring, an informal curriculum promotes the use of prior knowledge to help students gain a broad understanding of concepts. New knowledge cannot be told to students, it believes, but rather the students' current knowledge must be challenged. In this way, students will adjust their ideas to more closely resemble actual theories or concepts. By using this method students gain the broad understanding they're taught and later are more willing to learn and keep the specifics of the concept or theory. This theory further aligns with the idea that teaching the concepts and the language of a subject should be split into multiple steps. 

Other informal learning theories look at the sources of motivation for learning. Intrinsic motivation may create a more self-regulated learner, yet schools undermine intrinsic motivation. Critics argue that the average student learning in isolation performs significantly less well than those learning with collaboration and mediation. Students learn through talk, discussion, and argumentation. 

==Philosophical anthropology==

Every well-constructed theory of education has at its center a philosophical anthropology. Theodora Polito, Educational Theory as Theory of Culture: A Vichian perspective on the educational theories of John Dewey and Kieran Egan Educational Philosophy and Theory, Vol. 37, No. 4, 2005 

==Criticism of learning theory==
Critics of learning theories that seek to displace traditional educational practices claim that there is no need for such theories; that the attempt to comprehend the process of learning through the construction of theories creates problems and inhibits personal freedom. Holzman, Lois (1997). When Democratic Education is Developmental: The Sudbury Valley School Model, Schools for growth: radical alternatives to current educational models. Retrieved April 1, 2010. Daniel Greenberg (1987), A New Look at Learning, The Sudbury Valley School Experience. Retrieved April 1, 2010. 

==See also==
* Andragogical learning theory
* Cognitivism (learning theory)
* Constructivism (learning theory)
* Cultural-historical psychology
* Instructional theory
* Instructional design
* Kinesthetic learning
* Learning by teaching
* Science, technology, society and environment education
* Connectivism (learning theory)
* Evidence-based education

;About accelerating the learning process
*cognitive acceleration
*spaced repetition
*incremental reading

;About the mechanisms of memory and learning:
*neural networks in the brain
*sleep and learning
*latent learning
*memory consolidation
*short-term memory versus working memory
*long-term memory
*declarative memory versus procedural memory
*the cerebellum and motor learning

;About learning theories related to classroom learning:
*Contemporary Educational Psychology/Chapter 2: The Learning Process

== References ==

== Further reading ==
* 
* 

==External links==

* Social Science Research Network. How to Become an Expert Law Teacher by Understanding the Neurobiology of Learning
* ERIC Digest. How People Learn (and What Technology Might Have To Do with It)
* Instructional Design Learning theories

*


[[Long-term memory]]

Long-term memory (LTM) is the final stage of the dual memory model proposed by Atkinson and Shiffrin, in which data can be stored for long periods of time. While short-term and working memory persists for only about 20 to 30 seconds, information can remain in long term memory indefinitely.

According to Mazur (2006), long-term memory has also been called reference memory, because an individual must refer to the information in long-term memory when performing almost any task.

Long term memory is commonly broken down into explicit memory (declarative), which includes episodic memory, semantic memory, and autobiographical memory, and implicit memory (procedural memory).

==Dual-store memory model==
According to Miller, whose paper in 1956 popularized the theory of the "magic number seven", short-term memory is limited to a certain number of chunks of information, while long-term memory has a limitless store. 

===Atkinson-Shiffrin Memory Model===

According to the dual store memory model proposed by Richard C. Atkinson and Richard Shiffrin in 1968, memories can reside in the short-term "buffer" for a limited time while they are simultaneously strengthening their associations in long-term memory. When items are first presented, they enter short-term memory, but due to its limited space, as new items enter, older ones are pushed out. However, each time an item in short term memory is rehearsed, it is strengthened in long term memory. Similarly, the longer an item stays in short-term memory, the stronger its association becomes in long-term memory. 

===Baddeley's Model of Working Memory===

In 1974 Baddeley and Hitch proposed an alternative theory of short term memory: Baddeley's model of working memory. According to this theory, short-term memory is divided into different slave systems for different types of input items, and there is an executive control supervising what items enter and exit those systems. The slave systems include the phonological loop, the visuo-spatial sketchpad, and the episodic buffer (later added by Baddeley). 

==Encoding of Information==
Long-term memory encodes information semantically for storage, as researched by Baddeley. Baddeley, A. D. (1966). The influence of acoustic and semantic similarity on long-term memory for word sequences. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 18, 302309. In vision, the information needs to enter working memory before it can be stored into long-term memory. This is evidenced by the fact that the speed with which information is stored into long-term memory is determined by the amount of information that can be fit, at each step, into visual working memory. Nikoli, D. and Singer, W. (2007) Creation of visual long-term memory. Perception & Psychophysics, 69: 904912. In other words, the larger the capacity of working memory for certain stimuli, the faster will these materials be learned.

Synaptic Consolidation is the process by which items are transferred from short term to long term memory. Within the first minutes or hours after acquisition, the engram (memory trace) is encoded within synapses, becoming resistant (though not immune) to interference from outside sources. Dudai, Yadin (2003). "The neurobiology of consolidations, or, how stable is the engram?" Annual Review of Psychology, 55, 51-86. http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.55.090902.142050 Dudai, Yadin (2002). Memory from A to Z: Keywords, concepts, and beyond. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 

As long-term memory is subject to fading in the natural forgetting process, maintenance rehearsal (several recalls/retrievals of memory) may be needed to preserve long term memories. Greene, R. L. (1987) Effects of maintenance rehearsal on human memory. Psychological Bulletin, 102(3), 403-413. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.102.3.403 Individual retrievals can take place in increasing intervals in accordance with the principle of spaced repetition. This can happen quite naturally through reflection or deliberate recall (also known as recapitulation), often dependent on the perceived importance of the material.

===Sleep===
Some theories consider sleep to be an important factor in establishing well-organized long-term memories. (See also sleep and learning.) Sleep plays a key function in the consolidation of new memories. Ruch, S., Markes, O., Duss, B. S., Oppliger, D. Reber, P. T., Koenig, T., Mathis, J., Roth, C., Henke, K. (2012). Sleep stage II contributes to the consolidation of declarative memories. Neuropsychologia, 50(2012), 23892396 

According to Tarnow's theory, long-term memories are stored in dream format (reminiscent of the Penfield & Rasmussens findings that electrical excitations of cortex give rise to experiences similar to dreams). During waking life an executive function interprets long-term memory consistent with reality checking .
Also, that the information stored in memory, no matter how it was learned, can affect performance on a particular task without the subject being aware that this memory is being used. Newly acquired declarative memory traces are believed to be reactivated during NonREM sleep to promote their hippocampo-neocortical transfer for long-term storage. Specifically new declarative memories are better remembered if recall follows Stage II non-rapid eye movement sleep. The reactivation of memories during sleep can lead to lasting synaptic changes within certain neural networks. It is the high spindle activity, low oscillation activity, and delta wave activity during NREM sleep that helps to contribute to declarative memory consolidation. In learning before sleep spindles are redistributed to neuronally active upstates within slow oscillations. Sleep spindles are thought to induce synaptic changes and thereby contribute to memory consolidation during sleep. Here, we examined the role of sleep in the object-place recognition task, a task closely comparable to tasks typically applied for testing human declarative memory: It is a one-trial task, hippocampus-dependent, not stressful and can be repeated within the same animal. Sleep deprivation reduces vigilance or arousal levels, affecting the efficiency of certain cognitive functions such as learning and memory. 

The theory that sleep benefits memory retention is not a new idea. It has been around since Ebbinghaus's experiment on forgetting in 1885. More recently studies have been done by Payne and colleagues and Holtz and colleagues. Holz, J., Piosczyk, H., Landnann, N., Feige, B., Spiegelhalden, K., Riemann, D., Nissen, C., Voderholzer, V. (2012). "The timing of learning before night-time sleep differentiall affects declarative and procedural long-term memory consolidation in adolescents" PLoS ONE, 7(7), 110. In Payne and colleague's Payne, D. J., Tucker, A. M., Ellenbogen, M. J., Wamsley, J. E., Walker, P. M., Schacter, L. D., Stickglod, R. (2012). "Memory for semantically related and unrelated declarative information: the benefit of sleep, the cost of wake" PLoS One, 7(3), 18, experiment participants were randomly selected and split into two groups. Both groups were given semantically related or unrelated word pairs, but one group was given the information at 9am and the other group received theirs at 9pm. Participants were then tested on the word pairs at one of three intervals 30 minutes, 12 hours, or 24 hours later. It was found that participants who had a period of sleep between the learning and testing sessions did better on the memory tests. This information is similar to other results found by previous experiments by Jenkins and Dallenbach (1924). It has also been found that many domains of declarative memory are affected by sleep such as emotional memory, semantic memory, and direct encoding. 

Holtz found that not only does sleep affect consolidation of declarative memories, but also procedural memories. In this experiment fifty adolescent participants were taught either word pairs (which represents declarative memory) and a finger taping task(procedural memory at one of two different times of day. What they found was that the procedural finger taping task was best encoded and remembered directly before sleep, but the declarative word pairs task was better remembered and encoded if learned at 3 in the afternoon. 

== Divisions of Long Term Memory ==

The brain does not store memories in one unified structure, as might be seen in a computer's hard disk drive. Instead, different types of memory are stored in different regions of the brain. Long term memory is typically divided up into two major headings: explicit memory and implicit memory. 

=== Explicit Memory ===

Explicit memory (declarative memory) refers to all memories that are consciously available. These are encoded by the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, and perirhinal cortex, but consolidated and stored elsewhere. The precise location of storage is unknown, but the temporal cortex has been proposed as a likely candidate. Research by Meulemans and Van der Linden (2003) found that amnesiac patients with damage to the medial temporal lobe performed more poorly on explicit learning tests than did healthy controls. However, these same amnesiac patients performed at the same rate as healthy controls on implicit learning tests. This implies that the medial temporal lobe is heavily involved in explicit learning, but not in implicit learning. Meulemans, Thierry & Van der Linden, Martial (2003). Implicit learning of complex information in amnesia. Brain and Cognition, 52(2), 250-257. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0278-2626(03)00081-2 Aggleton, John P. (2008). Understanding anterograde amnesia: Disconnections and hidden lesions. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 61(10), 1441-1471. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17470210802215335 

Declarative memory has three major subdivisions:

==== Episodic Memory ====

Episodic memory refers to memory for specific events in time, as well as supporting their formation and retrieval. Some examples of episodic memory would be remembering someone's name and what happened at your last interaction with each other. Ranganath, C. C., Michael, B.X., Craig, J.B. (2005). Working Memory Maintenance Contributes to Long-term Memory Formation: Neural and Behavioral Evidence. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 17(7), 9941010. Wood,R.,Baxer,P.,Belpaeme,T. (2011). A review of long term memory in natural and synthetic systems. Adaptive Behavior, 20(2), 81103. Experiments conducted by Spaniol and colleagues indicated that older adults have worse episodic memories than younger adults because episodic memory requires context dependent memory. Spaniol, J., Madden, D. J., Voss, A. (2006). A Diffusion Model Analysis of Adult Age Differences in Episodic and Semantic LongTerm Memory Retrieval. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 32(1), 101117, 

==== Semantic Memory ====

Semantic memory refers to knowledge about factual information, such as the meaning of words. Semantic memory is independent information such as information remembered for a test. In contrast with episodic memory older adults and younger adults do not show much of a difference with semantic memory, presumably because semantic memory does not depend on context memory. 

==== Autobiographical Memory ====

Autobiographical memory refers to knowledge about events and personal experiences from an individual's own life. Though similar to episodic memory, it differs in that it contains only those experience which directly pertain to the individual, from across his lifespan. Conway and Pleydell-Pearce (2000) argue that this is one component of the self-memory system. Conway, M. A., & Pleydell-Pearce, C. W. (2000). The construction of autobiographical memories in the self-memory system. Psychological Review, 107(2), 261-288.http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.107.2.261 

=== Implicit memory ===

Implicit memory (procedural memory) refers to the use of objects or movements of the body, such as how exactly to use a pencil, drive a car, or ride a bicycle. This type of memory is encoded and it is presumed stored by the striatum and other parts of the basal ganglia. The basal ganglia is believed to mediate procedural memory and other brain structures and is largely independent of the hippocampus. Foerde, K., & Poldrack, R.A. (2009). Procedural learning in humans. The New Encyclopedia of Neuroscience, 7, 1083-1091.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-008045046-9.00783-X Research by Manelis, Hanson, and Hanson (2011) found that the reactivation of the parietal and occipital regions was associated with implicit memory. Manelis, A., Hanson, C., & Hanson, S. J. (2011). Implicit memory for object locations depends on reactivation of encoding-related brain regions. Human Brain Mapping, 32(1), 32-50.http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/hbm.20992 Procedural memory is considered non-declarative memory or unconscious memory which includes priming and non-associative learning. Holz, J., Piosczyk, H., Landnann, N., Feige, B., Spiegelhalden, K., Riemann, D., Nissen, C., Voderholzer, V. (2012). PLoS ONE, 7(7), 110 

Other categories of memory may also be relevant to the discussion of long term memory. For example:

Emotional memory, the memory for events that evoke a particularly strong emotion, is a domain that can involve both declarative and procedural memory processes. Emotional memories are consciously available, but elicit a powerful, unconscious physiological reaction. Research indicates that the amygdala is extremely active during emotional situations, and acts with the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex in the encoding and consolidation of emotional events. Buchanan, Tony W. (2007). Retrieval of emotional memories. Psychological Bulletin, 133(5), http://dx.doi.org/761-779. 10.1037/0033-2909.133.5.761 Cahill, L. & McGaugh, J. L. (1996). Modulation of memory storage. Current Opinion and Neurobiology, 6(2), 237-242. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0959-4388(96)80078-X 

Working memory is not part of long term memory, but is important for long term memory to function. Working memory holds and manipulates information for a short period of time, before it is either forgotten or encoded into long term memory. Then, in order to remember something from long term memory, it must be brought back into working memory. If working memory is overloaded it can affect the encoding of long term memory. If one has a good working memory they may have a better long term memory encoding. Ranganath, C. C., Michael, B.X., Craig, J.B. (2005) Working Memory Maintenance Contributes to Long-term Memory Formation: Neural and Behavioral Evidence. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 17(7), 9941010 Axmacher, N., Haupt, S., Cohen, M. X., Elger, C. F., Fell, J. (2010). Electrophysiological signature of working and long-term memory interaction in the human hippocampus. European Journal of Neuroscience, 31(1), 101117. 

==Disorders of memory==

Minor everyday slips and lapses of memory are fairly commonplace, and may increase naturally with age, when ill, or when under stress. Some women may experience more memory lapses following the onset of the menopause. Drogos, L. L., Rubin, L. J., Geller, S. E., Banuvar, S., Shulman, L. P., Maki, P. M. (2013). Objective cognitive performance is related to subjective memory complaints in midlife women with moderate to severe vasomotor symptoms. Menopause, 20(12), 1236-1242. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/GME.0b013e318291f5a6 
In general, more serious problems with memory occur due to traumatic brain injury or neurodegenerative disease.

===Traumatic brain injury===
The majority of findings about memory have been the result of studies that lesioned specific brain regions in rats or primates, but some of the most important work has been the result of accidental or inadvertent brain trauma. The most famous case in recent memory studies is the case study of HM, who had parts of his hippocampus, parahippocampal cortices, and surrounding tissue removed in an attempt to cure his epilepsy. His subsequent total anterograde amnesia and partial retrograde amnesia provided the first evidence for the localization of memory function, and further clarified the differences between declarative and procedural memory.

===Neurodegenerative diseases===
Many neurodegenerative diseases can cause memory loss. Some of the most prevalent (and, as a consequence, most intensely researched) include Alzheimer's disease, dementia, Huntington's disease, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, and schizophrenia. None act specifically on memory; instead, memory loss is often a casualty of generalized neuronal deterioration. Currently, these illnesses are irreversible, but research into stem cells, psychopharmacology, and genetic engineering holds much promise.

Those with Alzheimer's disease generally display symptoms such as getting momentarily lost on familiar routes, placing possessions in inappropriate locations and distortions of existing memories or completely forgetting memories. Researchers have often used the DeeseRoedigerMcDermott paradigm (DRM) to study the effects of Alzheimer's disease on memory. The DRM paradigm presents a list of words such as doze, pillow, bed, dream, nap, etc., with a theme word that is not presented. In this case the theme word would have been sleep. Alzheimer's disease patients are more likely to recall the theme word as being part of the original list than healthy adults. There is a possible link between longer encoding time and increased false memory in LTM. The patients end up relying on the gist of information instead of the specific words themselves. MacDuffie, E. K., Atkins, S. A., Flegal, E. K., Clark, M. C., Reuter-Lorenze, A. P. (2012). Memory distortion in Alzheimer's Disease: deficient monitoring of short-and long-term memory. Neuropsychology, 26(4), 509516. Alzheimer's leads to an uncontrolled inflammatory response brought on by extensive amyloid depostion in the brain, which leads to cell death in the brain. This gets worse over time and eventually leads to cognitive decline, after the loss of memory. Pioglitazone may improve cognitive impairments, including memory loss and may help protect long-term and visiospatial memory from neurodegenerative disease. Gupta,R.,Gupta,K.L. (2012). Improvement in long-term and visuo-spatial memory following chronic pioglitazone in mouse model of Alzheimer's disease. Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and Behavior, 102 (2012), 184190 

Parkinson's disease patients have problems with cognitive performance; these issues resemble what is seen in frontal lobe patients and can often lead to dementia. It is thought that Parkinson's disease is caused by degradation of the dopaminergic mesocorticolimbic projection originating from the ventral tegmental area. It has also been indicated that the hippocampus plays an important role in episodic and spatial (parts of LTM) memory and Parkinsons disease patients have abnormal hippocampuses resulting in abnormal functioning of LTM. L-dopa injections are often used to try to relieve Parkinson's disease symptoms as well as behavioral therapy. Costa,C.,Sgobio,C.,Siliqueni,S.,Tozzi,A.,Tantucci,M.,Ghiglieri,V.,Filippo,D.M.,Pendolino,V.,De lure,A.,MArti,M.,Morari,M.,Spillantini,G.M.,Latagliata,C.E.,Pascucci,T.,Puglisi-Allegra,S.,Gardioni,F.,DiLuca,M.,Picconi,B.,Calabresi,P. (2012). Mechanisms underlying the impairment of hippocampal long-term potentiation and memory in experimental Parkinson's diseaseBrain: A Journal of Neurology, 135, 18841899. 

Schizophrenia patients have trouble with attention and executive functions which in turn affects long term memory consolidation and retrieval. They cannot encode or retrieve temporal information properly, which causes them to select inappropriate social behaviors. They cannot effectively use the information they possess. The prefrontal cortex, where schizophrenia patients have structural abnormalities, is involved with the temporal lobe and also affects the hippocampus, which causes their difficulty in encoding and retrieving temporal information (including long term memory). Schizophrenia patients are very hard to treat. Their symptoms can be controlled with medication, but as many schizophrenics are paranoid, they believe the medication is to hurt them not help them Langraf, S., Steingen, J., Eppert, Y., Neidermeyer, U., Elke, U., Krueger, F. (2011). Temporal Information Processing in Short- and Long-Term Memory of Patients with Schizophrenia. PLoS ONE, 6(10), 110. 

==Biological underpinnings at the cellular level==
Long-term memory, unlike short-term memory, is dependent upon the construction of new proteins. This occurs within the cellular body, and concerns in particular transmitters, receptors, and new synapse pathways that reinforce the communicative strength between neurons. The production of new proteins devoted to synapse reinforcement is triggered after the release of certain signaling substances (such as calcium within hippocampal neurons) in the cell. In the case of hippocampal cells, this release is dependent upon the expulsion of magnesium (a binding molecule) that is expelled after significant and repetitive synaptic signaling. The temporary expulsion of magnesium frees NMDA receptors to release calcium in the cell, a signal that leads to gene transcription and the construction of reinforcing proteins. Neihoff, Debra (2005) "The Language of Life 'How cells Communicate in Health and Disease'" Speak Memory, 210223. For more information, see long-term potentiation (LTP).

One of the newly synthesized proteins in LTP is also critical for maintaining long-term memory. This protein is an autonomously active form of the enzyme protein kinase C (PKC), known as PKM. PKM maintains the activity-dependent enhancement of synaptic strength and inhibiting PKM erases established long-term memories, without affecting short-term memory or, once the inhibitor is eliminated, the ability to encode and store new long-term memories is restored.

Also, BDNF is important for the persistence of long-term memories. 

The long-term stabilization of synaptic changes is also determined by a parallel increase of pre- and postsynaptic structures such as axonal bouton, dendritic spine and postsynaptic density. 
 
On the molecular level, an increase of the postsynaptic scaffolding proteins PSD-95 and Homer1c has been shown to correlate with the stabilization of synaptic enlargement. 

==Contradictory evidence==
A couple of studies have had results that contradict the dual-store memory model. Studies showed that in spite of using distractors, there was still both a recency effect for a list of items and a contiguity effect. 
Another study revealed that how long an item spends in short-term memory is not the key determinant in its strength in long-term memory. Instead, whether the participant actively tries to remember the item while elaborating on its meaning determines the strength of its store in long-term memory. 

==Single-store memory model==
An alternative theory is that there is only one memory store with associations among items and their contexts. In this model, the context serves as a cue for retrieval, and the recency effect is greatly caused by the factor of context. Immediate and delayed free-recall will have the same recency effect because the relative similarity of the contexts still exist. Also, the contiguity effect still occurs because contiguity also exists between similar contexts. 

==See also==
* Aging and memory
* Emotion and memory
* Intermediate-term memory
* Neurogenesis

==Footnotes==

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
*

==Further reading==
* The role of testing-effect in a long-term memory



[[List of Latin phrases]]

__NOTOC__
This page lists direct English translations of common Latin phrases, such as veni, vidi, vici and et cetera. Some of the phrases are themselves translations of Greek phrases, as Greek rhetoric and literature were highly regarded in Ancient Rome when Latin rhetoric and literature were still maturing.

The Latin letter i may be used either as a vowel or a consonant. When used as a consonant, it often is replaced by the letter j, which originally, was simply an orthographic "long i" that was used in initial positions and when it occurred between two other vowels. This convention from Medieval Latin is preserved most commonly in Latin legal terminology&mdash;hence phrases such as de iure often are spelled de jure.

To view all phrases on a single, lengthy document, see:
* List of Latin phrases (full)

The list also is divided alphabetically into twenty pages:

* List of Latin phrases (A)
* List of Latin phrases (B)
* List of Latin phrases (C)
* List of Latin phrases (D)
* List of Latin phrases (E)
* List of Latin phrases (F)
* List of Latin phrases (G)
* List of Latin phrases (H)
* List of Latin phrases (I)
* List of Latin phrases (L)

* List of Latin phrases (M)
* List of Latin phrases (N)
* List of Latin phrases (O)
* List of Latin phrases (P)
* List of Latin phrases (Q)
* List of Latin phrases (R)
* List of Latin phrases (S)
* List of Latin phrases (T)
* List of Latin phrases (U)
* List of Latin phrases (V)

==See also==

===Lists===
*List of abbreviations used in medical prescriptions
*List of ecclesiastical abbreviations
*List of Germanic and Latinate equivalents in English
*List of Greek phrases
*List of Latin abbreviations
*List of Latin and Greek words commonly used in systematic names
*List of Latin phrases in A Canticle for Leibowitz
*List of Latin words with English derivatives
*List of legal Latin terms
*List of medical roots, suffixes, and prefixes
*List of U.S. state and territory mottos
*List of university mottos

===Categories===
*Ancient Roman names
*Dog Latin words and phrases
*Latin biological phrases
*Latin legal phrases
*Latin literary phrases
*Latin logical phrases
*Latin medical phrases
*Latin mottos
*Latin philosophical phrases
*Latin political phrases
*Latin religious phrases

== External links ==

* Database of Latin phrases, searchable in Latin or English
* Latin sayings & Latin phrases, organized by topic
* Latin Phrases, Sayings, Quotes, and Expressions
* Notable idioms and concepts in Latin
* Commonly used Latin phrases
* Famous Latin Proverbs and Sayings
* Latin abbreviations

 
Latin phrases

[[Latin declension]]

Latin is an inflected language, and as such its nouns, pronouns, and adjectives must be declined (i.e. their endings alter to show grammatical case). A set of declined forms of the same word pattern is called a declension. There are five declensions, which are numbered and grouped by ending and grammatical gender. For simple declension paradigms, visit the Wiktionary appendices:
First declension, Second declension, Third declension, Fourth declension, Fifth declension. Each noun follows one of these five declensions.

== Grammatical cases ==
A complete Latin noun declension consists of up to seven grammatical cases: nominative, vocative, accusative, genitive, dative, ablative and locative.

They are often abbreviated to the first three letters.

The sequence NOM-VOC-ACC-GEN-DAT-ABL has been the usual order taught in Britain and many Commonwealth countries since the publication of Hall Kennedy's Latin Primer (1866). It reflects the tendencies of different cases to share similar endings (see Syncretic trends below). For a discussion of other sequences taught elsewhere, see Instruction in Latin. However, some schools teach it in the order NOM-GEN-DAT-ACC-ABL-VOC, as first given. 

===Meanings and functions of the various cases===
* The vocative case is used to address someone or something in direct speech. In English, this function is expressed by intonation or punctuation: "Mary, are you going to the store?" or "Mary!" ("Mary" is vocative). 
* The nominative case marks the subject of a statement and denotes the person or object that performs the action of the verb in the sentence. For example "Mary is going to the store" or "Mary is my sister". It is also used for the predicate: "Mary is my sister". The nominative singular (for adjectives, masculine nominative singular) is used as the reference form of the word.
* The accusative case marks the direct object of a verb. It also has various other functions, e.g. it is governed by some prepositions.
* The genitive case expresses possession, measurement, or source. Many of its uses correspond in English to uses of the preposition "of", and in some situations to the English "possessive" case.
* The dative case marks the recipient of an action, the indirect object of a verb. In English, the prepositions to and for frequently correspond to this case, though there are also many uses of these prepositions which do not correspond to the dative case.
* The ablative case expresses separation, indirection, or the means by which an action is performed. In English, the prepositions by, with, from, in and on are most commonly used to indicate these meanings.
* The locative case expresses the place where an action is performed. In early Latin the locative case had extensive use, but in Classical Latin the locative case was very rarely used, applying only to the names of cities and small islands and to a few other isolated words. For this purpose, the Romans considered all Mediterranean islands to be "small" except for Sicily, Sardinia, Corsica, Crete, and Cyprus. Much of the case's function had been absorbed into the ablative. In the singular first and second declension, the locative is identical to the genitive singular form, and in the singular third declension, the locative is identical to the dative singular form. For plural nouns of all declensions, the locative is also identical to the ablative form. The few fourth and fifth declension place names would also use the ablative form for the locative case. However, a few nouns use the locative instead of a preposition: domus  dom "at home", rs  rr "in the country", humus  hum "on the ground", mlitia  militiae "in military service", "in the field", focus  foc "at the hearth", "at the center of the community". In archaic times, the locative singular of third declension nouns was interchangeable between ablative and dative forms, but in the Augustan period, the use of the dative form became fixed.

===Syncretism=== 
Syncretism, where one form in a paradigm shares the ending of another form in the paradigm, is common in Latin. The following are the most notable patterns of syncretism:

====Gender-specific====
* In masculines and feminines, the accusative plural ends in a long vowel plus s; so does the nominative plural in the third, fourth, and fifth declensions.
* For neuter plural nouns, the nominative, vocative, and accusative all always end in a (with a few exceptions: demonstrative hic and related istic and illic, relative/interrogative qu, and related words; in all of these, the neuter plural takes the same form as feminine nominative singular).

====Case-specific====

* The vocative form is the same as the nominative in both singular and plural, except for second declension masculine nouns ending in us and a few nouns of Greek origin. For example, the vocative of Aenes is Aenea, although Aenes is first declension.
* The accusative singular ends in a short vowel plus m, except for neuters in the third and fourth declensions.
* The genitive singular is the same as the nominative plural in first, second, and fourth declension masculine and feminine nouns.
* The dative is always the same as the ablative in the plural, and in the singular in the second declension, the third declension full i-stems (i.e. neuter i-stems, adjectives), and fourth declension neuters.
* The dative singular is the same as the genitive singular in first and fifth declension nouns.
* The dative, ablative, and locative are identical in the plural.
* The locative is identical to the ablative in the fourth and fifth declensions.

== History of cases ==
Old Latin had essentially two patterns of endings. One pattern was shared by the first and second declensions, with a clear similarity to the first and second declensions of Ancient Greek. The other pattern was used by the third, fourth and fifth declensions, and has similarities with the Greek third declension.

== Nouns ==
There are five declensions for Latin nouns:

=== First declension (a) ===
Nouns of this declension usually end in &ndash;a in the nominative singular and are mostly feminine, e.g. 'road' (via, viae fem.) and 'water' (aqua, aquae fem.). There is a small class of masculine exceptions generally referring to occupations, e.g. 'farmer' (agricola, agricolae masc.) and 'sailor' (nauta, nautae masc.).

The predominant letter in the ending forms of this declension is a. The nominative singular form consists of the stem and the ending a, and the genitive singular form is the stem plus ae.

 aqua, aewater f. agricola, aefarmer m. 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 Nominative aqua a aquae ae agricola a agricolae ae 
 Vocative aqua a aquae ae agricola a agricolae ae 
 Accusative aquam am aqus s agricolam am agricols s 
 Genitive aquae The archaic genitive aquai occurs frequently in Virgil, Cicero, Lucretius and others, to evoke the style of older writers. ae aqurum rum agricolae ae agricolrum rum 
 Dative aquae ae aqus s agricolae ae agricols s 
 Ablative aqu  aqus s agricol  agricols s 
 Locative aquae ae aqus s agricolae ae agricols s 
 

==== First declension Greek nouns ====
The first declension also includes three types of Greek loanwords, derived from Ancient Greek's Alpha Declension. They are declined irregularly in the singular, but are sometimes treated as if they were native Latin nouns, e.g. nominative athlta instead of the original athlts. Interestingly, archaic (Homeric) first declension Greek nouns and adjectives had been formed in exactly the same way as in Latin: nephelgerta Zeus (Zeus the cloud-gatherer) had in classical Greek become nephelgerts.

For full paradigm tables and more detailed information, see the Wiktionary appendix First declension.

=== Second declension (o) ===
The second declension is a large group of nouns consisting of mostly masculine nouns like equus, equ ("horse") and puer, puer ("boy") and neuter nouns like castellum, castell ("fort"). There are several small groups of feminine exceptions, including names of gemstones, plants, trees, and some towns and cities.

In the nominative singular, most masculine nouns consist of the stem and the ending us, although some end in er, which is not necessarily attached to the complete stem. Neuter nouns generally have a nominative singular consisting of the stem and the ending um. However, every second-declension noun has the ending  attached as a suffix to the root of the noun in the genitive singular form. The predominant letter in the ending forms of this declension is o.

Masculine:

 dominus,  master m. 
 Singular Plural 
 Nominative dominus us domin  
 Vocative domine e domin  
 Accusative dominum um domins s 
 Genitive domin  dominrum rum 
 Dative domin  domins s 
 Ablative domin  domins s 
 

Neuter:

 bellum, war n. 
 Singular Plural 
 Nominative bellum um bella a 
 Vocative bellum um bella a 
 Accusative bellum um bella a 
 Genitive bell  bellrum rum 
 Dative bell  bells s 
 Ablative bell  bells s 
 Locative bell  bells s 
 

Nouns ending in ius and ium have a genitive singular in  in earlier Latin, which was regularized to i in the later language. Masculine nouns in ius have a vocative singular in  at all stages. These forms in  are stressed on the same syllable as the nominative singular, sometimes in violation of the usual Latin stress rule. For example, the genitive and vocative singular Vergil (from Vergilius) is pronounced , with stress on the penult, even though it is short. Gildersleeve & Lodge 15, Allen & Greenough 12, 49c 

There is no contraction of i(s) in plural forms.

 flius, son m. auxilium, aid, help n. 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 Nominative flius ius fli i auxilium ium auxilia ia 
 Vocative fl  fli i auxilium ium auxilia ia 
 Accusative flium ium flis is auxilium ium auxilia a 
 Genitive fl(later) fli (later) i flirum irum auxil(later) auxili (later) i auxilirum irum 
 Dative fli i flis is auxili i auxilis is 
 Ablative fli i flis is auxili i auxilis is 

==== Second declension R nouns ====
Some masculine nouns of the second declension end in an er or an ir in the nominative singular. For such nouns, the genitive singular must be learned to see if the E is dropped. For example, socer, er keeps its E. However, the noun magister, tr ("teacher") drops its E in the genitive singular. Nouns with ir in the nominative singular never drop the I.

The declension of second declension R nouns is identical to that of the regular second declension, with the exception of the vocative singular, which is identical to the nominative rather than ending in an e.

For declension tables of second declension nouns, see the corresponding Wiktionary appendix.

==== Second declension Greek nouns ====
The second declension contains two types of masculine Greek nouns and one form of neuter Greek noun. These nouns are irregular only in the singular, as are their first declension counterparts. Greek nouns in the second declension are derived from the Omicron Declension.

Some Greek nouns may also be declined as normal Latin nouns. For example, thetron can appear as thetrum.

In the older language, nouns ending with vus, quus and vum take o rather than u in the nominative and accusative singular.

 servos, slave m. equos, horse m. aevom, eternity, age n. 
 Singular Singular Singular 
 Nominative servos os equos os aevom om 
 Vocative serve e eque e aevom om 
 Accusative servom om equom om aevom om 
 Genitive serv  equ  aev  
 Dative serv  equ  aev  
 Ablative serv  equ  aev  

The plural of deus (god, deity) is irregular.

::
 Nom. d/di/de 
 Voc. d 
 Acc. des 
 Gen. derum/deum 
 Dat. ds/dis/des 
 Abl. ds/dis/des 

The vocative singular of Deus is not attested in Classical Latin. In Ecclesiastical Latin the vocative is Deus.

In poetry, um may be substituted for rum as the genitive plural ending.

=== Third declension (i) ===
The third declension is the largest group of nouns. The nominative singular of these nouns may end in a,e, , , y, c, l, n, r, s, t, or x. This group of nouns includes masculine, neuter, and feminine nouns. Examples are flumen, fluminis neut. ("river"), flos, floris masc. ("flower"), and pax, pacis fem. ("peace"). Each noun has the ending is as a suffix attached to the root of the noun in the genitive singular form. Masculine, feminine and neuter nouns each have their own special nominative singular endings. For instance, many masculine nouns end in an or (amor). Many feminine nouns end in an x (phoenx), and many neuter nouns end in an us (onus).

 prnceps, prncipisleader, chief, prince m. phoenx, phoencisphoenix, fire-bird f. cnmen, conaminis effort, struggle n. 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 Nominative prnceps s1 prncips s phoenx s1 phoencs s cnmen 1 cnmina a 
 Vocative prnceps s1 prncips s phoenx s1  cnmen 1 cnmina a 
 Accusative prncipem em prncips s phoenca Being a Greek word, the accusative form is phoenica (Ovid, Metamorphoses, 15.393 ). Greek a, like Latin em, comes from the PIE athematic ending m, which was pronounced as a vowel after consonants. em  cnmen 1,2 cnmina a 
 Genitive prncipis is prncipum um phoencis is  cnminis is  
 Dative prncip  prncipibus ibus phoenc   cnmin   
 Ablative prncipe e prncipibus ibus phoence e  cnmine e  
 Locative prncip  prncipibus ibus phoenc   cnmin   
 

1 The nominative singular is formed in one of four ways: with s, with no ending, or by one of these two with a different stem from the oblique cases. The same is true of other forms that are the same as the nominative singular: the vocative singular and the neuter accusative singular.

2 The nominative and accusative of neuter nouns are always identical. It should not be assumed that en is always the appropriate ending, as it might appear above.

==== Third declension i-stem nouns ====
The third declension also has a set of nouns that are declined differently. They are called i-stems. I-stems are broken into two subcategories: pure and mixed. Pure i-stems are indicated by the parisyllabic rule or special neuter endings. Mixed i-stems are indicated by the double consonant rule.
* Masculine & Feminine
** Parisyllabic Rule: Some masculine and feminine third declension i-stem nouns have the same number of syllables in the genitive as they do in the nominative. For example: amnis, is. The nominative ends in is.
** Double-Consonant Rule: The rest of the masculine and feminine third declension i-stem nouns have two consonants before the is in the genitive singular. For example: pars, partis
* Neuter
** Special Neuter Ending: Neuter third declension i-stems have no rule. However, all of them end in al, ar or e. For example: animal, lis. This can be remembered with the help of the mnemonic involving a pirate named Al: "Al, ar' e' going pirating today?"

Pure i-stems may exhibit peculiar endings in both singular and plural. Mixed i-stems employ normal (consonant) 3rd declension endings in the singular but i-stem endings in the plural. Note the alternative i-stem endings indicated in parentheses.

 amnis, amnisstream, torrent m. (Pure) pars, partispart, piece f. (Mixed) animal, animlis animal, living being n. (Pure) 
 Parisyllabic Rule Double Consonant Rule Special Neuter Ending 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 Nominative amnis s1 amns s pars s1 parts s animal 1 animlia ia 
 Vocative amnis s1 amns s pars s1 parts s animal 1 animlia ia 
 Accusative amnem em (im) amns s (s) partempartim emim parts s(s) animal 1 animlia ia 
 Genitive amnis is amnium ium partis is partium ium animlis is animlium ium 
 Dative amn  amnibus ibus part  partibus ibus animl  animlibus ibus 
 Ablative amneamn e () amnibus ibus parte e partibus ibus animl  animlibus ibus 
 

1 The nominative singular is formed in one of four ways: with s, with no ending, or by one of these two with a different stem from the oblique cases. The same is true of other forms that are the same as the nominative singular: the vocative singular and the neuter accusative singular.

The rules for determining i-stems from non-i-stems and "mixed" i-stems should be thought of more as "guidelines" than "rules": even among the Romans themselves, the categorization of a 3rd declension word as an i-stem or non-i-stem was quite fluid. The result is that many words that should be i-stems according to the parisyllabic and consonant stem rules actually are not, such as canis or iuvenis. By the parisyllabic rule, "canis" should be a masculine i-stem and thus differ from the non-i-stems by having an extra i in the plural genitive form: "canium". In reality, the plural genitive of "canis" is "canum", the form of a non-i-stem. This fluidity even in Roman times results in much more uncertainty in Medieval Latin, as scholars were trying to imitate what was fluid to begin with.

==== Peculiarities ====
In the third declension, there are four irregular nouns.

 Case vs force, power f. ss, suis swine, pig, hog c. bs, bovis ox, bullock c. Iuppiter, Iovis Jupiter m. 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular 
 Nominative vs vrs ss sus bs Here  or  come from Old Latin ou. Thus b-/b- and I- before consonant endings are alternate developments of the bov- and Iov- before vowel endings.  The double pp in the preferred form Iu-ppiter \"Father Jove\" is an alternate way of marking the length of the u in the etymological form I-piter. i is weakened from a in pater (Allen and Greenough, sect. 79 b). bovs Iuppiter 
 Vocative vs vrs ss sus bs bovs Iuppiter 
 Accusative vim vrs suem sus bovem bovs Iovem 
 Genitive  vrium suis suum bovis boum Iovis 
 Dative  vribus su subus bov bbusbbus Iov 
 Ablative v vribus sue subus bove bbusbbus Iove 
 

=== Fourth declension (u) ===
The fourth declension is a group of nouns consisting of mostly masculine words such as fluctus, flucts (masc.) ("a wave")' and portus, ports (masc.)("a port") with a few feminine exceptions, including manus, mans (fem.) ("hand"). The fourth declension also includes several neuter nouns including genu, gens (neut.) ("knee"). Each noun has the ending s as a suffix attached to the root of the noun in the genitive singular form. The predominant letter in the ending forms of this declension is u.

 portus, s port, haven, harbor m. corn, s horn, strength n. 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 Nominative portus us ports s corn  cornua ua 
 Vocative portus us ports s corn  cornua ua 
 Accusative portum um ports s corn  cornua ua 
 Genitive ports s portuum uum corns s cornuum uum 
 Dative portu u portibus ibus corn  cornibus ibus 
 Ablative port  portibus ibus corn  cornibus ibus 
 

In the dative and ablative plural, ibus is sometimes replaced with ubus. This is so for only a few nouns, such as artus, "the limbs".

The declension of domus is irregular:

 domus, s house, home f. 
 Singular Plural 
 Nominative domus us doms s 
 Vocative domus us  
 Accusative domum um doms / doms s / s 
 Genitive doms s domrum / domuum rum / uum 
 Dative domu u domibus ibus 
 Ablative dom  domibus ibus 
 

=== Fifth declension (e) ===
The fifth declension is a small group of nouns consisting of mostly feminine words like 'affair, matter, thing' (rs, re fem.) and 'day' (dis, di usually masculine, except on notable days when it is feminine). Each noun has either the ending  or e as a suffix attached to the root of the noun in the genitive singular form

 effigis,  effigy, ideal f. sps, e hope, anticipation f. 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 Nominative effigis s effigis s sps s sps s 
 Vocative effigis s effigis s sps s sps s 
 Accusative effigiem em effigis s spem em sps s 
 Genitive effigi  effigirum rum spe e sprum rum 
 Dative effigi  effigibus bus spe e spbus bus 
 Ablative effigi  effigibus bus sp  spbus bus 

Note that nouns ending in is have long  in the dative and genitive, while nouns ending in a consonant + s have short e in these cases.

== Pronouns ==
Relative and demonstrative pronouns are generally declined like first and second declension adjectives, with the following differences:
* the nominatives are often irregular
* the genitive singular ends in us rather than ae or .
* the dative singular ends in : rather than ae or .
These differences identify the "pronominal" declension, and a few adjectives follow this pattern.
The vocative, where not shown, is the same as the nominative.

=== Personal pronouns ===
The first and second persons are irregular. They may be only masculine or feminine.

 First Person Second Person 
 ego, me I m. and f. ns, nostri we m. and f. t, tu thou m. and f. vs, vestri ye m. and f. 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 Nominative ego ns t vs 
 Vocative   t vs 
 Accusative m ns t vs 
 Genitive mei1 nostri1 tui1 vestri1 
 Dative mihi nbs tibi vbs 
 Ablative m nbs t vbs 
 

1These pronouns are declined in the 1st and 2nd declensions to agree in number and case with the thing possessed.

Usually, to show the ablative of accompaniment, cum would be added to the ablative form. However, with personal pronouns and the interrogative (not with 3rd person), cum is added onto the end of the ablative form. For example: mcum, nbscum, tcum, vbscum and qucum (sometimes qucum).

 is, ehe, they m. ea, eaeshe, they f. id, eait, they n. 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 Nominative is e, i ea eae id ea 
 Vocative       
 Accusative eum es eam es id ea 
 Genitive eius erum eius erum eius erum 
 Dative e es, is e es, is e es, is 
 Ablative e es, is e es, is e es, is 
 

The third person reflexive pronouns always refer back to the subject, whether it be singular or plural.

 , suushimself, herselfitself, oneself, themselves 
 Nominative  
 Vocative  
 Accusative s, ss 
 Genitive suus1 
 Dative sibi 
 Ablative s, ss 
 

1This pronoun is declined in the 1st and 2nd declensions to agree in number and case with the thing possessed.

=== Interrogative pronouns ===
The interrogative pronouns are used strictly for asking questions. They are distinct from the relative pronoun and the interrogative adjective (which is declined like the relative pronoun). Interrogative pronouns rarely occur in the plural. The plural interrogative pronouns are the same as the plural relative pronouns.

 quiswho? m. and f. quidwhat? n. only 
 Singular 
 Nominative quis quid 
 Vocative   
 Accusative quem quid 
 Genitive cuius cuius 
 Dative cu cu 
 Ablative qu qu 
 

=== Demonstrative pronouns and adjectives ===

 hic, haec, hoc this, this one (proximal) ille, illa, illud that, that one (distal) iste, ista, istud that of yours (medial) 
 Masculine Feminine Neuter Masculine Feminine Neuter Masculine Feminine Neuter 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 Nominative hic h haec hae hoc haec ille ill illa illae illud illa iste ist ista istae istud ista 
 Vocative                   
 Accusative hunc hs hanc hs hoc haec illum ills illam ills illud illa istum ists istam ists istud ista 
 Genitive huius hrum huius hrum huius hrum illus illrum illus illrum illus illrum istus istrum istus istrum istus istrum 
 Dative huic hs huic hs huic hs ill ills ill ills ill ills ist ists ist ists ist ists 
 Ablative hc hs hc hs hc hs ill ills ill ills ill ills ist ists ist ists ist ists 
 

=== Intensive pronouns ===

 ipse, ipsa, ipsum himself, herself, itself 
 Masculine Feminine Neuter 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 Nominative ipse ips ipsa ipsae ipsum ipsa 
 Vocative       
 Accusative ipsum ipss ipsam ipss ipsum ipsa 
 Genitive ipsus ipsrum ipsus ipsrum ipsus ipsrum 
 Dative ips ipss ips ipss ips ipss 
 Ablative ips ipss ips ipss ips ipss 
 

=== Relative pronouns ===

 qu, quae, quodwho, which, that 
 Masculine Feminine Neuter 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 Nominative qu qu quae quae quod quae 
 Vocative       
 Accusative quem qus quam qus quod quae 
 Genitive cius qurum cius qurum cius qurum 
 Dative cui quibus cui quibus cui quibus 
 Ablative qu quibus qu quibus qu quibus 
 

== Adjectives ==

=== First and second declension adjectives ===
First and second declension are inflected in the masculine, the feminine and the neuter; the masculine form typically ends in us (although some end in er, see below), the feminine form ends in a, and the neuter form ends in um. Therefore, some adjectives are given like altus, alta, altum
.

 altus, a, um high, long, tall 
 Masculine Feminine Neuter 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 Nominative altus us alt  alta a altae ae altum um alta a 
 Vocative alte e alt  alta a altae ae altum um alta a 
 Accusative altum um alts s altam am alts s altum um alta a 
 Genitive alt  altrum rum altae ae altrum rum alt  altrum rum 
 Dative alt  alts s altae ae alts s alt  alts s 
 Ablative alt  alts s alt  alts s alt  alts s 
 

==== First and second declension r adjectives ====
Some first and second declension adjectives' masculine form end in an er. As with second declension nouns r nouns, some adjectives retain the e throughout inflection, and some omit it. Sacer, sacra, sacrum omits its e while miser, misera, miserum keeps it.

 miser, era, erum sad, poor, unhappy 
 Masculine Feminine Neuter 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 Nominative miser er miser  misera a miserae ae miserum um misera a 
 Vocative miser er miser  misera a miserae ae miserum um misera a 
 Accusative miserum um misers s miseram am misers s miserum um misera a 
 Genitive miser  miserrum rum miserae ae miserrum rum miser  miserrum rum 
 Dative miser  misers s miserae ae misers s miser  misers s 
 Ablative miser  misers s miser  misers s miser  misers s 
 

 sacer, cra, crum sacred, holy 
 Masculine Feminine Neuter 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 Nominative sacer er sacr  sacra a sacrae ae sacrum um sacra a 
 Vocative sacer er sacr  sacra a sacrae ae sacrum um sacra a 
 Accusative sacrum um sacrs s sacram am sacrs s sacrum um sacra a 
 Genitive sacr  sacrrum rum sacrae ae sacrrum rum sacr  sacrrum rum 
 Dative sacr  sacrs s sacrae ae sacrs s sacr  sacrs s 
 Ablative sacr  sacrs s sacr  sacrs s sacr  sacrs s 
 

==== First and second us genitive adjectives ====
Nine first and second declension adjectives are irregular in the genitive and the dative in all genders. They can be remembered by using the mnemonic acronym UNUS NAUTA. They are:

llus, a, um; any
nllus, a, um; no, none (of any)
uter, tra, trum; which (of two)
slus, a, um; sole, alone
neuter, tra, trum; neither (of two)
alius, a, ud; (gen. sing. alus; another)
nus, a, um; one
ttus, a, um; whole
alter, era, erum; the other (of two)

 llus, a, umany 
 Masculine Feminine Neuter 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 Nominative llus us ll  lla a llae ae llum um lla a 
 Vocative lle e ll  lla a llae ae llum um lla a 
 Accusative llum um lls s llam am lls s llum um lla a 
 Genitive llus us llrum rum llus us llrum rum llus us llrum rum 
 Dative ll  lls s ll  lls s ll  lls s 
 Ablative ll  lls s ll  lls s ll  lls s 
 

=== Third declension adjectives ===
Third declension adjectives are normally declined like third declension i-stem nouns, except for the fact they always have a  rather than an e in the ablative singular (unlike i-stem nouns, in which only neuters have ). Some adjectives, however, like the one-ending vetus, veteris (old, aged), have an e in the ablative singular (all genders), a um in the genitive plural (all genders), and an a in the nominative and accusative plural (neuter only).

====Third declension adjectives with one ending====
These have a single nominative ending for all genders, although as usual the endings for the other cases vary. As with nouns, a genitive is given for the purpose of inflection.

 atrx, cis terrible, mean, cruel 
 Masculine & Feminine Neuter 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 Nominative atrx x atrcs s atrx x atrcia ia 
 Vocative atrx x atrcs s atrx x atrcia ia 
 Accusative atrcem em atrcs s1 atrx x atrcia ia 
 Genitive atrcis is atrcium ium atrcis is atrcium ium 
 Dative atrc  atrcibus ibus atrc  atrcibus ibus 
 Ablative atrc  atrcibus ibus atrc  atrcibus ibus 
 

1may end in s
may end in e

==== Third declension adjectives with two endings ====
Third declension adjectives that have two endings have one form for the masculine and feminine, and a separate form for the neuter. The ending for the masculine and feminine is is, and the ending for the neuter is e. Because the sexed form ends in an is, we find the adjective genitive singular.

 agilis, enimble, swift 
 Masculine & Feminine Neuter 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 Nominative agilis is agils s agile e agilia ia 
 Vocative agilis is agils s agile e agilia ia 
 Accusative agilem em agils s1 agile e agilia ia 
 Genitive agilis is agilium ium agilis is agilium ium 
 Dative agil  agilibus ibus agil  agilibus ibus 
 Ablative agil  agilibus ibus agil  agilibus ibus 
 

1may end in s

==== Third declension adjectives with three endings ====
Third declension adjectives with three endings have three separate nominative forms for all three genders. Like third and second declension r nouns, the masculine ends in an er. The feminine ends in an ris, and the neuter ends in an re. With that information, we come upon the genitive singular needed for inflection, the feminine form.

 celer, eris, ereswift, rapid, brash 
 Masculine Feminine Neuter 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 Nominative celer er celers s celeris is celers s celere e celeria ia 
 Vocative celer er celers s celeris is celers s celere e celeria ia 
 Accusative celerem em celers s1 celerem em celers s1 celere e celeria ia 
 Genitive celeris is celerium ium celeris is celerium ium celeris is celerium ium 
 Dative celer  celeribus ibus celer  celeribus ibus celer  celeribus ibus 
 Ablative celer  celeribus ibus celer  celeribus ibus celer  celeribus ibus 
 
 alacer, cris, crelively, jovial, animated 
 Masculine Feminine Neuter 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 Nominative alacer er alacrs s alacris is alacrs s alacre e alacria ia 
 Vocative alacer er alacrs s alacris is alacrs s alacre e alacria ia 
 Accusative alacrem em alacrs s1 alacrem em alacrs s1 alacre e alacria ia 
 Genitive alacris is alacrium ium alacris is alacrium ium alacris is alacrium ium 
 Dative alacr  alacribus ibus alacr  alacribus ibus alacr  alacribus ibus 
 Ablative alacr  alacribus ibus alacr  alacribus ibus alacr  alacribus ibus 
 

1may end in s

=== Comparative and superlative forms of adjectives ===
As in English, adjectives have superlative and comparative forms. For regular first and second declension and third declension adjectives with one or two endings, the comparative is formed by adding an ior for the masculine and feminine, and an ius for the neuter to the base. The genitive for both are formed by adding an iris. Therefore, they are declined like the third declension. However, they are not declined as i-stems are. Superlatives formed by adding an issimus, a, um to the base. Now, we find that superlatives are declined like first and second declension adjectives.

Adjective Positive Comparative Superlative 
 benignus, a, um (kind, nice) benignior, ius benignissimus, a, um 
 frgidus, a, um (cold, chilly) frgidior, ius frgidissimus, a, um 
 calidus, a, um (hot, fiery) calidior, ius calidissimus, a, um 
 pugnx, cis (pugnacious) pugncior, ius pugncissimus, a, um 
 fortis, e (strong, robust) fortior, ius fortissimus, a, um 
 aequlis, e (equal, even) aequlior, ius aequlissimus, a, um 

==== Comparatives and superlatives of er adjectives ====
Adjectives (in the third and first and second declensions) that have masculine nominative singular forms ending in er have different forms. If the feminine and neuter forms drop the E, use that for the comparative form. The superlative is formed by adding a rimus onto the masculine form.

Adjective Positive Comparative Superlative 
 pulcher, chra, chrum (pretty, beautiful) pulchrior, ius pulcherrimus, a, um 
 sacer, cra, crum (sacred, holy) sacrior, ius sacerrimus, a, um 
 tener, era, erum (delicate, tender) tenerior, ius tenerrimus, a, um 
 cer, cris, cre (sharp) crior, ius cerrimus, a, um 
 celber, bris, bre (celebrated, famous) celbrior, ius celberrimus, a, um 
 celer, eris, ere (quick, fast) celerior, ius celerrimus, a, um 

==== Comparatives and superlatives of lis adjectives ====
Some third declension adjectives with two endings in lis in the sexed nominative singular have irregular superlative forms. The following are the only adjectives that have this unique form.

Adjective Positive Comparative Superlative 
 facilis, e (easy) facilior, ius facillimus, a, um 
 difficilis, e (hard, difficult) difficilior, ius difficillimus, a, um 
 similis, e (similar, like) similior, ius simillimus, a, um 
 dissimilis, e (unlike, dissimilar) dissimilior, ius dissimillimus, a, um 
 gracilis, e (slender, slim) gracilior, ius gracillimus, a, um 
 humilis, e (low, humble) humilior, ius humillimus, a, um 

==== Irregular comparatives and superlatives ====
As in most languages, Latin has adjectives that have irregular comparatives and superlatives.

Adjective Positive Comparative Superlative 
 bonus, a, um (good) melior, ius optimus, a, um 
 malus, a, um (bad, evil) peior, ius pessimus, a, um 
 magnus, a, um (great, large) maior, ius maximus, a, um 
 parvus, a, um (small, slight) minor, us minimus, a, um 
 multus, a, um (much, many) pls1 plurimus, a, um 
 propinquus, a, um (near, close) propior, ius proximus, a, um 
 mtrus, a, um (ripe, mature) mtrior, ius mtrrimus, a, um2 
 nquam3 (worthless) nquior, ius nquissimus, a, um 
 posterus, a, um (next, future) posterior, ius postremus, a, um 
 superus, a, um (above, upper) superior, ius supremus, a, um 
 exterus, a, um (outer, outward) exterior, ius extremus, a, um 
 novus, a, um (new, strange) novior, ium novissimus, a, um 
 senex, senis (old, aged) senior, ius  
 iuvenis, is (young, youthful) iuvenior ius / inior, ius  

* 1: noun used with genitive to express more of something
* 2: often replaced by the regular form 'maturissimus, a, um'
* 3: indeclinable

=== Declension of dem ===
The adjective dem, eadem, idem means 'same.' It is a variant of the third person pronouns that were declined earlier. Generally, they are formed by adding dem to a declined third person pronouns. However, some forms have been changed to ease pronunciation.

 dem, eadem, idemthe same, same as 
 Masculine Feminine Neuter 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 Nominative dem edem, idem eadem eaedem idem eadem 
 Vocative dem edem, idem eadem eaedem idem eadem 
 Accusative eundem esdem eandem esdem idem eadem 
 Genitive eiusdem erundem eiusdem erundem eiusdem erundem 
 Dative edem esdem, isdem edem esdem, isdem edem esdem, isdem 
 Ablative edem esdem, isdem edem esdem, isdem edem esdem, isdem 
 

=== Declension of numerals ===
See also: Roman numerals for symbology.

There are several different kinds of numeral words in Latin: the two most common are cardinal numerals, and ordinal numerals. There are also several more rare numerals such as distributive numerals and adverbial numerals

==== Cardinal numerals ====
All numerals, except num (one), duo (two), tria (three), centum (one hundred), and mlia (thousand, sing. mlle) are indeclinable adjectives. nus, na, num is declined like a first and second declension adjective with an us in the genitive, and  in the dative. Duo is declined irregularly, and tria is declined like a third declension adjective.

 duo, duae, duotwo 
 Masculine Feminine Neuter 
 Plural 
 Nominative duo duae duo 
 Vocative duo duae duo 
 Accusative dus / duo dus duo 
 Genitive durum / duum durum durum 
 Dative dubus dubus dubus 
 Ablative dubus dubus dubus 
 

It should be noted that amb, "both", is declined as duo is, though its o is long.

 trs, tria 
 Masculine & Feminine Neuter 
 Plural 
 Nominative trs tria 
 Vocative trs tria 
 Accusative trs, trs tria 
 Genitive trium trium 
 Dative tribus tribus 
 Ablative tribus tribus 
 

The word mlle, is singular, an adjective and indeclinable. However, its plural, mlia, is a plural 3rd declension i-stem neuter noun.

 mlia, mlium(a) thousand n. 
 Plural 
 Nominative mlia 
 Vocative mlia 
 Accusative mlia 
 Genitive mlium 
 Dative mlibus 
 Ablative mlibus 
 

* Note that to write the phrase "four thousand horses" in Latin, the genitive is used: "quattuor milia equrum", literally, "four thousands of horses".

As stated before, the rest of the numbers are indeclinable adjectives. They are also indeclinable as substantives.

 1 I nus, a, um 11 XI ndecim 21 XXI nus et vigint 101 CI centum et nus 
 2 II duo, ae, o 12 XII duodecim 22 XXII du et vigint 200 CC ducent, ae, a 
 3 III trs, ia 13 XIII trdecim 30 XXX trgint 300 CCC trecent 
 4 IV quattuor 14 XIV quattuordecim 40 XL quadrgint 400 CD quadringent 
 5 V qunque 15 XV qundecim 50 L qunqugint 500 D qungent 
 6 VI sex 16 XVI sdecim 60 LX sexgint 600 DC sescent 
 7 VII septem 17 XVII septendecim 70 LXX septugint 700 DCC septingent 
 8 VIII oct 18 XVIII duodvigint 80 LXXX octgint 800 DCCC octingent 
 9 IX novem 19 XIX ndvigint 90 XC nngint 900 CM nngent 
 10 X decem 20 XX vigint 100 C centum 1000 M mlle 

==== Ordinal numerals ====
Ordinal numerals all decline like normal 1st and 2nd declension adjectives. When declining the two-word ordinals (thirteenth through twenty-second, with the exception of twentieth), both words decline to match in gender, number and case.

* Primus = first
* Secundus = second
* Tertius = third
* Vicensimus = twentieth

Note: "secundus" only means "second" in the sense of "following". The adjective alter, ra, rum meaning "the other (of two)" was more frequently used in many instances that English would use "second".

Ordinal numbers, not cardinal numbers, are commonly used to represent dates, because they are in the format of "in the tenth year of Caesar", etc. which also carried over into the Anno Domini system and Christian dating, i.e. "anno post Christum natum centesimo"(also "centensimo") = AD 100.

==== Distributive numerals ====
A rare numeral construction denoting an equal number distributed among several objects, e.g. "How many each?" "Two by two." They decline like normal 1st and 2nd declension adjectives, and are logically always plural. Bis, Bina = "twice two". A classical example would be "Uxores habent deni duo deniqui inter se communes" = "groups of ten or twelve men had wives in common" Gallic Wars, Julius Caesar

==== Adverbial numerals ====
Adverbial numerals are (as the name states) indeclinable adverbs, but because all of the other numeral constructions are adjectives, they are listed here with them. Adverbial numerals give how many times a thing happened. Semel = once, Bis = twice, Ter = thrice (three times), = four times, etc.

== Adverbs and their comparisons and superlatives ==
Adverbs are not declined. However, adverbs must be formed if one wants to make an adjective into an adverb.

=== First and second declension adjectives' adverbs ===
First and second declension adjectives' adverbs are formed by adding an  onto their bases.

Adjective Adverb 
 clrus, a, um (clear, famous) clr (clearly, famously) 
 validus, a, um (strong, robust) valid (strongly, robustly) 
 nfrmus, a, um (weak) nfrm (weakly) 
 solidus, a, um (complete, firm) solid (completely, firmly) 
 integer, gra, grum (whole, fresh) integr (wholly, freshly) 
 lber, era, erum (free) lber (freely) 

=== Third declension adjectives' adverbs ===
Typically, third declension adjectives' adverbs are formed by adding an iter onto their bases. However, most third declension adjectives with one ending simply add an er to their bases.

Adjective Adverb 
 prdns, entis (prudent) prdenter (prudently) 
 audx, cis (bold) audciter (boldly) 
 virilis, e (courageous, spirited) viriliter (courageously, spiritedly) 
 salbris, e (wholesome) salbriter (wholesomely) 
 

=== Adverbs' comparative and superlative forms ===
Adverbs' comparative forms are their neuter adjectives' comparative forms. Adverbs' superlative forms are made in the same way in which first and second declension adjectives' adverbs are made.

First and second declension adjectives' adverbs are formed by adding an  onto their bases.

Positive Comparative Superlative 
 clr (clearly, famously) clrius clrissim 
 solid (completely, firmly) solidius  
 lber (freely) lberius  
 prudenter (prudently) prudentius prudentissim 
 salbriter (wholesomely) salbrius salbrissim 

=== Irregular adverbs and their comparative and superlative forms ===
As so with adjectives, there are irregular adverbs with peculiar comparative and superlative forms.

Positive Comparative Superlative 
 bene (well) melius optim 
 male (ill, badly) peius pessim 
 mgnoper (greatly) magis maxim 
 multum (much, a lot) pls plrimum 
 parvum (little) minus minim 
 nquiter (worthlessly) nquius nquissim 
 saepe (often) saepius saepissim 
 mtr (seasonably, betimes) mtrius mturrim 
 prope (near) propius proxim 
 nper (recently)  nperrim 
 potis (possible) potius (rather) potissim (especially) 
  prius (before, previously) prmum /primo (first) 
 secus (otherwise) stius / sequius (less)  

== Peculiarities within declension ==

=== Irregularity in number ===
Some nouns are only used in the singular, such as:
* Materials such as aurum (gold) and aes (copper)
* Abstract nouns such as celerits (speed) and scientia (knowledge)
* Proper names such as Iulius (Julius) and Clra (Clara)
Some nouns are only used in the plural (plurale tantum) such as:
* Many festivals, such as Saturnalia
* Castra (camp) and arma (arms)
* A few geographical names are plural such as Thbae (Thebes).

=== Indeclinable nouns ===
Indeclinable nouns are neuter nouns which occur only in the nominative and the accusative singular. There are only six such nouns:
* fs  fate, divine law
* nstar  likeness
* mne  in the morning (arguably this occurs only in the ablative singular; also arguably it is an adverb rather than a noun) It is notable because it occurs in modern medical prescriptions.
* nefs  sin, abomination
* nihil / nil  nothing, none
* secus  sex, coitus

=== Heterogeneous nouns ===
Heterogeneous nouns are nouns which vary in respect to gender.

* A few nouns in the second declension occur in both the neuter and masculine. However, their meanings remain the same.
* Some nouns are one gender in the singular, but become another gender in the plural. They may also change in meaning.

:
 Singular Plural 
 balneum n. bath balneae f. or balnea n. bath-house 
 epulum n. feast, banquet epulae f. feasts, banquets 
 frnum n. bridle, curb frn m. bridle, curb 
 iocus m. joke, jest ioca n. or ioci m. jokes, jests 
 locus m. place, location loca n. places, locations; loc region 
 rstrum n. hoe, rake rstr m. hoes, rakes 

=== Plurals with alternative meanings ===
Nouns whose plural meaning is different from the singular meaning are called plrlia tantum.
:
 Singular Plural 
 aeds, is f. building, temple aeds, ium rooms, house 
 auxilium,  n. help, aid auxilia, rum auxiliary troops 
 carcer, eris m. prison, cell carcers, um starting-place of a chariot race 
 castrum,  n. fort, castle, fortress castra, rum milit. camp, encampment 
 cpia, ae f. plenty, much, abundance cpiae, rum troops 
 fnis, is m. end, boundary fns, ium territory 
 fortna, ae f. luck, chance fortnae rum wealth 
 grtia, ae f. charm, favor grtiae, rum thanks 
 impedmentum,  m. impediment, hindrance impedmenta, rum baggage, baggage train 
 littera, ae f. letter (as in A, B, C, etc.) litterae, rum epistle, scholarship, literature 
 ms, mris m. habit, inclination mrs, um m. morals, character 
 opera, ae f. trouble, pains operae, rum workmen 
 opis f. (gen.; nom. and dat. do not occur) the goddess Ops (pers.) help ops, ium resources, wealth 
 pars, partis f. part, piece parts, ium office, function 
 

== See also ==
* Latin conjugation
* Latin mnemonics
* Plural form of words ending in us
* William Whitaker's Words
* Greek declension

== Notes ==

== References ==
* Latin declensor 
* New Latin Grammar, an eBook, originally written by Charles Edwin Bennett, at the Project Gutenberg
* Latin grammar  interactive
* A Student's Latin Grammar, by Cambridge Latin Course's Robin m. Griffin, Third Edition
*
*

 



[[List of Latin words with English derivatives]]

This is a list of Latin words with derivatives in English (and other modern languages).

Ancient orthography did not distinguish between i and j or between u and v. Many modern works distinguish u from v but not i from j. In this article, both distinctions are shown as they are helpful when tracing the origin of English words. See also Latin spelling and pronunciation.

==Nouns and adjectives==
The citation form for nouns (the form normally shown in Latin dictionaries) is the Latin nominative singular, but that typically does not exhibit the root form from which English nouns are generally derived.

 Latin nouns and adjectives 
 Citation form Declining stem Meaning English derivatives 
 accipiter accipitr- hawk Accipiter, accipitrine 
 acer acer- maple aceric 
 acer acr- sharp acrid, acrimonious, acrimony, acritude, acrity, eager 
 acerbus acerb- bitter acerbic, acerbity, exacerbate 
 acervus acerv- heap acerval, acervate, acervose, Acervulinacea, acervuline, acervulus, coacervate, coacervation 
 actum act- vinegar acetabulum, acetate, acetic, acetone 
 acinus acin- berry acinaceous, acinarious, aciniform, acinose, acinous, acinus, interacinous 
 acus acu- needle acuity, aculeolate, aculeus, acumen, acuminate, acupuncture, acusector, acute, acutifoliate, acutilingual, peracute 
 acicula acicul- 
 adeps adip- fat adipose 
 aedes aed- building aedicule, aedile, edification, edifice 
 aedicula aedicul- 
 aequus aequ-, -iqu- even, level adequacy, adequate, equable, equal, equality, equanimity, equant, equation, equative, equator, equatorial, equitable, equity, equivalence, equivalent, inadequacy, inadequate, inequality, iniquity 
 aes aer- ore aeruginous, aerugite, aerugo, eruginous, estimate 
 aevum aev- age, eon age, coeval, eviternal, longevity, longevous, mediaeval, nonage, primaeval 
 ager agr-, -egr- field agrarian, agrestal, agriculture, peragration, peregrine, peregrinus, pilgrim, pilgrimage 
 agrellus agrell- 
 ala al- wing aileron, aisle, alar, alate, aliferous, aliform, aligerous 
 alacer alacr- quick alacrity, allegretto, allegro 
 albus alb- dull white alb, albarium, albedo, albinism, albino, albite, album, albumen, albumin 
 alius ali- other alias, alibi, alien, inalienable 
 alter alter- 
 alveus alve- alveolar, alveolus, interalveolar, postalveolar 
 alveolus alveol- 
 amplus ampl- ample amplification, amplitude 
 anguis angu- snake Anguidae, anguiform, anguilliform, anguine, anguineous 
 angulus angul- corner angular, angulose, quadrangle, triangle 
 anima anim- breath, soul, life animal, animate, animation, animator, inanimate 
 animus anim- mind, anger, spirit animosity, unanimous 
 annus ann-, -enn- year anniversary, annual, annuity, biannual, biennial, millennium, perennial 
 nser nser- goose anserine 
 aqua aqu- water akvavit, aqua vitae, aquaculture, aquamarine, aquarelle, aquarium, Aquarius, aquatic, aquatile, aqueduct, aqueous, aquifer, aquiferous, aquiform 
 aquila aquil- eagle Aquila, aquiline 
 arbor arbor- tree arboreal, arboretum 
 argentum argent- silver argent, Argentina 
 arma arm- arms (weapons) armada, armament, armature, armistice, armor, armorial, armory, army, disarm, disarmament 
 ars art--ert- art, skill artifact, artifice, artificial, artisan, inert, inertia, inertial 
 artus art- joint article, articular, articulate, articulation, articulator, articulatory, coarticulation 
 articulus articul- 
 asinus asin- donkey asinine, Asinus 
 asper asper- rough exasperate, exasperation 
 audx audc- brave, bold audacious, audacity 
 auris aur- ear aural, auricle, auricular, auriform, auscultation, biauricular, binaural 
 auricula auricul- 
 aurum aur- gold aurate, aureate, aureole, auriferous 
 avis avi- bird aucupation, auspice, Aves, avian, aviary, aviation, aviator, aviatrix, avicide, Avicula, aviculture 
 avicula avicul- 
 avunculus avuncul- uncle, mother's brother avuncular, uncle 
 axis axi- axle axial, biaxial 
 baca bac- berry baccate, bacciferous, bacciform, baccivorous 
 bacula bacul- 
 baculum bacul- staff bacillary, bacilliform, bacillus, baculiform 
 bacillum bacill- 
 barba barb- beard 
 barbula barbul- 
 beatus beat- blessed beatification, Beatitudes 
 bellum bell- war antebellum, bellic, bellicose, bellicosity, belligerence, belligerent, debellatio, imbellic, rebel, rebellion, revel, revelment, revelry 
 bellus bell- pretty embellish, embellishment 
 bene ben- good benediction, benedictional, benedictory, benefaction, benefactive, benefactor, benefactrix, benefic, benefice, beneficence, beneficent, benefit, benign, benignity 
 bestia besti- animal beast, bestial, bestiary 
 bini bin- two each binary, binate, combination, combinatorial, combine, recombinant 
 bonus melior optimus bon- melior- optim- good better best bonbon, bonify, bonitary, bonus, debonair ameliorate, amelioration, meliority optimal, optimate, optimum, suboptimal 
 bs bov- cow, ox bovine, bovinic acid 
 botulus botul- sausage botulin, boudin 
 botellus botell- 
 bracchium brac- arm, support embrace, braces, bracelet 
 brevis brev- brief, short abbreviate, abbreviation, breve, brevet, breviary, brevity, brief, debrief 
 bucca bucc- cheek, mouth, cavity buccal, buccinator muscle, buckle, debouch, debuccalization 
 buccula buccul- 
 bulbus bulb- bulbous bulb, bulbar, bulbose, bulbous, bulbule 
 bulbulus bulbul- 
 bulla bull- bubble, flask ebullient, ebullism 
 bursa burs- pouch, purse bourse, bursa, bursar, bursary, disbursal, disburse, disbursement 
 butyrum butyr- butter butyric 
 caballus caball- horse caballero, cavalcade, cavalier, cavalry, chevalier, chivalry 
 calx calc--culc- heel inculcate 
 calx calc- limestone, pebble calciform, calcite, calcium, calculus, calculation 
 camera camer- vault bicameral, camera 
 campus camp- field camp, campaign, camping, campus, champion 
 candela candel- candle candela, candelabra, candelabrum, chandelier, chandler, chandlery 
 canis can- dog canary, canicule, canid, canine, Canis Major 
 capanna capann- cabana, cabin 
 caper capr- goat capric, Capricorn, caprine 
 capillus capill- hair capillaries, capilliform 
 capsa caps- box, case capsicum, capsular, capsule, case, chassis, encapsulation, intracapsular 
 capsella capsell- 
 capsula capsul- 
 caput capit-, -cipit- head cad, caddie, cadet, cape, capital, capitulate, capo, capodecina, caporegime, captain, cattle, caudillo, chapter, chaptrel, chattel, chef, chief, chieftain, decapitation, per capita, precipice, precipitation, precipitous, recapitulate, sous-chef, triceps, tricipital 
 capitellum capitell- 
 capitulum capitul- 
 carbo carbon- coal carbon, Carboniferous 
 carcer carcer- jail incarceration 
 cardo cardin- hinge cardinal 
 caro carn- flesh carnage, carnal, carnary, carnation, carneous, carnival, carnivore, carnose, carnosity, charcuterie, charnel, discarnate, incarnate, incarnation, reincarnate, reincarnation 
 casa cas- house casino 
 caseus case- cheese caseic, casein 
 castus cast-, -cest- pure caste, castigate, chaste, chasten, chastity, incest 
 catena caten- chain catenary, catenative, concatenation 
 cauda caud-, cod- tail caudal, coda 
 caulis caul-, col- stalk, stem caulescent, caulicle, cauliflorous, cauliflory, cauliform, cauline 
 cauliculus caulicul- 
 causa caus-, -cus- accusative, causality, causative 
 cavus cav- hollow caval, cave, cavity, concave, excavation, excavator 
 celeber celebr- famous celebration, celebrity 
 celer celer- quick accelerant, acceleration, accelerator, celerity 
 centeni centen- hundred each centenary 
 centesimus centesim- hundredth centesimal, centesimation 
 centum cent- hundred cent, centennial, centurial, centurion, century 
 cera cer- wax ceraceous, cereous, ceresin 
 certus cert- certain certificate, certiorari, certitude, decertification 
 cervx cervc- neck cervical, cervix 
 cervus cerv- deer cervid, Cervidae, cervine 
 ceterus ceter- other et cetera 
 cilium cili- eyelash cilia, supercilious 
 cinis ciner- ashes cinereous, cinerin, incinerator 
 cippus cipp- cep 
 circus circ- circle circular, circus 
 cirrus cirr- curl, tentacle cirrus 
 citer citerior citimus citr- citerior- citim- on this side citerior 
 cvis cv- citizen civil, civilian, civility 
 clarus clar- clear clarify, clarity, declaration, declarative, declaratory, declare 
 clavis clav- key claves, clavicle, clavier, enclave, exclave 
 clvicula clvicul- 
 clemens clement- mild clemency, clement, inclemency, inclement 
 codex codic- code, codex, codical, codicil 
 codicillus codicill- 
 collis coll- hill colliculus 
 collum coll- neck collar 
 color color- color bicolor, Colorado, coloration, coloratura, concolorous, decolor, discolor, discoloration, multicolor, tricolor, unicolor, versicolor 
 ]] col- strainer colander, percolate 
 cor cord- heart accord, concordance, concordat, cordate, cordial, cordiform, core, courage, discord, discordant, obcordate, record 
 corbis corb- basket corb, corf 
 corium cori- coriaceous, excoriate 
 corn corn- horn bicorn, Capricorn, cornea, corniform, cornucopia, unicorn 
 corona coron- crown corona, coronation, coroniform 
 corpus corpor- body corporal, corporation, corporeal, corps, corpse, corpulent, corpuscle, corpuscular, incorporation, incorporeal 
 corpusculum corpuscul- 
 cortex cortic- bark, rind corticosteroid 
 coruscus corusc- coruscant, coruscate, coruscation 
 corvus corv- raven corbel, corvine 
 costa cost- rib accost, coast, coastal, costal 
 coxa cox- hip coxal 
 crapula crapul- crapulence, crapulent 
 cras cras- tomorrow procrastinate, procrastination, procrastinator 
 crassus crass- thick crass, crassitude 
 cratis crat- crate, grate, graticulation, graticule, grill, grillade, grillage, grille 
 craticula craticul- 
 creta cret- chalk cretaceous 
 cribrum cribr- sieve cribble, cribellum, cribrate, cribriform 
 crimen crimin- criminal, criminality, recrimination 
 crispus crisp- curled crispate 
 crista crist- crest cristate 
 crus crur- leg, shank crural 
 crusta crust- crouton, crust, crustacean 
 crux cruc- cross crucial, cruciate, crucifer, cruciferous, crucifix, crucifixion, cruciform, crucify, crusade, excruciating 
 culex culic- gnat Culex, culiciform, culicifuge, culicine, Culicivora 
 culina culin- kitchen culinarian, culinary 
 culpa culp- blame, fault culpable, culprit, exculpate, exculpatory 
 cuneus cune- wedge cuneate, cuneiform, cuneus, precuneus 
 cura cur- care accuracy, accurate, assecure, assurance, assure, curable, curate, curative, curator, cure, curettage, curette, curious, ensure, inaccurate, incurable, insecure, insecurity, procurator, reassurance, reassure, secure, security, sinecural, sinecure, sure, surety 
 curtus curt- shortened curt, curtail, decurt 
 curvus curv- bent curvature, curviform 
 cuspis cuspid- tip bicuspid 
 cutis cut- hide, skin cutaneous, cuticle, cuticolor, cuticular, subcutaneous 
 cuticula cuticul- 
 damnum damn--demn- harm condemn, condemnation, damage, damnation, indemnification, indemnity 
 decem decem- ten December, decemfid, decempedal, decemvirate, decemviri, decennial, decennium, decurion, decurionate, decury 
 decimus decim- tenth decimal, decimate, decimation, dime 
 decus decor- decor, decorament, decorate, decoration, decorative, decorator, decorous, decorum, redecorate 
 deni den- ten each denarius, denary, dinero 
 dens dent- tooth bident, bidental, dental, dentate, denticity, denticle, denticulate, dentiferous, dentiform, dentifrice, dentil, dentition, denture, indent, indentation, indenture, interdental, multidentate, trident 
 denticulus denticul- 
 densus dens- thick condensable, condensate, condensation, condense, density, nondense 
 deter dterior dterrimus deter- deterior- deterrim-  worse worst  deterior, deteriorate, deterioration 
 deus de- god deicidal, deicide, deific, deification, deiform, deity 
 dexter dexterior dextimus dextr- dexterior- dextim- right ambidextrous, dexterity, dexterous, dextral, dextrality, dextrin, dextrorse, dextrose  
 dis di- day adjourn, adjournment, aggiornamento, circadian, dial, diary, diurnal, diurnality, infradian, journal, journey, meridian, meridional, per diem, quotidian, sojourn, ultradian 
 digitus digit- finger, toe bidigitate, digit, digital, digitate, digitiform, digitigrade, multidigitate 
 dignus dign- worthy condign, deign, dignify, dignitary, dignity, disdain, indignant, indignation, indignity 
 discipulus discipul- student disciple, disciplinarian, disciplinary, discipline, interdisciplinarity, interdisciplinary, multidisciplinary, transdisciplinarity 
 dominus domin- lord condominium, dame, damsel, demesne, domain, dominance, dominant, dominate, domination, dominative, dominator, dominatrix, domine, domineer, dominion, dominium, madam, madame, mademoiselle, predominant, predominate, subdominant 
 domus dom- house domal, dome, domestic, domesticate, domicile, domiciliary 
 dorsum dors- back dorsal, endorse, endorsement, indorse 
 dos dot- dowry dotal, dotation 
 dulcis dulc- sweet dolce, douce, doux, dulcet, dulcian, dulcimer 
 duo du- two doubt, dual, duality, dubious, duet, duo, duplex, duumvirate, duumviri, nonduality 
 duodeni duoden- twelve each duodenal, duodenary, duodenum 
 durus dur- hard dour, durability, durable, duration, durative, duress, endurable, endurance, endurant, endure, obdurate, perdurable, perdurance, perdure 
 ebrius ebri- inebriant, inebriate, inebriation, inebriety, sober, sobriety 
 ensis ens- sword ensiferous, ensiform 
 equus equ- horse equestrian, equine 
 eruca eruc- caterpillar eruciform 
 exterus exterior extremus exter- exterior- extrem-  outer outmost extern, external, externality exterior extreme, extremity, extremum 
 faba fab- bean faba bean, fabaceous 
 faber fabr- fabric, fabrication, fabricator 
 faenum faen- hay fennel, sainfoin 
 falx falc- sickle defalcation, falcate, falciform 
 fames fam- hunger famine, famish 
 fanum fan- temple profane, profanity 
 fascis fasc- bundle fasces, fascicle, fascicular, fasciculation, fascine 
 fasciculus fascicul- 
 fatuus fatu- foolish, useless fatuous, infatuation 
 fauces fauc-, -foc- throat faucal, suffocate, suffocation 
 febris febr- fever antefebrile, febrifacient, febriferous, febrifuge, febrile 
 fls fl- cat felid, Felinae, feline 
 flix flic- happy felicitations, felicitous, felicity 
 fmina fmin- woman effeminacy, effeminate, feminine, femininity 
 femur femor- thigh femoral, femur 
 fenestra fenestr- window defenestration 
 ferox feroc- fierce ferocious, ferocity 
 ferrum ferr- iron ferrate, ferrite, ferreous, ferrous, ferruginous, ferrugo 
 ferus fer- wild feral, ferine, ferocious, ferocity, fierce 
 feudum feud- fee feudal 
 fibra fibr- defibrillate, defibrillator, fiber, fibre, fibriform, fibril, fibrillar, fibrillate, fibrin, fibrous 
 fibrilla fibrill- 
 ficus fic- fig Ficus 
 fides fid- faith, trust affiance, affiant, affidavit, confide, confidence, confident, confidential, confidentiality, defiance, defiant, defy, diffide, diffidence, diffident, feal, fealty, fianc, fiance, fidelity, fiducial, fiduciary, infidel, infidelity, perfidy, prefident 
 fliaflius fli-fli- daughterson affiliate, affiliation, affiliative, disaffiliate, filial 
 filum fil- thread bifilar, defilade, defile, enfilade, filament, filiferous, filiform, profile 
 fnis fn- end, limit affinal, affine, affinity, confine, confinement, confines, confinity, define, definiendum, definiens, definite, definition, definitive, equifinality, final, finality, finance, fine, finesse, finis, finish, finite, finito, finitude, indefinite, infinite, infinitesimal, infinitive, infinitude, infinity, prefinite, redefine, redefinition, refine, refinement, refinery, superfine, transfinite 
 firmus firm- firm affirm, affirmation, affirmative, confirm, confirmation, disaffirm, farm, fermata, firmament, infirm, infirmary, infirmity, obfirm, reaffirm, reaffirmation 
 fiscus fisc- basket confiscate, confiscation, confiscatory, fiscal 
 fistula fistul- pipe, tube fistula, fistulate 
 flaccus flacc- flabby flaccid, flaccidity 
 flamma flamm- flame flamage, flamb, flambeau, flamboyant, inflame, inflammable, inflammation, inflammatory, oriflamme 
 flavus flav- yellow flavin, flavivirus, flavonoid 
 floccus flocc- tuft deflocculant, deflocculation, floc, floccose, flocculant, floccular, flocculation, floccule, flocculent, flock 
 flocculus floccul- 
 fls flr- flower deflorate, flora, floral, floret, floriculture, florid, floriferous, floriform, florist, floruit, flourish, inflorescence 
 focus foc- hearth bifocal, focal, focus, fusillade, trifocal 
 foedus foeder- confederation, federal 
 folium foli- leaf bifoliate, defoliant, foil, folate, foliage, foliation, foliature, folic, foliferous, folio, foliolate, foliole, foliose, foliosity, folivore, multifoliate, portfolio, quatrefoil, trefoil, trifoliate, unifoliate 
 foliolum foliol- 
 follis foll- bellows follicle, follicular 
 fons font- fountain, spring font, fontal, fontanelle 
 foris for- outdoors foreclose, foreign, forest, forum 
 frma frm- form, shape biform, biformity, conform, conformable, conformance, conformant, conformity, counterreformation, deform, deformable, deformation, deformity, disinformation, formable, formal, formality, formant, format, formation, formative, formula, formulary, formulation, inform, informal, informality, informant, information, informative, irreformable, malformation, nonconformance, perform, performance, preform, preformat, reform, reformable, reformat, reformation, reformatory, transform, transformable, transformation, transformational, transformative, triform, triformity, uniform, uniformity 
 formella formell- 
 formula formul- 
 formica formic- ant formic 
 formus form- warm 
 fornix fornic- vault fornication, forniciform 
 fors fort- luck fortuitous, fortuity, fortunate, fortune 
 fortis fort- strong comfort, effort, force, forcible, forte, fortification, fortify, fortis, fortissimo, fortitude 
 fovea fove- shallow round depression fovea, foveal, foveole 
 frter frtr- brother fraternal, fraternity, fratricide, friar, friary 
 fraus fraud- fraud defraud, fraudulent 
 frequens frequent- often frequency, frequentative 
 frns front- forehead affront, confront, confrontation, confrontational, front, frontage, frontal, frontier, frontispiece, quadrifrons 
 frustum frust- piece frustule, frustulent, frustum 
 frx frg- fruit frugal, frugality 
 fulvus fulv- fulvic acid, fulvid, fulvous 
 fmus fm- smoke fumacious, fumade, fumage, fumarine, fumarole, fumatorium, fume, fumigation, perfume 
 fundus fund- bottom found, foundation, fund, fundament, fundamental, profound, profundity 
 fungus fung- mushroom fungal, fungicide, fungiform 
 funis fun- rope funicular 
 fur fur- thief furuncle 
 furca furc- fork bifurcation, furcate, furcula 
 furtum furt- theft furtive 
 fuscus fusc- dark fuscation, fuscine, fuscous, obfuscation 
 fsus fus- spindle fusee, fuselage, fusilli, fuze 
 gelu gel- congeal, congelation, gel, gelati, gelatin, gelatinous, gelation, gele, gelid, gelignite, jelly 
 gens gent- gens, gentile, gentility, gentle 
 genu genu- knee geniculate, geniculation, geniculum, genuflection 
 geniculum genicul- 
 genus gener- birth, offspring, creation congener, congeneric, degenerate, degenerative, engender, gender, general, generality, generate, generation, generational, generative, generator, generatrix, generic, generosity, generous, genre, genuine, genus, intergenerational, intergeneric, regenerate, regenerative, subgenre, subgenus, transgender 
 germen germin- germ, germinal, germinate, germination, regerminate 
 glacies glaci- ice glacial, glaciation, glacier, glacious, glacis 
 gladius gladi- sword gladiator, gladiolus 
 gluten glutin- glue agglutination, glutelin, gluten, glutinosity, glutinous 
 gracilis gracil- gracile, gracility 
 gradus grad- step aggradation, aggrade, antegrade, degradable, degradation, degrade, degree, gradation, grade, gradient, gradine, gradual, graduality, graduand, graduate, graduation, progradation, prograde, retrogradation, retrograde 
 grandis grand- aggrandisement, grandee, grandeur, grandiloquent, grandiose, grandiosity 
 granum gran- grain degranulation, granary, granite, granular, granularity, granule 
 granulum granul- 
 gratus - congratulations, congratulatory, disgrace, grace, graciosity, gracious, gratify, gratification, gratis, gratitude, gratuitous, gratuity, gratulant, gratulate, gratulation, gratulatory 
 gravis grav- heavy aggravate, aggravation, degravation, gravamen, grave, gravid, gravida, gravidity, gravitas, gravitate, gravitation, gravitational, gravity, grief, grieve, grievance, grievant, grievous 
 grex greg- flock, herd aggregate, aggregation, aggregator, congregate, congregation, congregational, desegregate, desegregation, disaggregate, egregious, gregarious, intercongregational, segregate, segregation 
 grossus gross- thick engross, engrossment, gross 
 gula gul- gullet, gully 
 gurges gurgit- demigorge, disgorge, disgorgement, engorge, engorgement, gorge, gorget, regurgitate, regurgitation 
 gustus gust- taste disgust, gustatory, gusto 
 gutta gutt- drop gout, guttifer, guttiform 
 guttur guttur- throat guttural 
 hamus ham- hook hamate, hamiform 
 harena haren- sand arena, arenaceous, arenite, arenose 
 hasta hast- spear hasta, hastate, hastile 
 herba herb- grass herbaceous, herbal, herbarium, herbicide, herbivore, herbivorous 
 heres hered- heredity, inherit, inheritance 
 hibernus hibern- hibernacle, hibernal 
 hiems hiem- winter hiemal 
 hircus hirc- goat hircine 
 hom homin- man (human being) homage, hombre, homicide, hominid, homuncular, homunculus, human, humane, humanity, inhuman, inhumane, inhumanity 
 homunculus homuncul- 
 honor honor- honor honorable, honorarium, honorary, honorific 
 hortus hort- garden cohort, court, courteous, courtesan, courtesy, courtier, curtain, horticulture 
 hostis host- enemy hostile, hostility 
 humus hum- ground exhumation, exhume, humate, humation, humic, humiliate, humility, inhumation, inhume 
 ignis ign- fire igneous, ignite, ignition 
 imbecillus imbecill- weak imbecile, imbecility 
 inanis inan- inane, inanity 
 inferus inferior infimus infer- inferior- infim-  lower lowest  inferior, inferiority 
 inguen inguin- groin inguinal 
 nsula nsul- island insular, insulate, insulation, peninsula, peninsular 
 interus interior intimus inter- interior- intim-   entrail, intern, internal, internality interior intima, intimacy, intimate, intimation 
 iocusjocus joc- jest jocular, jocularity, joke 
 joculus jocul- 
 idexjudex idic- judge adjudicate, judge, judicial, judiciary 
 iugumjugum iug- yoke conjugacy, conjugal, conjugate, conjugation, jugal, jugate, jugular 
 is ir- law, right abjuration, abjure, conjure, de jure, jurat, juration, juratory, jurisdiction, jury, justice 
 iuvenisjuvenis juven- young junior, juniorate, juniority, juvenile, juvenilia, juvenility 
 jejunus jejun- jejunal, jejune, jejunity, jejunum 
 labia labi- lip labial, labium 
 labor labor- toil collaboration, collaborative, collaborator, elaboration, laboratory, laborious 
 labrum labr- lip labrose, labrum 
 lac lact- milk lactate, lactic, lactose 
 lacrima lacrim- tear lachrymose 
 lacus lac- lacuna, lacustrine, lagoon, lake 
 lapis lapid- stone dilapidate, lapidary 
 lassus lass- lassitude 
 latex latic- liquid laticifer 
 latus lat- broad, wide latifoliate, latitude 
 latus later- side collateral, lateral 
 laus laud- praise laud, laudable, Lauds 
 laxus lax- loose laxity, relax 
 lenis leni- gentle leniency, lenient, leniment, lenis, lenition, lenitive, lenitude, lenity 
 lens lent- lentil lens, lenticel, lenticular, lentiform 
 lentus lent- lentic, relent 
 leo leon- lion leonine 
 lepus lepor- hare leporid, leporine 
 levis lev- light (weight) levity, relieve 
 lx lg- law alleged, extralegal, illegal, legal, legality, legislation, legislator, privilege 
 liber liber- free illiberal, illiberality, liberal, liberality, liberate, liberation, liberator 
 liber libr- book librarian, library, libretto 
 libra libr- balance, scales deliberate, deliberation, deliberative, equilibrium, libration 
 lignum lign- wood ligneous, ligniform, lignin, lignite, lignose 
 limbus limb- edge limbate, limbic, limbo 
 limes limit- delimit, limes, limit, limitation 
 linea line- line align, collinear, collineation, linea, lineage, linear, linearity, multicollinearity 
 lingua lingu- tongue bilingual, lingua franca, linguiform, linguistics, multilingual 
 lira lir- furrow delirium 
 littera litter- letter alliteration, alliterative, biliteral, illiteracy, illiterate, literacy, literal, literary, literate, literature, obliterate, obliteration, transliteracy, transliteration, triliteral 
 locus loc- place accouchement, couch, dislocation, local, locality, locate, location, locative, translocate, translocation 
 loculus locul- 
 longus long- long elongate, longitude, oblong, prolong 
 lucrum lucr- lucrative, lucre 
 lumen lumin- light illumination, luminary, luminescence, luminous 
 lna ln- Moon cislunar, lunar, lunate, lunatic, lunation, luniform, superlunary, translunar 
 lupus lup- wolf lupine 
 lutum lut- mud lutaceous, lutite 
 lux luc- light Lucifer, luciferous, lucifugal, translucency, translucent 
 luxus lux- luxuriant, luxurious, luxury 
 macula macul- spot immaculate, macula, macular, maculate, maculation, maculature, macule, maculose 
 magister magistr- master magisterial, magistrate 
 magnus mior maximus magn- mior- maxim- big, great greater greatest magnate, magnitude majority, supermajority maxim, maximum 
 malleus malle- hammer malleability, malleable, mallet 
 malus peior pessimus mal- peior- pessim- bad worse worst dismal, malady, malevolence, malice, malignancy, malignant impair, impairment, pejoration, pejorative pessimal 
 manus manu- hand mainour, maintain, manacle, manage, mandamus, mandate, maneuver, manicure, manifest, maniform, maniple, manipulation, manual, manufacture, manumit, manuscript 
 manicula manicul- 
 mare mar- sea marinade, marinate, marine, mariner, maritime, submarine, ultramarine 
 Mars marti- Mars martial, Martian 
 mter mtr- mother immaterial, material, materiality, maternal, maternity, matricide, matriculant, matriculate, matrilocal, matrimonial, matrimony, matrix, matron, matter 
 maturus matur- ripe immature, immaturity, maturant, maturate, maturation, mature, maturescent, maturity, premature 
 medius medi- middle antemeridian, dimidiate, dimidiation, immediacy, immediate, intermediary, intermediate, intermedio, intermezzo, mean, media, medial, median, mediant, mediation, mediator, mediatrix, mediety, medieval, mediocre, mediocrity, medium, meridian, mezzanine, postmeridian 
 mel mell- honey mellifluent 
 memor memor- mindful commemorate, commemoration, commemorative, immemorial, memoir, memorabilia, memorability, memorable, memorandum, memorial, memory, remember, remembrance, rememorate 
 menda mend- blemish emend, emendation 
 mendicus mendic- mendicant, mendicate, mendication, mendicity 
 mens ment- mind comment, commentary, dementia, mental, mentality 
 merus mer- pure mere 
 mta met- goal mete 
 miles milit- soldier militant, military, militate, militia 
 mille mill- thousand mile, mileage, millennial, millennium, millipede, multimillion 
 mirus mir- admirable, admire, admiration, miracle, miraculous, mirative, mirativity 
 miraculum miracul- 
 miser miser- commiserate, commiseration, miser, miserable, misery 
 modus mod- accommodate, accommodation, bimodal, commode, commodity, demodulation, immodest, intermodal, modal, modality, mode, modern, modernity, modest, modesty, modicum, modification, modify, modular, modularity, modulate, modulation, modulator, module, modulo, modulus, multimodal, postmodern, postmodernity, ultramodern 
 modulus modul- 
 moles mol- mass bimolecular, demolition, mole, molecule 
 mollis moll- soft emollient, mollient, mollify, mollitude, mollusc, molluscicide, molluscivore, mollusk 
 mons mont- mountain cismontane, dismount, montage, montane, monticello, monticule, montiform, montigenous, mount, piedmont, submontane, surmount, tramontane, transmontane, ultramontanism 
 monticellus monticell- 
 monticulus monticul- 
 mora mor- delay demur, demure, demurrage, demurral, moratorium 
 morbus morb- sickness morbid, morbidity 
 mors mort- death immortal, immortality, mortal, mortality, mortician, rigor mortis 
 mortuus mort- dead mortgage, mortuary, morgue, postmortem 
 mos mor- custom immoral, immorality, moral, morality, mores 
 mucus muci- mucic, muciferous, muciform, mucilage, mucivore 
 mulier muli- woman muliebrity, mulierose 
 multus plus plurimus mult- plur- plurim- many more most multiplicity, multitude plurality, pluriform 
 mulus mul- mule mular 
 mundus mund- world extramundane, mondial, mondo, mundane, mundanity 
 murus mur- wall antemural, intramural, murage, mural 
 mus mur- mouse murine, muscular, muscularity, musculature 
 musculus muscul- 
 musca musc- fly Musca, muscarine, Muscidae, musciform, mosquito 
 muscus musc- moss 
 nasus nas- nose intranasal, nasal, nasality 
 navis nav- ship antenave, naval, nave, navy 
 nervus nerv- nerval, nervate, nerve, nervose, nervosity, trinervate 
 neuter neutr- neither neutral, neutrality, nonneutrality 
 ndus nid- nest niche, nidicolous, nidification, nidifugous, nidulant, nidulate 
 nidulus nidul- 
 ]] nigr- black denigrate, denigration, nigrescence, nigrine, nigritude 
 nihil nihil- nothing annihilate, annihilation, annihilator, nihilism, nil 
 nodus nod- knot denouement, nodal, node, nodose, nodosity, nodular, nodule, nodulose 
 nodulus nodul- 
 nomen nomin- name binomen, , denomination, denominational, denominative, denominator, ignominious, ignominy, interdenominational, multidenominational, multinominal, nominal, nomination, nominative, nominator, nondenominational, noun, postnominal, praenomen, prenominal, pronominal, pronoun, trinomen, 
 nonageni nonagen- ninety each nonagenarian, nonagenary 
 nonagesimus nonagesim- ninetieth nonagesimal 
 nnus non- ninth nonary, None, noon 
 norma norm- carpenter's square abnormal, abnormality, denormal, enormity, enormous, nonnormative, norm, normal, normality, normative, subnormal 
 novem novem- nine November, novennial 
 novemdecim novemdec- nineteen novemdecillion 
 noveni noven- nine each Novena, novenary 
 novus nov- new innovation, innovative, novel, novella, novelty, novice, novitiate, supernova 
 novellus novell- 
 nox noct- night equinox, nocturnal, nocturnality, trinoctial 
 nbs nub- cloud nuance 
 nudus nud- naked denudation, denude, nude, nudity 
 numerus numer- number denumerable, enumerate, enumeration, enumerative, enumerator, equinumerant, equinumerous, innumerable, innumeracy, innumerate, numerable, numeracy, numeral, numerary, numerate, numeration, numerative, numerator, numerical, numerous 
 nux nuc- nut extranuclear, intranuclear, nucifer, nuciferine, nuciferous, nuciform, Nucifraga, nucivorous, nuclear, nucleus, nucleolar, nucleolus 
 nucula nucul- 
 octvus octav- eighth octaval, octave, octavo 
 oct oct- eight octal, octangular, octavalent, octennial, octuple, octuplet, octuplicate 
 octogeni octogen- eighty each octogenarian, octogenary 
 octni octon- eight each octonary, octonion 
 oculus ocul- eye binocular, inoculation, intraocular, monocle, ocular 
 omen omin- abominable, abomination, omen, ominous 
 omnis omn- all omniform, omnipotence, omnipresence, omniscience, omnivore 
 onus oner- burden, load exonerate, onerous, onus 
 opacus opac- shady opacity, opaque 
 ops op- copious, opulent 
 opus oper- work chef-d'oeuvre, cooperate, cooperation, cooperative, hors d'oeuvre, inoperable, interoperable, inure, inurement, manoeuvre, oeuvre, opera, operable, operand, operant, operate, operation, operational, operative, operator, operose, operosity, opus, opuscule, postoperative, preoperative 
 opusculum opuscul- 
 orbis orb- ring orb, orbicle, orbicular, orbiculate, orbit, orbital, suborbital 
 orbiculus orbicul- 
 ordo ordin- order coordinal, coordinate, coordination, disorder, extraordinary, inordinate, inordination, insubordinate, insubordination, ordain, order, ordinal, ordinance, ordinary, ordinate, ordination, ordinative, ordnance, ornery, preordain, preorder, preordination, quasiorder, reordination, suborder, subordinate, subordination, superorder, superordinate, superordination 
 os or- mouth adorable, adoral, adoration, adore, adosculation, exorable, inexorable, inosculate, inosculation, intraoral, oral, oration, orator, oratorio, oratory, orifice, oscitate, oscitation, osculant, oscular, oscularity, osculate, osculation, osculator, osculatory, osculatrix, oscule, osculum 
 osculum oscul- 
 os oss- bone exossation, ossiferous, ossification, ossifrage, ossify, ossuary 
 otium oti- leisure negotiate, negotiation, otiose 
 ovis ov- sheep ovile, ovine 
 ovum ov- egg oval, ovarian, ovary, oviduct, oviform, oviposition, ovipositor, ovular, ovulation, ovulatory, ovule, ovum 
 ovulum ovul- 
 pagus pag- pagan, paisano, peasant, peasantry 
 pala pal- spade palette 
 palatum palat- roof of the mouth palatable, palatal, palate 
 plus pal- stake impale, impalement, pale, palisade, pole 
 plus pald- marsh paludose 
 paluster palustr- palustral, palustrine 
 panis pan- bread accompaniment, accompany, appanage, companion, company, impanate 
 pannus pann- impanel, pane, panel 
 panus pan- panicle 
 panicula panicul- 
 papaver papaver- poppy papaveraceous, papaverine 
 papilio papilion- butterfly pavilion 
 par par- equal comparative, comparator, disparage, disparity, impar, imparity, nonpareil, pair, par, parile, parity, peer, peerage, subpar 
 paries pariet- wall biparietal, parietal 
 pars part--pert- piece apart, apartment, bipartient, bipartisan, bipartite, bipartition, champerty, compart, compartition, compartment, compartmental, coparcenary, counterpart, counterparty, depart, department, departmental, departure, dispart, ex parte, impart, impartial, multipartite, nonpartisan, parcel, partial, partiality, participate, participle, particle, particular, particularity, particulate, partisan, partita, partite, partition, partitive, party, passel, portion, proportion, proportional, proportionality, repartee, repartition, superparticular, tripartient, tripartite 
 particella particell- 
 particula particul- 
 parvus minor minimus parv- min- minim- small less least parvifoliate, parvity, parvovirus administer, maladminister, minister, minority, minus, minuscule minimal 
 passer passer- sparrow passerine 
 passus pass- compass, encompass, pace, passage, passant, passement, passementerie, passenger 
 pater patr- father Jupiter, paternal, paternity, patrician, patrilineal, patrilocal, patrilocality, patrimonial, patrimony, patron, patronage, perpetrate, repatriation 
 paucus pauc- few paucal, pauciloquent, paucity, poco 
 pauper pauper- impoverish, impoverishment, pauperage, poor, poverty 
 pausa paus-pos- compose, composure, counterpose, counterproposal, imposable, impose, interposal, interpose, opposable, opposal, oppose, posada, pose, poseur, poseuse, proposal, propose, purpose, reposal, repose, repurpose, supposal, suppose, transposable, transposal, transpose 
 pavo pavon- peacock pavone, pavonine 
 pax pac- peace appease, appeasement, copayment, pacific, pacify, pay, payment, repay, repayment 
 pectus pector- chest pectoral 
 pecu pecu- impecunious, peculiar, pecuniary 
 penna penn- feather pen, pennage, pennate, penniform, pennigerous, pennon 
 perca perc- perch Perca, Percidae, perciform, percoid, Percoidea 
 persona person- person impersonate, impersonation, impersonator, person, personable, personage, personal, personality, personification, subpersonality, transpersonal 
 ps ped- foot biped, bipedal, expedient, expedite, expedition, impeach, impeachment, impediment, inexpedient, oppidum, pawn, pedal, pedestal, pedestrian, pedicel, pedicle, pedicure, pediform, pedigerous, pedigree, peon, peonage, piedfort, piedmont, pioneer, quadruped, quadrupedal, tripedal 
 pediculus pedicul- 
 pestis pest- pest pesticide, pestiferous, pestilence 
 pila pil- ball pellet, pelota, peloton, pill 
 pilula pilul- 
 pileus pile- cap Pilea, pileate, pileum, pileus 
 pilus pil- hair depilation, depilatory, epilation, piliferous, piliform, pilose, pilosity 
 pinna pinn- feather panache, pinnacle, pinnal, pinnate, pinniform, pinniped 
 pinnaculum pinnacul- 
 pinus pin- pine, pineal 
 pirus pir- pear piriform 
 piscis pisc- fish pisces, pisciform, piscine, piscivore 
 pius pi- dutiful piety, pious, pittance, pity 
 pix pic- Picea, picene, piceous, pitch 
 planca planc- plank planch 
 planta plant- sole implant, implantable, implantation, plant, plantar, plantation, plantigrade, supplant, supplantation, transplant, transplantation 
 planus plan- flat applanate, applanation, complanar, complanate, coplanar, coplanarity, esplanade, explain, explanation, explanatory, piano, pianoforte, plain, plaintext, planar, planary, planate, , plane 
 platea plate- place displace, displacement, emplacement, piazza, placement, plaza, replace, replacement, transplace 
 plebs pleb- common people plebian, plebiscite, plebs 
 plenus plen- full plenary, plenipotent, plenipotentiary, plenish, plenishment, plenitude, plenitudinous, plenum 
 pluma plum- feather plumage, plume, plumose, plumosity 
 plumbum plumb- lead plumb, plumbaginous, plumbago, plumbeous 
 pluvia pluvi- rain compluvium, impluvium, plover, pluvial, pluviosity 
 poculum pocul- cup poculent, poculiform 
 pollen pollin- pollen, pollination, polliniferous 
 pollex pollic- thumb pollex, pollical, pollicate, prepollex 
 pondus ponder- weight ponderosa, ponderous, pound, preponderance, preponderate 
 pons pont- bridge pons, pontage, pontic, pontile, pontine, pontonier, pontoon, punt 
 porca, porcus porc- pig porcine, porcupine, pork 
 porta port- gate anteporch, anteport, anteportico, porch, portal, portcullis, portico, portire 
 portula portul- 
 portus port- importune, importunity, opportune, opportunity, port 
 posterus posterior postremus poster- posterior- postrem-   posterity a posteriori, posterior, posteriority postremogeniture 
 potis pot- compossible, idempotence, idempotent, impossible, impotence, impotency, impotent, nilpotence, nilpotent, posse, possible, potence, potency, potent, potentate, potential, potentiality, puissance, puissant, subpotency, superpotency, superpotential, unipotent 
 prandium prandi- lunch prandial, preprandial 
 pravus prav- crooked depravity 
 pretium preti- price appreciate, appreciation, depreciation, precious 
 prex prec- prayer preces 
 prior prmus prior- prm- former first a priori, prior, priority, priory, subprior prima facie, primacy, primal, primary, primate, prime, primer, primine, primitive, primogeniture, primordial, primrose, Primula, subprimal, subprime 
 privus priv- own privacy, private, privy 
 probrum probr- opprobrium 
 probus prob- approbation, approval, approve, improbability, improbable, probability, probable, proband, probate, probation, probationary, probative, probity, reprobate, reproval 
 prope propior proximus prop- propior- proxim- near, nigh nearer nearest propinquity, propitiation, propitiatory, propitious approach, rapprochement, reproach proximal, proximate, proximity 
 proprius propri- proper appropriate, appropriation, impropriety, inappropriate, propriety 
 prunus prun- plum prune 
 publicus public- public, publican, publication, publicity 
 pulcher pulchr- beautiful pulchritude 
 pullus pull- pullet, pullorum 
 pulmo pulmon- lung pulmonary 
 pulvinus pulvin- cushion, pillow pulvilli, pulvinar, pulvinated, pulvinus 
 pulvis pulver- dust, powder pulverize, pulverulence, pulverulent 
 pumex pumic- pumice stone pumicate, pumice, pumiceous, pumiciform, pumicite 
 pupa pup- doll pupae, pupal, puparium, pupation, pupil 
 purus pur- pure depurate, depuration, impure, impurity, pure, purification, purity 
 pus pur- pus purulence, purulent 
 quadrageni quadragen- forty each quadragenarian, quadragenary 
 quadragesimus quadragesim- fortieth quadragesimal 
 quadrini quadrin- four each quadrin 
 quadrum quadr- square biquadratic, conquadrate, quadrate, quadratic, quadrature, quadrille, quarry, squadron, square 
 quartus quart- fourth inquartation, interquartile, quadroon, quart, quartal, quartan, quartary, quarter, quartet, quartic, quartile, quartine, quarto 
 quaterni quatern- four each biquaternion, quaternary, quaternate, quaternion, quaternity 
 quattuor quadr- four quadrangle, quadrennial, quadriceps, quadrifarious, quadrifid, quadrifolium, quadrifrons, quadrilateral, quadrilingual, quadriliteral, quadrillion, quadrinational, quadrinodal, quadrinomial, quadrinominal, quadripara, quadrireme, quadrisection, quadrivalent, quadrivium, quadruped, quadruple, quadruplet, quadruplex, quadruplicate, quatrain, quatrefoil 
 quies quiet- rest acquiesce, acquiescence, acquiescent, inquietude, quiescence, quiescent, quiet, quietude 
 quindecim quindecim- fifteen quindecimal, quindecimvir, quinzaine, quinze 
 quini quin- five each biquinary, quinarius, quinary, quinate 
 quintus quint- fifth biquintile, quint, quintal, quintan, quintessence, quintic, quintile, quintipara 
 radius radi- ray, spoke circumradius, irradiate, radial, radian, radiance, radiant, radiation, radiator, radio 
 radix radic- root eradicate, radical, radicand, radicant, radicate, radicel, radicle, radicular, radicule, radiculose, radish 
 radicula radicul- 
 ramus ram- branch ramate, ramification, ramiform, ramose, ramosity 
 remus rem- oar bireme, quadrireme, quinquereme, remiform, trireme 
 rn ren- kidney adrenal, renal, reniform 
 res re- thing irrealis, real, reality, surreal 
 rete ret- net reticle, reticular, reticulate, reticulation, reticule, retiform, retina 
 reticulum reticul- 
 rx rg- king interregnum, regal, regalia, regality, regency, regent, regious, reguline, reign, royal, viceroy 
 regulus regul- 
 ripa rip- bank riparian 
 ritus rit- rite ritual 
 rivus riv- brook derivation, derivative, derive, rival, rivality, rivalry, rivose, rivulet 
 rosa ros- rose rosaceous, rosary, rosulate 
 rosula rosul- 
 rostrum rostr- beak, prow rostral, rostrate, rostriform, rostrum 
 rostrulum rostrul- 
 rota rot- wheel circumrotation, contrarotation, rondeau, rondel, rondo, rotary, rotation, rotational, rotelle, rotifer, Rotifera, rotiferous, rotiform, rotula, rotund, rotunda, rotundifolious, rotundity, roulette, round, roundel, rowel 
 rotella rotell- 
 rotula rotul- 
 ruber rubr- red erubescent, rubric 
 rdis rd- rude erudite, erudition, rudiment, rudimentary 
 ruga rug- wrinkle corrugate, corrugation, erugate, rugose 
 rumen rumin- rumen, rumenic acid, ruminal, ruminant, ruminate, rumination, ruminator 
 rs rr- countryside, farm rural, rustic 
 sacer sacr- sacred sacrifice, sacrificial, sacristy 
 saepes saep- hedge septum 
 saeta saet- bristle seta, setaceous, setal, setaria, setiferous, setiform, setigerous, setireme, setose 
 sal sal- salt salami, salary, salinity, salsa, sauce, sausage 
 sanguis sanguin- blood consanguineous, sanguinaceous, sanguinary, sanguine 
 sanus san- sound insane, insanity, sanatorium, sane, sanity 
 saxum sax- rock saxatile, saxicavous, saxicoline, saxifrage, saxifragous 
 semen semin- seed disseminate, insemination, semen, seminal, seminar, seminary 
 semis semi- half semiannual, semicolon, semiconductor, semiconscious, seminatural 
 senex sen- old man senate, senator, senile, senility, senior, seniority 
 seni sen- six each senary 
 septem sept- seven septangular, septemvir, septennial, septilateral, septinsular, septireme, septivalent 
 septeni septen- seven each septenary 
 septimus septim- seventh septimal, septime 
 sex sex- six sexangular, sexavalent, sexennial, sexireme, sexradiate, sextain 
 sexageni sexagen- sixty each sexagenarian, sexagenary 
 sexagesimus sexagesim- sixtieth sexagesimal 
 sextus sext- sixth bissextile, sestet, sestina, Sext, sextan, sextans, sextant, sextary, sextic, sextile 
 sibilus sibil- hiss silibance, sibilant, sibilation 
 siccus sicc- dry desiccant, desiccation, siccation, siccative, siccific 
 sidus sider- constellation consider, considerable, considerate, consideration, desiderate, desideration, desiderative, desideratum, desideria, desire, inconsiderable, inconsiderate, sidereal 
 signum sign- mark, sign assign, assignation, assignment, consign, consignment, design, designation, ensign, insignia, insignificance, insignificant, reassign, reassignment, resign, resignation, sign, signal, signatory, signature, significance, significant, signum 
 silva silv- forest silvan, silviculture 
 similis simil- like assimilate, assimilation, similar, similarity, simile, similitude, verisimilitude 
 sincerus sincer- insincere, insincerity, sincere, sincerity 
 singulus singul- one each single, singularity, singulation, singulative 
 sinister sinistr- left sinister, sinistral 
 sinus sinu- curve insinuation, sine, sinus, sinuose, sinuosity, sinuous 
 sol sol- sun extrasolar, insolate, insolation, solar, soliform, solstice 
 solum sol- bottom insole, sole 
 solus sol- alone, only sole, solitary, solitude, solo, sullen 
 somnus somn- sleep insomnia, somnolent 
 sonus son- sound absonant, assonance, consonance, consonant, dissonance, dissonant, resonance, resonant, resound, sonorant, sonority, soun, sound, triconsonantal 
 sopor sopor- deep sleep sopor, soporific 
 soror soror- sister sororal, sororate, sororicide, sorority 
 spes sper- hope despair, desperado, desperate, desperation 
 spica spic- spica, spicate, spicose, spicosity, spiculate, spicule, spiculiform 
 spina spin- thorn spinal, spine, spinescent, spiniferous, spiniform, spinose 
 squama squam- scale squamate, squamella, squamiform, squamose, squamous 
 stagnum stagn- stagnant, stagnate, stagnation 
 stella stell- star circumstellar, constellation, interstellar, stellar 
 stria stri- furrow striate, striation, striature 
 strix strig- owl strigine 
 suavis suav- sweet assuage, assuagement, suave, suaviloquent, suaviloquy, suavity 
 sucussuccus succ- juice succulent 
 sulcus sulc- furrow sulcal, sulcate, sulciform 
 superus&ndash; superior&ndash; supremus super-&ndash; superior-&ndash; suprem- over&ndash; higher&ndash; highest superior, superiority, supreme, supremity, supremum 
 taberna tabern- tabernacle, tabernacular, tavern 
 tabernaculum tabernacul- 
 tabes tab- tabefaction, tabes, tabescence, tabescent, tabid 
 tabula tabul- board tabellion, table, tablet, tabular, tabulate, tabulation, tabulator 
 tabella tabell- 
 taedium taedi- tediosity, tedium 
 tardus tard- slow retard, retardation, tardy 
 templum templ- temple templar, template 
 tempus tempor- time contemporaneous, contemporary, extemporaneous, tempest, tempo, temporal, temporaneous, temporary 
 tenuis tenu- thin attenuant, attenuate, attenuation, attenuator, extenuate, extenuation, tenuate, tenuifolious, tenuis, tenuity, tenuous 
 terminus termin- boundary coterminous, determinable, determinant, determinate, determination, determinative, determinator, determine, exterminate, extermination, indeterminable, indeterminate, interminable, terminal, terminate, termination, terminative, terminator 
 terni tern- three each tern, ternary, ternate, ternion 
 terra terr- dry land atterration, circumterrestrial, extraterrestrial, terrace, terracotta, terrain, terrarium, terrestrial, territory, terroir 
 tertius terti- third sesterce, Terce, tertial, tertian, tertiary, tertiate 
 testis test- witness attest, attestable, attestation, attestator, contest, contestable, contestant, contestation, counter-protest, detest, detestable, detestation, intestacy, intestate, protest, Protestant, protestation, protestator, testacy, testament, testamentary, testate, testation, testator, testatrix, testicle, testimonial, testimony 
 titulus titul- title tilde, titular, titulary 
 totus tot- all, whole subtotal, total, totality 
 tres tri- three triangle, triceps, triennial, trillion, triolet, triquetrous, triradiate 
 tribus trib- contribute, contributor, contributory, tribe, tribunal, tribune, tributary, tribute 
 tricae tric- tricks extricate, extrication, intricacy, intricate, intrigue 
 trini trin- three each trinal, trinary, trine, trinity 
 tubus tub- tube intubation, tubal, tube, tubular 
 turba turb- disturbance, turbidity, turbine 
 tussis tuss- cough pertussis, tussive 
 ulcus ulcer- ulcer, ulcerate, ulceration, ulcerative 
 ulmus ulm- elm Ulmaceae, ulmaceous, ulmic 
 ulter ulterior ultimus ultr- ulterior- ultim-  farther farmost, farthest  ulterior, ulteriority penultimate, ultima, ultimate, ultimatum, ultimogeniture 
 umbra umbr- shade, shadow adumbrate, adumbration, inumbrate, penumbra, umbrage, umbrageous, umbrella 
 umbella unbell- 
 uncia unci- twelfth inch, ounce, quincuncial, uncial 
 uncus unc- hook unciform, Uncinaria, uncinate, Uncinia 
 unda und- wave abound, abundance, abundant, inundate, redound, redundancy, redundant, superabound, superabundance, superabundant, surround, undulant, undulate, undulation, undulatory, undulose 
 undecim undecim- eleven undecimarticulate 
 undeni unden- eleven each undenary 
 unguis ungu- claw, hoof ungual, unguiferous, unguiform, ungular, ungulate 
 ungula ungul- 
 unus un- one coadunate, onion, unary, unate, uniform, uniformity, union, unique, unite, unity 
 urbs urb- city conurbation, interurban, suburb, suburban, urban, urbane 
 ursus urs- bear ursine, Ursus 
 vacuus vacu- empty vacuous, vacuum 
 vagus vag- wandering extravagant, vagile, vague 
 vallum vall- rampart circumvallate, circumvallation, contravallation, interval, vallar, vallate, vallation 
 valva valv- bivalve, valvate, valve 
 vanus van- empty, vain vanity 
 varius vari- varying bivariate, variable, variance, variant, variate, variation, variety, variform, various, vary 
 vas vas- vessel vasal, vase, vasiform 
 vastus vast- empty devastate, vastitude 
 velox veloc- quick, swift velocity 
 velum vel- sail, veil reveal, revelation, revelatory, velamen, velar, velate 
 vena ven- vein vein, venae cavae, venation, venose, venosity, venous, venular, venule, venulose 
 venula venul- 
 venter ventr- belly ventral, ventricle, ventriloquy 
 ventus vent- wind ventilation, ventilator, ventose, ventosity 
 venum ven- venal, venality 
 venus vener- desire venerable, venereal 
 verbum verb- word adverb, adverbial, proverb, proverbial, verbal, verbatim, verbiage, verbicide, verbid, verbose, verbosity 
 vermis verm- worm vermian, vermicelli, vermicular, vermiculate, vermiculation, vermicule, vermiculite, vermiculose, vermiculture, vermiform, vermifuge 
 vernus vern- spring vernal 
 vrus ver- true veracious, veracity, verify, veritable, verity 
 vespa vesp- wasp vespacide 
 vesper vesper- evening vespertine 
 vestigium vestig- trace, track investigate, vestige, vestigial 
 vestis vest- clothing transvestite, travesty, vest, vestment, vesture 
 vetus veter- old inveterate, inveteration, veteran 
 via vi- way bivial, bivious, bivium, convey, conveyance, convoy, deviance, deviant, deviation, devious, impervious, obviate, obvious, pervious, quadrivial, quadrivium, trivial, triviality, trivium, viaduct, vialis, viary 
 vicis vic- change vicarious, vicissitude 
 vicus vic- vicinal, vicinity 
 vigesimus vigesim- twentieth septemvigesimal, vigesimal 
 vilis vil- cheap, vile revile, vilification, vilify 
 vlla vill- country house villa, village, villain 
 villus vill- velour, velvet 
 vinum vin- wine vignette, vine, viniculture, vinosity 
 vir vir- man (masculine) quadrumvirate, triumvirate, virago, virile, virility, virtue 
 virga virg- rod, twig virga, virgate, virgule 
 viscus viscer- internal organ eviscerate, visceral, viscus 
 vita vit- life viable, vital, vitality 
 vitium viti- vice, vicious, vitiate 
 vitrum vitr- glass vitreous, vitriol 
 viverra viverr- ferret viverrid, viverrine 
 vola vol- palm volar 
 vox voc- voice advocacy, advocate, avouch, avouchment, avow, avowal, convocation, invocation, provocation, revocation, vocal, vocation, vocative, vociferant, vociferous, vouch, vouchment, vouchsafe 
 vulgus vulg- crowd divulge, vulgar, vulgarity, vulgate 
 vulnus vulner- wound vulnerable, vulnerose 
 vulps vulp- fox vulpicide, vulpine 

 Diminutive

==Verbs==
In some Latin verbs, a preposition caused a vowel change in the root of the verb. For example, "capi" prefixed with "in" becomes "incipio".

 Latin verbs 
 Citation form Present stem Perfect stem Participial stem Meaning English derivatives 
 ace ac- acu-  be sour acescent, acid, acidity, peracid 
 acesc acesc- acu-  become sour 
 ag-ig ag--ig- - ct- act, drive abaction, abactor, act, actant, actio, action, actionable, actionary, activate, activation, activator, active, activity, actor, actual, actuality, actuarial, actuary, actuate, actuation, actuator, actuose, agenda, agency, agent, agentive, agible, agile, agility, agitate, agitation, agitative, agitato, agitator, ambages, ambaginous, ambagious, ambiguity, ambiguous, assay, castigate, castigation, coact, coaction, coactive, coagency, coagent, coagment, coagmentation, coagulant, coagulate, coagulation, coagulum, cogency, cogent, cogitability, cogitable, cogitabund, cogitate, cogitation, cogitative, cogitator, compurgation, counteract, counteraction, counteragent, counterreaction, deactivate, deactivation, disambiguate, disambiguation, enact, enactment, enactor, entracte, essay, exact, examen, examine, excogitate, exigency, exigent, expurgate, fumigate, fumigation, inaction, inactive, indagate, indefatigable, inexact, interact, interaction, interactive, interagency, intransigent, litigate, mitigate, navigate, peract, precogitation, proactive, prodigality, prodigence, purgament, purgation, purgative, purgatory, purge, react, reaction, reactionary, reactive, reactor, reagent, redact, redaction, reenact, reenactment, reenactor, reexamine, retroact, retroaction, retroactive, subact, subaction, transact, transaction, transactional, transactivation, transactivator, variegate, variegation 
 agit agit- agitav- agitat- 
 al al--ol--ul- alu- alit-alt- nourish adolescence, adolescent, adult, alible, aliment, alimental, alimentary, alimentation, alimonious, alimony, alma mater, altar, altiloquent, altissimo, altitude, altitudinal, alto, altricial, alumnus, coalesce, coalescence, coalescent, coalite, coalition, coalitional, contralto, exalt, exaltation 
 alesc alesc--olesc- alit- 
 ambul ambul- ambulav- ambulat- walk amble, ambulance, ambulatory, circumambulation, perambulate, preamble 
 am am- amav- amat- like, love amateur, amatory, amigo, amorous, enamor, paramour 
 appello appell- appellav- appellat- call, address appeal, appellant, appellate, appellation 
 ap ap-api-epi- ap- apt--ept- fasten adapt, adaptable, adaptation, adaptative, apt, aptate, aptitude, aptitudinal, attitude, attitudinal, inept, ineptitude, maladaptation 
 apt apt- aptav- aptat- 
 arde ard- ars- ars- be on fire ardent, ardor 
 are ar-   be dry arid, aridisols, aridity 
 argu argu- argu- argut- argue, argument 
 aude aud- aus-  be bold, dare 
 audi aud- audiv- audit- hear audibility, audible, audience, audient, audio, audit, audition, auditive, auditor, auditorium, auditory, inaudible 
 auge aug- aux- auct- increase auction, augmentation, augmentative 
 ave av-   avarice, avid 
 bib bib- bib- bibit- drink beverage, bibulous, imbibe, imbrue 
 cad-cid cad--cid- cecid- cas- fall accident, accidental, cadaver, cadaverine, cadaverous, cadence, cadent, cadenza, caducous, cascade, case, casual, casualty, casuistry, chance, coincide, coincidence, coincidental, decadence, decadent, decay, deciduous, demicadence, escheat, escheatage, incident, incidental, recidivous, semelincident 
 caed caed--cid- cecid- caes--cis- cut caesura, cement, cementum, chisel, circumcise, circumcision, concise, concision, decide, decision, decisive, deciso, excide, excise, excision, excisional, imprecise, imprecision, incise, incision, incisive, incisor, incisory, incisure, indecision, indecisive, precise, precision, scissors, succise, succision 
 cale cal- calu-  be warm caldarium, caldera, calefacient, calefaction, calefactive, calefactory, calenture, calescent, calid, calor, calore, calorie, calorifacient, calorific, caudle, cauldron, nonchalance, nonchalant, recalescence, scald 
 calesc calesc- calu-  
 can can--cin- cecin- cant--cent- sing accent, accentual, accentuate, accentuation, cancin, cant, cantabile, cantata, cantation, cantatory, cantatrice, canticle, canticum, cantiga, cantilena, cantion, canto, cantor, cantus, chanson, chansonnier, chant, chanteur, chanteuse, chanticleer, concent, descant, discant, enchant, enchantment, incantation, incantational, incentive, plainchant, precentor, recant, recantation, succentor 
 cant cant- cantav- cantat- 
 cantit cantit- cantitav- cantitat- 
 capi-cipi cap--cup- cep--cip- capt--cept- take accept, acceptable, acceptance, acceptancy, acceptant, acceptation, accipient, anticipate, anticipation, anticipative, anticipatory, capability, capable, capacious, capacitance, capacitate, capacity, capistrate, capstan, captation, caption, captious, captivate, captivation, captive, captivity, captor, capture, case, catch, catchment, chase, conceit, conceivable, conceive, concept, conceptacle, conceptible, conception, conceptional, conceptive, conceptual, contraception, contraceptive, deceit, deceive, deception, deceptive, discept, disceptation, disceptator, emancipate, except, exceptant, exception, exceptional, exceptive, exceptor, excipient, exciple, excipulum, forceps, imperceptible, incapability, incapable, incapacious, incapacitant, incapacitate, incapacitation, incapacity, incept, inception, inceptive, inceptor, incipience, incipient, inconceivable, intercept, interception, interceptor, intussusception, participant, participate, participial, participle, perceive, percept, perceptible, perception, perceptive, percipience, percipient, precept, preception, preceptive, preceptor, preceptory, preceptress, precipient, prince, principal, principality, recapture, receipt, receive, recept, receptacle, receptible, reception, receptive, receptivity, receptor, receptory, recipe, recipience, recipient, recover, recovery, recuperate, susceptible, susception, susceptive, susceptivity, susceptor, suscipiency, suscipient 
 capt capt--cept- captav- captat--ceptat- 
 care car- caru- carit- lack charity, precarious 
 carp-cerp carp--cerp- carps- carpt--cerpt- pick, pluck carpe diem, decerp, decerpt, decerption, discerp, discerption, excerpt 
 cass cass- cassav- cassat- cassate, cassation 
 cave cav- cav- caut- beware caution, cautionary, caveat, precaution, precautionary 
 cd ced- cess- cess- yield, depart abscess, abscession, accede, access, accessible, accession, accessory, antecedaneous, antecede, antecedent, antecessor, cease, cessation, cessative, cessavit, cession, circumincession, concede, concession, concessionary, decease, decedent, decession, discede, discession, excedent, exceed, excess, excessive, inaccessible, incessable, incessant, intercede, intercession, nonrecessive, precede, precedent, precession, prcis, predecease, predecessor, preprocess, preprocessor, procedural, procedure, proceed, process, procession, processionary, processive, processor, recede, recess, recession, recessionary, recessive, reprocess, retrocede, retrocession, retrocessive, secede, secession, succeed, success, succession, successive, successor 
 cess cess- cessav- cessat- 
 cl-cul cl--cul- celav- celat--cult- hide conceal, concealment, occult 
 cen cen- cenav- cenat- dine cenation, cenatory 
 cept cept- ceptav- ceptat- discept, disceptation 
 cern cern- crev- cret- separate, sift decern, decree, discern, discernible, discernment, discrete, excrement, excretion, recrement, secern, secernent, secretion 
 cie ci- civ- cit-  accite, citation, cite, concitation, concite, excitability, excitable, excitant, excitation, excitative, excite, excitement, incitable, incitant, incitation, incitative, incite, incitement, inexcitable, insouciance, insouciant, irresuscitable, recital, recitation, recitative, recite, resuscitate, resuscitation, solicit, solicitant, solicitation, solicitor, solicitous 
 cit cit- citav- citat- 
 cing cing- cinx- cinct- encircle, gird cincture, succinct 
 clm clm- clmv- clmt- call acclaim, acclamation, clamor, declaim, declamation, declamatory, exclaim, exclamation, exclamatory, proclaim, proclamation, reclaim, reclamation 
 claud-cld claud--cld- claus- claus--cls- close clause, claustral, claustrum, clausula, clausure, cloister, closet, closure, cloture, clusivity, conclude, concludent, conclusion, conclusive, conclusory, disclose, disclosure, disclude, disclusion, enclose, enclosure, exclude, exclusion, exclusionary, exclusive, exclusivity, exclusory, inclose, inclosure, include, inclusion, inclusionary, inclusive, inclusivity, inconclusive, malocclusion, nondisclosure, nonexclusive, occlude, occlusion, occlusive, preclude, preclusive, reclude, recluse, reclusion, reclusive, reclusory, seclude, seclusion, seclusive 
 clin clin- clinav- clinat- lean declinable, declination, decline, disinclination, disincline, inclination, incline, recline 
 col col-cul- colu- colt-cult- till acculturation, agriculture, apiculture, colonial, colony, counterculture, cult, cultivate, cultural, culture, incult, inculturation, multicultural, subculture 
 cnor con- conat-  try conation 
 coqu coqu- cox- coct- cook coctile, concoct, concoction, cook, cookery, cuisine, decoct, decoction, excoct, excoction, precocious 
 consul consul- consulu- consult- consult consult, counsel 
 crem crem- cremav- cremat- burn cremate, cremation, crematory, incremate 
 cre cre- creav- creat- make accretion, accrue, creant, create, creation, creative, creativity, creator, creature, crescendo, crescent, croissant, decrease, decrescence, decrescendo, decrescent, excrescent, increase, increscent, procreant, procreate, procreation, procreative, procreator, re-create, recruit 
 cresc cresc- crev- cret- grow 
 cub cub- cubu- cubat- lie concubinage, incubate, incubator, incubous, incubus, succubine, succubous, succubus 
 -cumb -cumb- -cubu- -cubit- lie incumbency, incumbent, recumbence, recumbent, succumb 
 cupi cup- cupiv- cupit- desire cupidity 
 curr curr- cucurr- curs- run concur, concurrency, concurrent, corsair, courier, course, currency, current, curriculum, cursive, cursor, cursory, curule, decurrent, decursion, discourse, discurrent, discursion, discursive, discursory, discursus, excur, excurrent, excursion, excursive, excursus, extracurricular, incur, incurrent, incursion, incursive, occur, occurrence, occurrent, occursion, parcourse, recourse, recur, recurrent, recursion, recursive, succor, succursal 
 curs curs- cursav- cursat- 
 dic dic- dicav- dicat- dedicate, dedication, preach, predicate 
 dic dic- dix- dict- say addict, addiction, addictive, contradict, contradiction, contradictive, contradictory, dictate, dictation, dictator, dictatorial, diction, dictionary, dictum, edict, indict, indictment, , , predict, prediction, predictive, valediction, valedictorian, valedictory 
 dict dict- dictav- dictat- 
 d d- ded--did- dat--dit- give add, addend, addendum, addition, additional, additive, dative, dedimus, dedition, edition, editor, editorial, extradition, perdition, reddition, redditive, rendition, surrender, tradition, traditional, traditor 
 doce doc- docu- doct- teach doctor, doctoral, doctrinal, doctrine, document, documentary, documentation, indoctrinate, indoctrination, postdoctoral 
 dole dol- dolu- dolit- grieve condole, condolence, condolent, dolent, dolente, dolor, dolorific 
 dormi dorm- dormiv- dormit- sleep dormitory 
 dubit dubit- dubitav- dubitat- doubt dubitable, dubitancy, dubitation, indubitable 
 duc duc- dux- duct- lead abduce, abducent, abduction, abductor, adduce, adducent, adduct, adduction, adductor, circumduction, conduce, conducent, conduction, conductive, conductivity, conductor, deduce, deduct, deductible, deduction, deductive, duct, ductile, ductility, ductor, educe, educt, induce, inducement, induct, induction, inductive, inductor, introduce, introduction, introductory, irreducible, nonconductive, produce, product, production, productive, productivity, reduce, reducible, reduction, redux, reintroduction, reproduce, reproduction, reproductive, seduce, seduction, seductive, semiconductor, subduction, superconductivity, superconductor, traduce, traducent, traducian, traduct, traduction 
 ed ed- ed- es- eat edacity, edible, esculent, inedible, obese, obesity 
 em-im em--im- em- empt- buy adempt, ademption, emptor, exempt, exemption, impromptu, nonexempt, preempt, preemption, preemptive, preemptory, prompt, redeem, redemption, redemptive, redemptress, redempture 
 e e- i- it- go adit, ambient, ambit, ambition, coition, coitus, exeat, exit, intransitive, introit, obituary, preterite, redient, redition, sedition, transient, transit, transition, transitive, transitory 
 err err- errav- errat- stray errant, errata, erratic, erratum, inerrant 
 faci-fici fac--fic- fec--fic- fact--fect- make affair, affect, affectation, affection, affectional, affectionate, affective, affectivity, aficionado, benefaction, benefactive, benefactor, benefic, benefice, beneficence, beneficial, beneficiary, beneficiation, comfit, comfiture, confect, confection, confectionary, confectionery, confecture, confetti, contrafactive, contrafactual, counterfactual, counterfeit, de facto, deface, defacement, defeasance, defeat, defect, defection, defective, defector, deficiency, deficient, deficit, difficile, difficulty, disaffection, discomfit, discomfiture, disinfect, disinfectant, disinfection, efface, effacement, effect, effectible, effection, effective, effectivity, effector, effectual, effectuality, effectuate, effectuation, efficacious, efficacity, efficacy, efficiency, efficient, face, facet, facial, faciend, facient, facile, facilitate, facilitation, facilitative, facilitator, facilitatory, facility, facinorous, facsimile, fact, faction, factional, factionary, factious, factitious, factor, factorial, factory, factual, facture, facultative, faculty, fashion, fashionable, feasibility, feasible, feasance, feat, feature, fetish, forfeit, forfeiture, hacienda, imperfect, imperfection, indefeasible, ineffective, ineffectual, inefficient, infect, infection, infectious, infective, insufficiency, insufficient, malefaction, malefactor, maleficence, malfeasance, nonfactual, nonfacultative, nonfeasance, nonproficiency, nonprofit, office, official, officiant, officiary, officiate, parfait, perfect, perfectible, perfection, perfective, pluperfect, prefect, prefecture, proficiency, proficient, profit, profiteer, reinfect, remanufacture, resurface, sacrifice, semelfactive, subprefect, subprefecture, subsurface, suffice, sufficiency, sufficient, superficial, superficiality, superficies, surface, surfeit, transfection 
 fact fact--fect- factav- factat--fectat- 
 fall fall- fefell- fals- fallacy, fallible, false, falsity, infallible 
 fave fav- favu- favit- favor 
 fend fend- fend- fens- defend, defense, defensible, defensive, fence, indefensible, inoffensive, offend, offense, offensive, reoffend 
 fer fer- tul- lt- bear, bring ablate, ablation, ablative, ablator, allative, aquifer, circumference, circumferential, confer, conference, conferential, conferment, conferral, conifer, correlate, correlation, correlative, defer, deference, deferent, deferential, deferment, deferral, delate, delative, differ, difference, different, differential, differentiate, differentiation, elate, elation, elative, fertile, fertility, illative, infer, inference, inferential, infertile, infertility, interfere, interference, interrelate, interrelation, lative, multiferous, oblate, oblation, perlative, prefer, preference, preferential, prelacy, prelate, prolate, prolation, prolative, refer, reference, referendary, referendum, referent, referential, referral, relate, relation, relational, relative, relativity, relator, relatrix, relatum, sublative, suffer, superlative, transfer, transference, transferral, translation, translative, translator 
 ferve ferv-    effervescence, effervescent, fervency, fervent, fervescent, fervid, fervor 
 fervesc fervesc-   
 fg fg- fx- fix- fix affix, affixion, crucifix, crucifixion, , infix, infixion, postfix, prefix, prefixion, suffix, suffixion 
 find find- fid- fiss- cleave, split bifid, contrafissure, fissile, fission, fissiped, fissure, fistula, fistular, multifid 
 fing fing- finx- fict- fashion, invent effigy, fiction, fictional, fictive, figment 
 fi fi-   be made fiat 
 flect flect- flex- flex- bend deflect, flexibility, flexible, flexile, flexion, flexor, flexuose, flexure, genuflect, inflect, inflection, inflexible, irreflexive, reflect, reflective, reflector, reflex, reflexion, reflexive, retroreflector 
 flig flig- flix- flict- strike afflict, affliction, afflictive, conflict, confliction, inflict, infliction, inflictive, profligate 
 fl fl- flav- flat- blow afflation, afflatus, conflate, conflation, deflate, deflation, efflate, efflation, exsufflate, exsufflation, flabellum, flabile, flatulence, flatulent, inflate, inflation, insufflate, insufflation, souffl, sufflate, sufflation 
 flu flu- flux- flux- flow affluence, affluent, confluence, diffluence, effluent, efflux, fluency, fluent, fluid, flume, flux, fluxion, influence, influenza, influx, reflux 
 fodi fod- fod- foss- dig fossil 
 for f- fat-  say, speak affability, affable, fable, fabular, fabulous, facund, facundious, facundity, famacide, fame, famosity, famous, fatal, fatality, fate, fatidic, fatiferous, fetial, ineffable, infamous, infamy, infancy, infant, infantile, infantry 
 frang-fring frang--fring- freg- fract- break birefringence, diffract, diffraction, fractal, fraction, fractional, fracture, fragile, fragility, fragment, fragmentary, frail, infraction, infringe, irrefrangible, refraction, refractive, refractor, refractory, refrain (noun), refrangible, refringent, suffrage 
 fric fric- fricu- frict- rub fricative, friction 
 frige frig-   be cold frigid 
 frig frig- frix- frict- parch 
 fruor fru- fruct-  enjoy usufruct, usufructuary 
 fugi fug- fug- fugit- flee fugitive, refugee 
 fund fund- fd- fs- pour affusion, confound, confuse, confusion, diffuse, diffusion, diffusive, diffusor, effund, effuse, effusion, effusive, fondant, fondue, found, foundry, fuse, fusibility, fusible, fusile, fusion, futile, futility, nonfusible, perfuse, perfusion, perfusive, profuse, profusion, profusive, refund, refusal, refuse 
 fungor fung- funct-  do defunct, fungible, function, functional, functionary, malfunction 
 gaude gaud- gavis-  rejoice gaud 
 ger ger- gess- gest- carry agger, congest, congestion, congestive, contragestive, contrasuggestible, decongestant, digest, digestible, digestion, digestive, gerund, gerundive, gestant, gestate, gestation, gestational, gestative, gestatory, gesture, indigestible, indigestion, ingest, ingestion, ingestive, suggest, suggestive, suggestion 
 gest gest- gestav- gestat- 
 gradior-gredior gradi--gredi- gress--gress-  step aggression, aggressive, aggressor, congress, digress, digression, digressive, egress, egression, egressive, gradient, ingredient, ingress, ingressive, introgression, introgressive, nonaggression, progress, progression, progressive, regress, regression, regressive, retrogressive, transgression, transgressor 
 gust gust- gustav- gustat- taste gustation, gustatory 
 habe-hibe habe--hibe- habu- habit--hibit- have ability, able, debit, debitor, debt, debtor, devoir, disability, disable, due, duty, enable, endeavor, exhibit, exhibition, exhibitor, habeas corpus, habile, habilitate, hability, habit, habitable, habitance, habitant, habitat, habitation, habitator, habitual, habituate, habituation, habitude, habitudinal, inability, indubitable, inhabile, inhabit, inhabitable, inhabitant, inhabitation, inhibit, inhibition, inhibitory, prebend, prebendary, prohibit, prohibition, prohibitive, prohibitory, provender, rehabilitant, rehabilitate, rehabilitation, rehabilitative, rehabilitator 
 habit habit- habitav- habitat- 
 haere haer- haes- haes- cling, stick adhere, adherent, adhesion, adhesive, cohere, coherence, coherent, cohesion, cohesive, hesitant, hesitate, hesitation, incoherent, nonadhesive 
 hal hal--hel- halav- halat- breathe exhalable, exhalant, exhalation, exhale, inhalant, inhalation, inhale 
 hauri hauri- haus- haust- draw exhaust, exhaustible, exhaustion, exhaustive, haurient, haustrum, inexhaustible 
 hi hi- hiav- hiat- gape hiatal, hiatus 
 iace iac- iacu- jacit- be thrown, lie adjacent, circumjacent, nonadjacent, subjacent, superjacent 
 iaci-ici iac- iec-(j)ic- jact--ject- throw abject, conjecture, dejection, ejection, ejector, inject, injection, introjection, jet, object, objection, objective, objector, project, projectile, projector, reject, rejection, subject, subjective, surjective, trajectory 
 irascor irasc- irat-  be angry irascible, irate 
 labor lab- laps-  slide, slip collapse, elapse, labile, prolapse, relapse 
 laci-lici lac--lic- -licu- -lect- lure delicious, elicit, illicit 
 laed-lid laed--lid- laes--lis- laes--lis- hurt collide, collision, elide, elision, lesion 
 langue langu-   languid, languish, languor 
 laud laud- laudav- laudat- praise laud, laudable, laudatory 
 lav lav- lav- laut-, lot- wash latrine, lavatory, loment, lotion, loture 
 lg lg- legav- legat- send allege, delegate, delegation, relegation 
 leg-lig leg--lig- leg- lect- choose, gather, read collect, collectible, collection, collective, collector, diligence, diligent, elect, election, elective, elector, eligibility, eligible, illegible, ineligible, lectionary, lector, lecture, legend, legendary, legible, neglect, negligence, negligent, select, selection, selective, selector 
 le l-  let--lit- delete, deletion, delible, indelible 
 lib lib- libav- libat- pour libament, libation 
 lib lib-  libit- please libido 
 lice lic- - licit-  licence, licit, licitation 
 licit licit- licitav- licitat- 
 lig lig- ligav- ligat- bind ligament, ligature, obligation 
 linqu linqu- liqu- lict- abandon delict, delinquent, derelict, dereliction, relict, reliction, relinquish, reliquary 
 live liv-   livid, livor 
 loc loc- locav- locat- place, put allocate, allocation, collocate, collocation, locate, location, locational, locative, locator, relocate, relocation 
 loquor loqu- loct-  speak allocution, allocutive, circumlocution, collocution, collocutor, colloquial, colloquium, colloquy, elocutio, elocution, eloquence, eloquent, grandiloquent, illocution, interlocutor, interlocutory, locution, loquacious, loquacity, loquitur, oblocutor, obloquy, perlocutionary, ventriloquy 
 luce luc- lux-  be light, shine lucent, pellucid 
 luctor luct- luctat-  wrestle reluctance, reluctant 
 ld ld- ls- ls- play allude, allusion, allusive, collude, collusion, collusive, delude, delusion, delusional, delusive, delusory, disillusion, elude, elusion, elusive, illude, illusion, illusive, illusory, interlude, ludicrous, prelude 
 lu lu- lu- lut- wash abluent, ablution, dilute, elution, pollution 
 mane man- mans- mans- stay immanent, mansion, permanence, permanent, remain, remanence, remanent 
 mn mn- manav- manat- flow emanate, emanation 
 me me- meav- meat- go, pass impermeable, permeable, permeance, permeant, permease, permeate, permeation 
 merg merg- mers- mers- dip emerge, emergence, immerse, immersion, immersive 
 migr migr- migrav- migrat- emigrant, emigrate, emigration, migr, immigrant, immigrate, immigration, migrant, migrate, migration, migratory, nonmigratory 
 minu minu- minu- minut- lessen diminuendo, diminution, diminutive, minuend 
 misce misc- miscu- mixt- mix admixture, miscible, mixture, promiscuous 
 mitt mitt- ms- miss- send admissibility, admissible, admission, admissive, admit, commissar, commissariat, commissary, commission, commissure, commit, commitment, committal, committee, compromise, decommission, decommit, demise, demiss, demit, dismiss, dismissal, dismissive, emissary, emission, emissitious, emissive, emissivity, emit, emittent, impermissible, inadmissible, intermission, intermittent, intromissible, intromission, intromissive, intromit, intromittent, manumission, manumit, mess, message, messenger, missile, mission, missionary, missive, mittimus, noncommittal, omission, omit, permissible, permission, permissive, permit, permittee, premise, premiss, premit, pretermission, pretermit, promise, promissive, promissory, readmission, readmit, recommit, remise, remiss, remissible, remission, remissive, remissory, remit, remittal, remittance, remittee, remittence, remittent, remittitur resubmit, retransmission, retransmit, subcommittee, submission, submissive, submit, surmise, transmissibility, transmissible, transmission, transmissive, transmit 
 mol mol- molu- molit- grind demolition, emolument, molar 
 mone mon- monu- monit- warn admonish, admonition, admonitory, monition, monitor, monitory, monument, monumental, premonition 
 monstr monstr- monstrav- monstrat- show demonstrable, demonstrant, demonstrate, demonstration, demonstrative, demonstrator, demonstratory, remonstrant, remonstrate, remonstration, remonstrative 
 move mov- mov- mot- move admove, demote, demotion, commotion, commove, emotion, emotional, emotive, locomotion, locomotive, motif, motile, motility, motion, motive, motor, move, promote, promotion, promotional, promotor, remote, remotion, removal, remove 
 narr narr- narrav- narrat- tell narration, narrative, narrator 
 nascor nasc- nat-gnat-  be born adnascent, adnate, agnate, agnatic, agnation, cognate, cognation, enate, enation, innate, naissant, nascent, natal, nation, national, nationality, native, nativity, natural, nature, prenatal, preternatural, renaissance, renascent, supernatural 
 nat nat- natav- natat- float, swim natatorium 
 nec nec- necav- necat- kill enecate 
 nect nect- nexu- nex- join, tie annex, connect, connexion, disconnect, interconnect, nexus, reconnect 
 nsc-gnsc nsc--gnsc- nosc- nt--gnt-, -gnit- know cognition, cognitive, ignoble, nobility, noble, notice, notion, recognition, reconnaissance, reconnoiter 
 not not- notav- notat- mark annotation, annotator, connotation, denotation, denote, notability, notable, notary, notation 
 nunti nunt- nuntiav- nuntiat- bring news of, announce announce, annunciation, denunciation, renounce, renunciation 
 nutri nutr- nutriv- nutrit- nourish nutrient, nutriment, nutrition, nutritious 
 di od-   hate annoy, annoyance, ennui, odious, odium 
 ole ol- olu-  smell olfactory, olid, redolence, redolent 
 operi oper- operu- opert- cover cover, covert, curfew, discover, discovert, discoverture, discovery, operculum, rediscover 
 opt opt- optav- optat- choose adopt, adoptive, coopt, cooptation, opt, optation, optative 
 ordior ord- ors-  begin exordium, primordial, primordium 
 orior ori- ort-  rise abort, abortion, abortive, disorient, disorientation, orient, oriental, orientation 
 palle pall- pallu-  be pale pallid, pallor 
 pand pand--pend- pand- pans--pess- spread compass, dispand, dispansion, encompass, expand, expanse, expansion, expansive, pace, repand 
 pang-ping pang--ping- pepig- pact- fasten compact, compaction, compactor, compinge, counterpropaganda, impact, impaction, impactive, impinge, impingement, propaganda, propagate, propagation 
 pare par- paru- parit- be ready apparent, apparition, appear, appearance, disappear, disappearance, disparition, semitransparent, transparency, transparent 
 pari par--per- peper- part--pert- antepartum, biparous, deiparous, fissiparity, multiparous, nonparental, nullipara, nulliparity, nulliparous, oviparity, oviparous, parent, parental, parity, parturiency, parturient, parturifacient, parturition, pluriparous, postpartum, primipara, primiparous, repertoire, repertory, semelparity, semelparous, uniparous, vivipary, viviparous 
 parturi partur- parturiv- parturit- 
 par par--per- parav--perav- parat--perat- make ready apparat, apparatus, disparate, disrepair, dissever, disseverance, emperor, empery, empire, empress, imperant, imperative, imperator, imperious, inseparable, irreparable, parade, pare, parry, preparation, preparative, preparatory, prepare, repair, reparable, reparation, reparative, separable, separate, separation, separator, sever, severable, several, severance 
 pasc pasc- pav- past- feed antepast, antipasto, pastern, pastor, pastorage, pastoral, pastorale, pastorate, pastorium, pasturage, pastural, pasture, repast, repasture 
 pate pat- patu-  be open patefaction, patella, patellar, patelliform, patency, patent 
 patior pat- pass-  endure compassion, compassionate, compatibility, compatible, dispassion, dispassionate, impassion, impassive, impassivity, impatience, impatient, incompatibility, incompatible, noncompatible, passion, passionate, passive, passivity, patience, patient 
 pave pav- pav-  be afraid pavid, pavidity 
 pavi pav- paviv- pavit- beat pave, pavement, paviage, pavior 
 -pell -pell- -pellav- -pellat- appeal, appellable, appellant, appellate, appellation, appellative, repeal 
 pell pell- pepul- puls- push appulse, appulsion, appulsive, compel, compulsatory, compulsion, compulsive, compulsivity, compulsory, depulse, depulsion, dispel, expel, expellent, expulsion, impel, impellent, impulse, impulsion, impulsive, impulsor, nonpropulsive, propel, propellent, propulsion, propulsive, pulsate, pulsatile, pulsation, pulsative, pulsator pulse, pulsion, push, repel, repulse, repulsion, repulsive, repulsory 
 puls puls- pulsav- pulsat- 
 pende pend- pepend-  be hanging, hang (intrans.) antependium, codependency, codependent, depend, dependable, dependency, dependent, impend, impendency, impendent, independence, independent, interdependent, lis pendens, penchant, pendency, pendent, pendente lite, pendulous, pendulum, pensile, propend, propendency, propendent, propense, propension, propensity 
 pend pend- pepend- pens- weigh compendious, compendium, compensate, compensation, compensatory, dispensation, dispense, expend, expense, pensative, pension, pensive, poise, suspense 
 pens pens- pensav- pensat- 
 perior per-   experience, experiment, inexperience, peril 
 pet pet- petiv- petit- seek, attack appete, appetence, appetent, appetite, appetition, centripetal, compete, competence, competent, competition, competitive, competitor, impetuous, impetus, inappetence, incompetence, incompetent, noncompetitive, petulance, petulant, petulcity, petulcous, propitiation, propitious, repeat, rptiteur, repetition, repetitive, repetitor 
 ping ping- pinx- pict- paint depict, depiction, paint, pictorial, picture, pigment, pigmentary, pigmentation, pimiento, pinto, repaint 
 place-plice plac--plic- placu- placit--plicit- please complacency, complacent, complaisance, complaisant, counterplea, displease, displeasure, implead, placebo, placid, placidity, plea, plead, pleasance, pleasant, pleasantry, please, pleasurable, pleasure 
 plc plc- plcav- plct- implacable, placability, placable, placate, placation, placative, placatory 
 plang plang- planx- planct- complain, complainant, complaint, plague, plain, plaint, plaintiff, plaintive, plangency, plangent 
 plaud-plod plaud--plod- plaus- plaus--plos- clap applaud, applause, displode, displosion, displosive, explode, explosion, explosive, implausibility, implausible, implosion, implosive, nonexplosive, plaudit, plausibility, plausible, plosion, plosive 
 plect plect- plex- plex- plait amplexus, complect, complex, complexion, complexity, implex, implexion, perplex, perplexity, plexure, plexus 
 pl pl- plev- plt- fill accomplish, accomplishment, complement, complementarity, complementary, complementation, complete, completion, completive, compliance, compliant, compliment, Compline, comply, deplete, depletion, depletive, implement, implementation, impletion, incomplete, incompletion, noncompliance, plenary, plenitude, plenitudinous, plenty, plenum, reimplement, reimplementation, replenish, replete, repletion, repletive, resupply, supplement, supplemental, supplementary, supplementation, suppletion, suppletive, suppletory, supply 
 plic plic- plicav- plicat- fold applicability, applicable, applicant, application, applicative, applicator, applicatory, apply, centuplicate, complicate, complication, contortuplicate, counterploy, demi-pli, deplication, deploy, deployment, duplicate, duplication, duplicator, employ, employee, employment, explicable, explicandum, explicans, explicate, explication, explicative, explicator, explicatory, explicature, exploit, exploitable, exploitation, implicate, implication, implicational, implicature, imply, inapplicable, induplicate, induplication, inexplicable, multiplicand, multiplication, multiplicative, nonexploitation, nonpliant, plait, pleat, pliable, pliancy, pliant, pli, ploy, ply, quadruplicate, reapply, reduplication, replica, replicable, replicant, replicate, replication, replicator, reply, subduplicate, triplicate 
 plr plor- plorav- plorat-  deplorable, deplore, implore 
 poli pol- poliv- polit- smoothen expolish, impolite, interpolate, interpolation, polish, polite, politesse, politure 
 pn pn- posu- posit- put adposition, antepone, anteposition, apposite, apposition, appositional, appositive, circumposition, component, composite, composition, compositional, compositor, contraposition, contrapositive, decomposition, depone, deponent, deposit, deposition, depositional, depositor, depository, dispone, disposition, dispositional, dispositive, entrept, expone, exponent, exponential, exponentiation, exponible, exposit, exposition, expositional, expositive, expositor, expository, impone, imponent, imposition, impostor, indisposition, interpone, interponent, interposition, juxtaposit, juxtaposition, juxtapositional, oppone, opponent, opposite, opposition, oppositional, oppositive, posit, position, positional, positive, , postpone, postposition, postpositional, postpositive, posture, preposition, prepositional, prepositive, prepositor, prepositure, propone, proponent, proposition, propositional, recomposition, reimposition, repone, reposit, reposition, repository, seposit, seposition, superimposition, superposition, supposition, suppositional, suppositive, suppositor, suppository, transposition, transpositional, transpositive 
 port port- portav- portat- carry apport, asportation, comport, comportable, comportance, comportation, comportment, deport, deportable, deportation, deportee, disport, export, exportable, exportation, import, importable, importance, important, importation, insupportable, nonportable, portability, portable, portage, portamento, portance, portative, porterage, proport, purport, rapport, rapporteur, reexport, reimport, reimportation, report, reportable, reportage, reportative, sport, support, supportable, transport, transportable, transportation 
 pt pt- potav- potat- drink compotation, compotator, perpotation, potability, potable, potation, potion 
 precor prec- precat-  pray apprecation, deprecable, deprecate, deprecation, imprecate, imprecation, pray, prayer, precarious, precation, precatory 
 prehend prehend-prend- prehend- prehens-prens- grasp apprehend, apprehension, apprehensive, apprentice, apprisal, apprise, comprehend, comprehensible, comprehension, comprehensive, comprisal, comprise, deprehend, emprise, enterprise, entrepreneur, impregnable, impresa, impresario, imprison, imprisonment, inapprehension, incomprehensible, incomprehension, incomprehensive, pregnable, prehend, prehensile, prehensility, prehension, prise, prison, purprise, reprehend, reprehensible, reprieve, reprisal, reprise, surprise 
 prem-prim prem--prim- press- press- press, push appress, appressorium, compress, compressible, compression, compressional, compressive, compressor, counterpressure, decompress, decompression, depress, depression, depressive, depressor, espresso, express, expressible, expression, expressional, expressive, expressivity, expressor, impress, impressible, impression, impressionable, impressional, impressive, impressor, imprimatur, imprimatura, imprint, incompressibility, incompressible, inexpressible, inexpressive, irrepressible, oppress, oppressible, oppression, oppressive, oppressor, preprint, press, pressure, print, repress, repressible, repression, repressive, repressor, reprimand, reprint, subexpression, suppress, suppressant, suppression, suppressor, surprint, transrepression 
 press press- pressav- pressat- 
 pugn pugn- pugnav- pugnat- fight impugn, impugnable, impugnation, pugnacious, repugn, repugnance, repugnant 
 pung pung- pupug- punct- prick appoint, appointee, appointive, appointment, bipunctate, bipunctual, compunction, contrapuntal, counterpoint, demi-pointe, disappoint, disappointment, dispunge, expunction, expunge, impunctate, impunctual, inexpungible, multipoint, poignant, point, pointe, punctate, punctatim, punctation, punctator, punctiform, punctilio, punction, punctual, punctuality, punctuation, puncture, pungency, pungent, puntilla, puntillero, punto, reappoint, reappointment, tripoint 
 punct punct- punctav- punctat- 
 put put- putav- putat- prune, think accompt, accomptant, account, accountability, accountable, accountancy, accountant, amputate, amputation, amputee, computable, computation, compute, count, countable, deputable, depute, deputy, discount, disputable, disputant, disputation, disputative, dispute, disreputable, disrepute, imputable, imputation, imputative, impute, incomputable, indisputable, irreputable, nonimputable, precompute, putamen, putaminous, putative, raconteur, recompute, recount, reputable, reputation, repute, supputate, supputation, suppute 
 putre putr-   be rotten putredinous, putrefacient, putrefaction, putrefactive, putrefy, putresce, putrescence, putrescent, putrescible, putrescine, putrid, putridity, putrilage, putrilaginous 
 putresc putresc-   
 quaer-quir quaer--quir- quaesiv- quaesit--quisit- search, seek acquire, acquisition, exquire, exquisite, inquest, inquire, inquisitive, perquisite, query, quest 
 quati-cuti quat--cut-  quass--cuss- shake cassate, cassation, concussion, conquassate, decussation, discuss, discussion, discussive, discutient, percussion, percussive, percussor, quash, quassation, recussion, repercussion, rescue, squash, squassation, succussion, succussive 
 quass quass- quassav- quassat- 
 queror quer- quest-  complain quarrel, querent, querimony, querulous 
 queritor querit- -  
 rd rd- ras- ras- scrape, shave abrade, abrasion, abrasive, corrade, corrasion, erase, erasure, radula, radular 
 rance ranc-   be rotten rancid, rancor 
 rapi-ripi rap--rip- rapu- rapt--rept- arreption, arreptitious, rapacious, rapacity, rape, rapid, rapidity, rapine, rapt, raptio, raptor, rapture, rapturous, raptus, ravish, subreption, subreptitious, surreptitious 
 reg-rig reg--rig- rex- rect- keep straight adret, adroit, alert, arrect, bidirectional, bidirectionality, birectify, biregular, coregency, coregent, correct, correction, correctional, corrective, corrector, correctory, correctress, corregidor, corregimiento, corrigendum, corrigent, corrigibility, corrigible, counterinsurgency, counterinsurgent, derail, derailleur, derailment, derecho, deregulate, deregulation, direct, direction, directional, directionality, directive, director, directorate, directorial, directory, directress, directrix, dirigible, erect, erection, erector, escort, experrection, incorrect, incorrigibility, incorrigible, indirect, indirection, insurgency, insurgent, insurrection, interregent, interregimental, interregional, irregular, irregularity, maladroit, multidirectional, porrect, porrection, rail, rectal, rectification, rectilinear, rectilinearity, rection, rectitude, rectitudinous, rector, rectorate, rectory, rectress, rectricial, rectrix, rectum, redirect, regency, regent, regible, regime, regimen, regiment, regimental, regimentation, region, regional, regle, regula, regular, regularity, regulate, regulation, regulator, regulatory, reregulate, resource, resurge, resurgence, resurgent, resurrect, resurrection, semiregular, source, subrector, subrectory, subregent, subregion, subregional, surge, trirectify, unidirectional, viceregent 
 rp rp- reps- rpt- crawl, creep obreption, obreptitious, reptation, reptile, reptilian 
 rept rept- reptav- reptat- 
 ride rid- ris- ris- laugh, smile arride, deride, derision, derisive, irrisible, irrision, ridicule, ridiculous, risibility, risible 
 rige rig-   be stiff de rigueur, rigid, rigor 
 rod rod- ros- ros- gnaw corrode, corrosion, corrosive, erode, erosion, noncorrosive, rodent, rodenticide 
 rog rog- rogav- rogat- ask abrogate, abrogation, derogate, derogatory, interrogate, interrogation, interrogative, interrogator, interrogatory, obrogate, obrogation, prorogatio, prorogation, rogatio, rogation, rogatory, subrogate, subrogation, surrogacy, surrogate 
 rump rump- rup- rupt- break, burst abrupt, corrupt, corruption, corruptor, disrupt, disruption, disruptive, erumpent, erupt, eruption, eruptive, interrupt, interruption, irrupt, irruption, irruptive, noneruptive, reroute, rout, route, rupture 
 sali-sili sal--sil- salu--silu- salt- jump assail, assault, desultory, exult, exultant, exultation, insult, insultation, irresilient, resile, resilience, resiliency, resilient, result, resultant, salient, saltant 
 salt salt--sult- saltav- saltat--sultat- 
 scand-scend scand--scend- scand- scans--scens- climb ascend, ascension, condescension, descend, descent, scansion, transcend, transcendental 
 sc sci- sciv- scit- know conscience, nescience, omniscience, plebiscite, prescient, science 
 scrb scrb- scrips- scrpt- write ascribe, circumscribe, conscription, describe, description, descriptive, descriptor, indescribable, inscribe, inscription, nondescript, postscript, prescribe, prescription, prescriptive, proscribe, proscription, proscriptive, scribble, scribe, script, scriptural, scripture, scrivener, subscribe, subscript, subscription, superscript, transcribe, transcript, transcription 
 sec sec- secu- sect- cut bisect, bisection, bisector, bisectrix, dissect, dissection, insect, intersect, intersection, intersectionality, prosect, prosector, resection, secant, sectile, section, sectional, sector, sectorial, segment, subsection, subsector, subsegment, suprasegmental, transect, transection, trisectrix, vivisection 
 sede-side sede--side- sed- sess- sit dissident, insidious, nonresident, obsession, obsessive, preside, presidium, reside, resident, sedentary, sediment, sessile, session, subside, supersede, supersession 
 sed sed- sedav- sedat- sedate, sedation, sedative 
 senti senti- sens- sens- feel assent, consensual, consensus, consent, dissension, dissent, insensate, nonsense, resent, resentment, scent, sensate, sensation, sensational, sense, sensibility, sensible, sensor, sensual, sentence, sentient, sentiment, sentimental, sentimentality 
 sequor sequ- secut-  follow assecution, consecutive, consequence, consequent, consequential, demisuit, ensuant, ensue, execute, execution, executive, executor, extrinsic, inconsequential, insequent, intrinsic, non sequitur, nonconsecutive, nonsequential, obsequence, obsequent, obsequious, persecute, persecution, persecutor, prosecute, prosecution, prosecutor, prosecutorial, prosecutory, prosecutive, pursual, pursuance, pursuant, pursue, pursuit, pursuivant, resequent, second, secondary, secundine, segue, sequacious, sequacity, sequel, sequela, sequence, sequent, sequential, sequitur, suant, subsecute, subsecutive, subsequent, sue, suit, suitability, suitable, suite, suitor 
 sector sect- sectat-  
 ser ser- seru- sert- assert, assertion, desert, desertion, desertrix, insert, insertion, serial, series 
 serp serp- serps- serpt- crawl serpent 
 servi serv- serviv- servit- serve deserve, servile, servitude, subservience, subservient 
 serv serv- servav- servat- save conservable, conservation, conservative, conservator, conservatory, conserve, observable, observance, observant, observation, observational, observative, observator, observatory, observe, preservable, preservation, preservative, preserve, reservable, reservance, reservation, reservative, reserve 
 sist sist- stet- stat- cause to stand absist, assist, consist, consistency, consistent, desist, exist, existence, existent, inconsistent, insist, insistence, insistent, irresistible, nonexistent, persist, persistence, persistent, resist, resistible, subsist, subsistence, subsistent 
 solv solv- solv- solut- loosen absolute, absolution, absolutive, absolutory, absolve, dissolute, dissolution, dissolve, insolubility, insoluble, insolvency, insolvent, irresolute, resolute, resolution, resolve, resolvent, solubility, soluble, solute, solution, solve, solvency, solvend, solvent 
 sorde sord- sordu-  be dirty sordes, sordid 
 sparg sparg--sperg- spars- spars--spers- scatter aspersion, dispersal, disperse, dispersion, sparse 
 speci-spici spec--spic- spex- spect- look aspect, aspectual, auspices, auspicious, circumspect, circumspection, circumspective, conspecific, conspectus, conspicuous, disrespect, expect, expectancy, expectant, expectation, inauspicious, incircumspect, inconspicuous, inspect, inspection, inspector, interspecific, introspection, introspective, irrespective, nonspecific, perspective, perspicacious, perspicuity, perspicuous, prospect, prospective, prospector, prospectus, respect, respectable, respective, retrospection, retrospective, special, speciality, speciation, specie, species, specific, specification, specificity, specimen, speciosity, specious, spectacle, spectacular, spectator, spectral, spectrum, specular, speculate, speculation, speculative, speculator, speculatory, speculum, subspecies 
 spect spect- spectav- spectat- 
 spir spir- spirav- spirat- breathe aspiration, aspire, conspiracy, conspirator, conspiratorial, conspire, inspiration, inspirational, inspire, perspiration, perspire, preaspiration, respiration, respirator, respiratory, spiracle 
 splende splend- splendu-  resplendent, splendent, splendid, splendiferous, splendor 
 sponde spond- spopond- spons- promise correspond, correspondence, correspondent, despond, despondency, despondent, espousage, espousal, espouse, irresponsible, nonresponsive, respond, respondence, respondent, response, responsibility, responsible, responsive, sponsal, sponsion, sponsional, sponsor, spousal, spouse 
 spons spons- sponsav- sponsat- 
 squale squal- squalu-  squalid, squalor 
 statu-stitu statu--stitu- statu--stitu- statut--stitut- cause to stand constituency, constituent, constitute, constitution, constitutional, destitute, destitution, institute, institution, institutional, prostitute, prostitution, reconstitute, restitution, statuary, statue, statuette, statute, statutory, substituent, substitute, substitution 
 staur staur- staurav- staurat- instaurate, instauration, instaure, restaurant, restoration, restorative 
 stern stern- strav- strat- spread, strew prostrate, prostration, stratus, stratum, substratum 
 st st- stet- stat- stand antestature, circumstance, circumstant, circumstantial, circumstantiality, constable, constancy, constant, consubstantial, consubstantiality, consubstantiation, contrast, contrastable, disestablish, distance, distant, establish, establishment, estate, extant, inconstancy, inconstant, instability, instance, instancy, instant, instate, instatement, insubstantial, presto, reinstate, reinstatement, restate, restatement, stabile, stability, stable, stage, stamen, stamina, staminal, stance, stanchion, stanza, statant, statary, state, statement, station, stationary, stative, stator, stature, status, stet, substance, substantial, substantiality, substantiate, substantiation, substantive, substation, transubstantiate, transubstantiation 
 string string- strinx- strict- squeeze astrict, astriction, astrictive, astringe, astringency, astringent, constrain, constraint, constrict, constriction, constrictive, constrictor, constringe, constringency, constringent, distrain, distraint, distress, district, restrain, restraint, restrict, restriction, restrictive, restrictor, restringe, restringency, restringent, strain, strict, stricture, stringency, stringent 
 stru stru- strux- struct- construct, constructible, construction, constructive, constructor, construe, destroy, destruction, destructive, destructor, indestructible, infrastructure, instruct, instruction, instructive, instructor, instrument, instrumental, obstruct, obstruent, obstruction, structural, structure, superstructure 
 stude stud- studu-  tude, student, studio, studious, study 
 stupe stup- stupu-  be stunned stupefaction, stupendous, stupid, stupidity, stupor, stuporous 
 suade suad- suas- suas- dissuade, dissuasion, persuade, persuasion, persuasive 
 sum es- fu- futur- be absence, absent, adessive, antessive, disinterest, essence, essential, essive, exessive, future, futurity, inessive, interest, presence, present, subessive 
 sm sum- sumps- sumpt- take assume, assumption, assumptive, consume, consumption, consumptive, insume, presume, presumption, presumptive, presumptuous, resume, resumption, resumptive, subsume, subsumption 
 su su- su- st- sew assument, sutile, suture 
 tace tac--tic- tacu- tacit- keep silent reticence, reticent, tacit, taciturn, taciturnity 
 tang-ting tang--ting- tetig--tig- tact- touch attain, attainment, contact, contingency, contingent, intact, intangible, integral, pertingent, tactile, tangent, tangental, tangential, tangible 
 teg teg- tex- tect- cover contection, detect, detection, detective, detector, integument, obtect, protect, protection, protective, protector, protectorate, protg, tectrix, tectum, tegmen, tegmental, tegula, tegular, tegument, tile, toga 
 tend tend- tetend- tens- stretch attend, attent, attentive, contend, distend, distension, extend, extensible, extension, extensor, extent, inattentive, intend, intense, intension, intensional, intensity, intensive, intent, ostensible, ostension, ostensory, portend, portension, portent, pretend, pretense, pretension, subtend, tendency, tendentious, tense, tensible, tensile, tension, tensure 
 tene-tine ten--tin- tenu--tinu- tent- have, hold abstain, abstention, abstinence, abstinent, appertain, appertinent, appurtenance, appurtenant, contain, content, continence, continent, continental, contratenor, countenance, detain, detention, discontent, entertain, entertainment, impertinent, incontinence, incontinent, intenible, maintain, maintenance, malcontent, obtain, pertain, pertinacious, pertinacity, pertinence, pertinent, retain, retainer, retention, retentive, retinue, sustain, sustenance, tenacious, tenacity, tenet, tenor, tenure 
 tent tent- tentav- tentat- ostentation, ostentatious, tentacle, tentation, tentative 
 terge terg- ters- ters- wipe detergent, terse 
 ter ter- triv- trit- rub, wear attrition, contrite, contrition, detriment, detrimental, detrital, detrition, detritivore, detritus, trite 
 tex tex- texu- text- weave context, contextual, pretext, subtext, text, textile, textual, texture 
 time tim- timu-  be afraid timidity, timorous 
 tinni tinn- tinniv- tinnit- ring tinnitus 
 torque torqu- tors- tort- twist contort, contortion, detortion, distort, distortion, extort, extortion, retort, torque, torsade, torse, tort, tortillon, tortrix, torture 
 torre torr- torru- tost- torrent, torrential, torrid 
 trah trah- trax- tract- drag, draw abstract, abstraction, abstractive, attract, attractant, attraction, attractive, attractor, contract, contraction, contractional, contractive, contractor, contrahent, detract, detraction, detractive, detractor, distract, distraction, distractive, distrait, extract, extraction, extractive, extractor, intractable, portrait, portraiture, portray, portrayal, protractor, retract, retraction, retractor, subtract, subtraction, subtractive, subtractor, subtrahend, tract, tractable, tractate, tractation, tractator, tractile, traction, tractional, tractor, trait 
 tract tract--trect- tractav- tractat--trectat- 
 trud trud- trus- trus- thrust abstrude, abstruse, abstrusion, detrude, detrusion, extrude, extrusible, extrusion, extrusive, intrude, intrusion, intrusive, obtrude, obtrusion, obtrusive, protrude, protrudent, protrusion, protrusive, retrude, retruse, retrusion 
 tueor tu- tut-, tuit-  intuition, intuitive, tuition, tutelage, tutor 
 tume tum- tumu-  be swollen detumescence, tumescent, tumid, tumidity, tumor 
 turge turg-   turgid, turgidity, turgor 
 ume um-   be moist humid, humidify, humidity, humidor 
 ur ur- uss- ust- burn adustion, urn 
 utor ut- us-  use abuse, abusive, disabuse, disuse, perusal, peruse, use, usufruct, usure, usurp, usury, utility 
 vac vac- vacav- vacat- be empty vacancy, vacant, vacate, vacation 
 vad vad- vas- vas- go evade, evasion, evasive, invade, invasion, invasive, pervasive 
 vale val- valu- valit- be strong ambivalence, ambivalent, avail, countervail, invalid, prevail, prevalence, prevalent, valence, valid, validity, valor 
 veh veh- vex- vect- carry advection, convection, convective, convex, invective, inveigh, transvection, vector, vehicle, vehicular 
 vell - vuls- vuls- avulsion, convulse, convulsion, convulsive, revulsion 
 veni ven- ven- vent- come advene, advent, adventist, adventitious, adventure, avenue, circumvent, circumvention, contravene, contravention, convene, convenience, convenient, convent, conventicle, convention, conventional, coven, covenant, event, eventual, eventuality, inconvenience, inconvenient, intervene, intervention, invent, invention, inventive, inventory, nonintervention, obvention, prevene, prevent, prevention, preventive, provenience, reconvene, venture, venue 
 vereor ver- verit-  irreverent, revere, reverence, reverend, reverent, reverential 
 verg verg-   converge, convergence, convergent, diverge, divergence, divergent, vergence 
 vert vert- vert- vers- turn adversarial, adversary, adversative, adverse, adversion, adversity, advert, advertent, animadversion, animadvert, anteversion, antevert, aversation, averse, aversion, avert, avertible, contraversion, controversial, controversy, controvert, conversant, conversation, conversational, converse, conversion, convert, convertibility, convertible, diverse, diversion, diversionary, diversity, divert, divertible, divorce, everse, eversible, eversion, eversive, evert, extrorse, extroversion, extrovert, inadvertent, incontrovertible, indivertible, interconversion, interconvert, interconvertible, intervert, introrse, introversion, introversive, introvert, inverse, inversion, invert, invertible, irreversible, multiverse, nonconvertible, nonuniversal, obversant, obverse, obversion, obvert, perverse, perversion, perversity, pervert, pervertibility, pervertible, reconversion, reconvert, reconvertible, reversal, reverse, reversible, reversion, reversionary, reversive, revert, revertent, revertibility, revertible, subversion, subversionary, subversive, subvert, subvertible, transverse, traversal, traverse, universal, universality, universe, university, varsity, versable, versant, versatile, versatility, verse, versicle, versicular, versification, versificator, version, verso, versus, versute, vertebra, vertebral, vertebrate, vertex, vertical, vertiginous, vertigo 
 vers vers- versav- versat- 
 vide vid- vid- vis- see advice, advisable, advise, advisement, advisor, advisory, envisage, envisagement, envision, evidence, evident, evidential, evidentiality, evidentiary, improvidence, improvident, improvisation, improvisational, improvisator, improvisatory, improvise, imprudence, imprudent, inevident, interview, invisible, nonvisual, preview, provide, providence, provident, provision, provisional, provisionality, proviso, provisory, prudence, prudent, prudential, purvey, purveyance, purveyor, purview, review, supervision, supervisor, supervisory, survey, surveyor, video, view, vis--vis, visa, visage, visibility, visible, vision, visionary, visitation, visor, vista, visual, voila, voyeur 
 visit visit- visitav- visitat- 
 vid vid- vis- vis- divide, dividend, divisibility, divisible, division, divisional, divisive, divisor, individual, individuality, indivisible 
 vinc vinc- vic- vict- conquer, win convict, conviction, convince, convincible, evict, eviction, evince, inconvincible, invincible, pervicacious, vanquish, victor, victorious, victory 
 vit vit- vitav- vitat- shun evitable, evitation, evite, inevitability, inevitable 
 viv viv- vix- vict- live convivial, conviviality, revival, revive, survival, survive, survivor, viand, victual, viva, vivace, vivacious, vivacity, vivandire, vivant, vivarium, vivid, vivific, vivification, vivisepulture 
 voc voc- vocav- vocat- call advocacy, advocate, advocation, advocator, advocatory, advoke, advowson, avocation, avouch, avow, avowal, convocation, equivocate, equivocation, evocative, evoke, invocation, invoke, provocation, provocative, provoke, revocation, revoke, vocation, vouch, vouchee, voucher, vouchsafe 
 vol vol- volav- volat- fly avolation, circumvolant, circumvolation, nonvolatile, volatile, volatility, volitant, volitation 
 volit volit- volitav- volitat- 
 vol volu-  wish benevolence, benevolent, involuntary, malevolence, malevolent, volitient, volition, volitional, volitive, voluntary, volunteer 
 volv volv- volv- volt- roll advolution, circumvolute, circumvolution, circumvolve, convolute, convolution, convolutionary, convolve, devolute, devolution, devolutionary, devolve, devolvement, evolute, evolution, evolutionary, evolve, evolvent, involucrum, involute, involution, involve, involvement, revoluble, revolute, revolution, revolutionary, revolve, vault, volte, volte-face, voltigeur, volubility, voluble, volume, voluminous, voussoir 
 vor vor- vorav- vorat- swallow carnivore, devour, omnivore, omnivorous, voracious, voracity, voraginous 
 vove vov- vov- vot- vow devote, devotion, devotional, devout, votary, vote, votive, vow 

 Frequentative
 Inchoative

==Prepositions and other words used to form compound words==

 Latin prepositions and other words 
 Word Meaning Prefixes 
 , ab away from ab-, a-, abs-, as- 
 ad to, toward ad-, a-, ac-, af-, ag-, al-, ap-, ar-, at- 
 ambo both ambi-, am-, amb- 
 ante before ante-, anti- 
 bis twice bi-, bis- 
 circum around circum- 
 cis this side of cis- 
 contr against, opposite to contra-, contro- 
 cum together, with con-, co-, col-, com-, cor- 
 d down from de- 
 dexter right, to the right hand dextro- 
 dis- apart dis-, di-, dif-, dir- 
 ex,  from, out of ex-, e-, ef- 
 extr outside extra-, extro- 
 in in, into in-, il-, im-, ir- 
 nfr below infra- 
 inter among, between inter-, intel- 
 intr within intra-, intro- 
 iuxt beside juxta- 
 multus much, many multi- 
 ne no ne-, neg- 
 non not non- 
 ob, obs toward, against, in the way of, by reason of ob-, o-, oc-, of-, og-, op-, os- 
 paene almost, nearly pen- 
 per thorough, through per-, pel- 
 post after, behind post- 
 prae before pre- 
 praeter by, past preter- 
 pr for, forth, in front of pro-, pol-, por-, prod- 
 re- again, back re-, red- 
 retro backwards retro- 
 s apart, without se-, sed- 
 sub from below, under sub-, su-, suc-, suf-, sug-, sum-, sup-, sur-, sus- 
 subter beneath subter- 
 super above, over super- 
 supr above, more than supra- 
 trns across trans-, tra-, tran- 
 ultr beyond ultra- 
 ve- out ve- 

==See also==
* Hybrid word
* Classical compound
* Latin
* Latin influence in English
* List of Greek words of Byzantine Latin origin
* List of Greek words with English derivatives
* List of Greek and Latin roots in English
* List of Latin phrases
* Latin Mnemonics
* Latin school
* List of Latin abbreviations
* List of Latin and Greek words commonly used in systematic names
* List of Latinised names
* List of legal Latin terms
* Medical terminology
* Romanization (cultural)
* Toponymy
* 

==References==
*Latin terms used by the Legion of Mary
*The New Perseus Search Engine/Word study tool
*The Old Perseus Latin morphology tool
*Online Etymology Dictionary (English)
*The Latin Lexicon  Word Study Tool / Word Analysis

 List of

Latin

[[Latin spelling and pronunciation]]

Ancient Roman inscription in Roman square capitals. The words Appius Claudius / C(ai) f(ilius) Caecus / censor co(n)s(ul) bis dict(ator) interrex III / pr(aetor) II aed(ilis) cur(ulis) II q(uaestor) tr(ibunus) mil(itum) III com/plura oppida de( )Samnitibus cepit / Sabinorum et Tuscrum exerci/tum fudit pcem fier cum Pyrrho / rege prohibuit in censura uiam / Appiam strauit etaquam in / urbem( )adduxit aedem Bellonae / fecit are separated by engraved dots, a common but by no means universal practice, and long vowels are marked by apices.

Latin spelling or orthography refers to the spelling of Latin words written in the scripts of all historical phases of Latin, from Old Latin to the present. All scripts use the same alphabet, but conventional spellings may vary from phase to phase. The Roman alphabet, or Latin alphabet, was adapted from the Old Italic alphabet to represent the phonemes of the Latin language. The Old Italic alphabet had in turn been borrowed from the Greek alphabet, itself adapted from the Phoenician alphabet.

Latin pronunciation continually evolved over the centuries, making it difficult for speakers in one era to know how Latin was spoken in prior eras. A given phoneme may be represented by different letters in different periods. This article deals primarily with modern scholarship's best reconstruction of Classical Latin's phonemes (phonology) and the pronunciation and spelling used by educated people in the late Republic, and then touches upon later changes and other variants.

==Letters and phonemes==

In Latin spelling, individual letters mostly corresponded to individual phonemes, with three main exceptions:
# Each vowel letter, , , , , represented both long and short vocalic phonemes. As for instance has long , short . The long vowels were distinguished by apices in many Classical texts (), but are not always reproduced in modern copy. (Where they are, they are typically replaced with a macron: mns.)
# Some pairs of letters represented either two vowels in separate syllables, or a diphthong in a single syllable. For instance, starts with the syllables and , but starts with the syllable .
# the letters and represented either the vowels and , or the semivowels and . So is , starting with the vowel , but is , with the semivowel .
The other 17 letters had mostly always the same sound value, with very few exceptions, such as the word , which was pronounced due to assimilation (the stem, however, continued to be urb- in all other declensions).

In the tables below, letters (and digraphs) are paired with the phonemes they usually represent in IPA. English upper case letters are used to represent the Roman square capitals from which they derive. Latin as yet had no equivalent to the English lower case. It did have a Roman cursive used for rapid writing, which is not represented in this article.

===Consonants===

====Table of single consonants====
:
 Labial Dental Palatal Velar Glottal 
 plain labialized 
 Plosive voiced 
 voiceless or 
 aspirated 
 Fricative voiced 
 voiceless 
 Nasal or 
 Rhotic 
 Approximant 

;Notes
* and both represent . In archaic inscriptions of Early Latin, was primarily used before and , while was used before . However, in classical times, had been replaced by , except in a very small number of words. clarified minimal pairs between and , making it possible to distinguish between (with a diphthong) and (with a labialized velar stop). represented the consonant cluster , which in Old Latin which could be spelled , or . Adding to all this, originally represented both and . Hence, it was used in the abbreviation of common praenomina (first names): [[Gaius|]] was abbreviated , and (disambiguation)|] as Later misunderstanding of this convention would lead to the erroneous modern spelling .

*In the classical period, (spelled ) became labio-palatalized when followed by a front vowel. For example, was pronounced . 

*The digraphs representing aspirated phonemes began to be used in writing around the middle of the second century B.C., and were primarily employed for transcribing Greek names and loan-words containing the aspirated sounds represented by phi ( ), theta ( ), and chi ( ), as in , , and . In such cases, the aspiration was likely produced only by educated speakers. Subsequently, the aspirates began making an appearance in a number of Latin words which were not learned borrowings from classical Greek, initially as allophones of the unaspirated plosives in proximity to and . Because , and were already available to represent these sounds, this resulted in standard forms such as , , , , thereby reducing the phonemes' erstwhile marginal status, at least among educated speakers. 

* was at first represented by or in Koine Greek loanwords (e.g. from ). Around the second and first centuries B.C., zeta () was adopted to represent . Based on Italian Greek, where was still pronounced , and before a vowel in Latin replaced standing for . For example, became . Thereafter, was pronounced either or . In classical verse, always counted as two consonants. This might mean that the sound was or geminated .

*The phoneme transcribed by may have represented a bilabial in Early Latin, or perhaps in free variation with . Lloyd, Sturtevant and Kent make this argument based on certain misspellings of inscriptions, the Proto-Indo-European phone from which the Latin descended, and the way the sound appears to have behaved in Vulgar Latin, particularly in Spain. 

*It is likely that, by the Classical period, at the end of words was pronounced weakly, either voiceless or simply by nasalizing the preceding vowel. For instance ('ten') was probably pronounced . In addition to the metrical features of Latin poetry, the fact that all such endings in words of more than two syllables lost the final in the descendant Romance languages strengthens this hypothesis. For simplicity, and because this is not known for certain, is always represented as the phoneme here and in other references.

* assimilated to before labial consonants as in .

====Diphthongs====
, , , , represented diphthongs: represented , represented , represented , represented , and represented .

In the earliest Latin, and were pronounced as and , with a fully closed second element, and were written as such in early texts (, ). In the late Old Latin period, the falling element was lowered, Ralf L. Ward, Evidence For The Pronunciation Of Latin, The Classical World, Vol. 55, No. 9 (Jun., 1962), pp. 273-275 and the pronunciation shifted first to and . These then became the monophthongs and , starting in rural areas at the end of the republican period. This simplification was already common in rural speech as far back as the time of Varro (116 BC  27 BC): cf. De lingua latina, 5:97 (referred to in ). This process, however, does not seem to have been completed before the 3rd century AD in Vulgar Latin, and some scholars say that it may have been regular by the 5th century. Clackson & Horrocks, pp. 273-274 

===Vowel and consonant length===
Vowel and consonant length were more significant and more clearly defined in Latin than in modern English. Length is the duration of time that a particular sound is held before proceeding to the next sound in a word. Unfortunately, "vowel length" is a confusing term for English speakers, who in their language call "long vowels" what are in most cases diphthongs, rather than plain vowels. (This is a relic of the Great Vowel Shift, during which vowels that were once pronounced phonemically longer became these diphthongs.) In the modern spelling of Latin, especially in dictionaries and academic work, macrons are frequently used to mark long vowels: , while the breve is sometimes used to indicate that a vowel is short: .

Long consonants were usually indicated through doubling (for example, 'old woman' and 'year', two different words with distinct pronunciations), but Latin orthography did not distinguish between the vocalic and consonantal uses of and . Vowel length was indicated only intermittently in classical sources, through a variety of means. Later medieval and modern usage tended to omit vowel length altogether. A short-lived convention of spelling long vowels by doubling the vowel letter is associated with the poet Lucius Accius. Later spelling conventions marked long vowels with an apex (a diacritic similar to an acute accent), or in the case of long , by increasing the height of the letter (long i). Distinctions of vowel length became less important in later Latin, and have ceased to be phonemic in the modern Romance languages, where the previous long and short versions of the vowels have either been lost or replaced by other phonetic contrasts.

Vowel length was phonemic in Latin, and sometimes resulted in minimal pairs: ('old woman'), ('ring, anus').

==Syllables and stress==

In Early Latin, as in Proto-Italic, stress normally fell on the first syllable of a word. During this period, the word-initial stress triggered changes in the vowels of non-initial syllables, the effects of which are still visible in classical Latin. Compare for example ('I do/make'), in which the was originally stressed, with , in which it was originally unstressed, and was therefore reduced. In the earliest Latin writings, the original unreduced vowels are still visible. Study of this vowel reduction, as well as syncopation (dropping of short unaccented syllables) in Greek loan words, indicates that the stress remained word-initial until around the time of Plautus, the 3rd century BC. The placement of the stress then shifted to become the pattern found in classical Latin. (Thus a change to .)

In classical Latin, according to the penultimate rule, stress was placed relative to the end of the word rather than the beginning as in early Latin. The distinction between heavy and light syllables was important as it determined where the main stress of a word fell, and was the key element in classical Latin versification. According to Cicero and Quintilian, it determined the accentuation of classical Latin. Romance Languages: A Historical Introduction - 2010 p7 "1.1.4 The Penultimate Rule This rule assigning word stress in Latin is stated in terms of syllable weight. Once you have identified the boundaries of a syllable, you have to determine whether it's heavy or light. Definition: A syllable is heavy if it ..." According to the rule stress-accent falls on the penultimate syllable if it is of 'heavy', and on the antepenultimate if the penultimate is 'light.' Vox Graeca: The Pronunciation of Classical Greek William Sidney Allen - 1987 p151 "The Latin system is, as we know, governed by the so-called 'penultimate' rule (cf. VL, p. 83), whereby a stress-accent falls on the penultimate syllable if it is of 'heavy' structure, and on the antepenultimate if the penultimate is 'light'; according to ... 

Words were normally stressed on the penultimate syllable if that syllable was heavy, and on the antepenultimate syllable if the penultimate syllable was light. In words of two syllables, the stress was always on the first syllable. A heavy syllable (sometimes called a "long" syllable) is a syllable that contains either a long vowel or a diphthong, or ends in a consonant. If a single consonant occurs between two syllables within a word, it is considered to belong to the following syllable, so the syllable before the consonant is light if it contains a short vowel. If two or more consonants (or a geminated consonant) occur between syllables within a word, the first of the consonants goes with the first syllable, making it heavy. Certain combinations of consonants, e.g. , are exceptions: both consonants go with the second syllable.

==Elision==

Where one word ended with a vowel (including a nasalized vowel, represented by a vowel plus ) and the next word began with a vowel, the first vowel, at least in verse, was regularly elided; that is, it was omitted altogether, or possibly (in the case of and ) pronounced like the corresponding semivowel. Elision also occurred in Ancient Greek but in that language it is shown in writing by the vowel in question being replaced by an apostrophe, whereas in Latin elision is not indicated at all in the orthography, but can be deduced from the verse form. Only occasionally is it found in inscriptions, as in scriptust for scriptum est.

==Latin spelling and pronunciation today==

===Spelling===
Modern usage, even when printing classical Latin texts, varies in respect of and . During the Renaissance the printing convention was to use I (upper case) and i (lower case) for both vocalic and consonantal , to use V in the upper case and in the lower case to use v at the start of words and u subsequently within the word regardless of whether and was represented. Thus, for example, Henri Estienne's Dictionarium, seu Latinae linguae thesaurus (1531) 

Many publishers (such as Oxford University Press) have adopted a purist convention of using I (upper case) and i (lower case) for both and , and V (upper case) and u (lower case) for both and .

An alternative approach, less common today, is to use i and u only for the vowels, and j and v for the approximants.

Most modern editions, however, adopt an intermediate position, distinguishing between u and v but not between i and j. Usually the non-vocalic v after q or g is still printed as u rather than v, probably because in this position it did not change from to in post-classical times. This approach is also recommended in the help page for the Latin Wikipedia. 

Textbooks and dictionaries indicate the length of vowels by putting a macron or horizontal bar above the long vowel, but this is not generally done in regular texts. Occasionally, mainly in early printed texts up to the 18th century, one may see a circumflex used to indicate a long vowel where this makes a difference to the sense, for instance Rom ('from Rome' ablative) compared to Roma ('Rome' nominative). Gilbert, Allan H.: "Mock Accents in Renaissance and Modern Latin (in Comment and Criticism)", PMLA, Vol. 54, No. 2. (Jun., 1939), pp. 608-610. Sometimes, for instance in Roman Catholic service books, an acute accent over a vowel is used to indicate the stressed syllable. This would be redundant for one who knew the classical rules of accentuation, and also made the correct distinction between long and short vowels, but most Latin speakers since the 3rd century have not made any distinction between long and short vowels, while they have kept the accents in the same places, so the use of accent marks allows speakers to read aloud correctly even words that they have never heard spoken aloud.

===Pronunciation===

====Post-Medieval Latin====

Since around the beginning of the Renaissance period onwards, with the language being used as an international language among intellectuals, pronunciation of Latin in Europe came to be dominated by the phonology of local languages, resulting in a variety of different pronunciation systems.

====Loan words and formal study====

When Latin words are used as loanwords in a modern language, there is ordinarily little or no attempt to pronounce them as the Romans did; in most cases, a pronunciation suiting the phonology of the receiving language is employed.

Latin words in common use in English are generally fully assimilated into the English sound system, with little to mark them as foreign, for example, cranium, saliva. Other words have a stronger Latin feel to them, usually because of spelling features such as the digraphs and (occasionally written as ligatures: and , respectively), which both denote in English. The digraph or ligature in some words tend to be given an pronunciation, for example, curriculum vitae.

However, using loan words in the context of the language borrowing them is a markedly different situation from the study of Latin itself. In this classroom setting, instructors and students attempt to recreate at least some sense of the original pronunciation. What is taught to native anglophones is suggested by the sounds of today's Romance languages, the direct descendants of Latin. Instructors who take this approach rationalize that Romance vowels probably come closer to the original pronunciation than those of any other modern language (see also the section below on "Derivative languages").

However, other languagesincluding Romance family membersall have their own interpretations of the Latin phonological system, applied both to loan words and formal study of Latin. But English, Romance, or other teachers do not always point out that the particular accent their students learn is not actually the way ancient Romans spoke.

====Ecclesiastical pronunciation====
Because of the central position of Rome within the Catholic Church, an Italian pronunciation of Latin became commonly accepted, but studies by Frederick Brittain (published as Latin in Church; the history of its pronunciation) show that this was not the case until the latter part of the 19th century. This pronunciation corresponds to that of the Latin-derived words in Italian. Before then, the pronunciation of Latin in church was the same as the pronunciation as Latin in other fields, and tended to reflect the sound values associated with the nationality of the speaker (Brittain, Latin in Church; the history of its pronunciation).

The following are the main points that distinguish modern ecclesiastical pronunciation from Classical Latin pronunciation:

* Vowels are long when stressed and in an open syllable, otherwise short. This change, like many of the others, dated from early mediaeval times and was by no means limited to Italy: "Already in the Old English period vowel-length had ceased to be observed except in the penultimate syllable of polysyllambic words, where it made a difference to the position of the accent ... Otherwise new rhythmical laws were applied, the first syllable of a disyllabic word, for instance being made heavy by lengthening the vowel if it were originally light (hence e.g. pter ... for pter)" - 
* The digraphs and represent .
* denotes (as in English ) before , , , or .
* denotes (as in English ) before , , , or .
* is silent except in two words: mihi and nihil, where it represents . Of course, the medieval spellings 'michi' and 'nichil' are now considered incorrect. However, the silent is regional, as is fully pronounced in North America in all cases, e.g., in the phrase da nobis hodie from the Pater Noster. This pronunciation of mihi and nihil may have been an attempt to reintroduce intervocalically, where it seems to have been lost even in literary Latin by the end of the Republican period (). 
* between vowels represents ; In ecclesiastical Latin, following usage in Rome rather than in Italy in general, this intervocalic softening is very slight (Liber Usualis, p. xxxviij). before , , , or represents .
* , if followed by a vowel and not preceded by , , or , represents . Liber Usualis, p. xxxviij 
* the letter when it starts a syllable is pronounced , and not as in classical Latin. Between or and a vowel, it retains the ancient pronunciation, and as a syllable nucleus it retains . Unlike in the ancient orthography, the letter is now written when it is pronounced , but when it is pronounced or .
* represents .
* represents .
* represents .
* represents .
* represents .
* represents , the of which merges with a following that precedes , , , or to form , as in 
* represents .

In his Vox Latina: A guide to the Pronunciation of Classical Latin, William Sidney Allen remarked that this pronunciation, used by the Catholic Church in Rome and elsewhere, and whose adoption Pope Pius X recommended in a 1912 letter to the Archbishop of Bourges, "is probably less far removed from classical Latin than any other 'national' pronunciation"; but, as can be seen from the table above, there are, nevertheless, very significant differences. Pius X issued a Motu Proprio in 1903 stating that "he language proper to the Roman Church is Latin". Although the document explicitly forbids "to sing anything whatever in the vernacular", it implies that the ecclesiastical pronunciation is the standard for all liturgical actions in the Church. The ecclesiastical pronunciation has since that time been the required pronunciation for any Catholic performing an action of the Church and is also the preferred pronunciation of Catholics whenever speaking Latin even if not as part of liturgy. The Pontifical Academy for Latin is a regulatory body in the Vatican that is charged with regulating Latin for use by Catholics similar to the way Acadmie franaise regulates the French language within the French state.

Outside of Austria and Germany it is the most widely used standard in choral singing which, with a few exceptions like Stravinsky's Oedipus rex, is concerned with liturgical texts. Anglican choirs adopted it when classicists abandoned traditional English pronunciation after World War II. The rise of historically informed performance and the availability of guides such as Copeman's Singing in Latin has led to the recent revival of regional pronunciations.

==Pronunciation shared by Vulgar Latin and Romance==

Because it gave rise to many modern languages, Latin did not strictly "die"; it merely evolved over the centuries in diverse ways. The local dialects of Vulgar Latin that emerged eventually became modern Italian, Spanish, French, Romanian, Portuguese, Catalan, Romansh, Dalmatian, Sardinian, and many others.

Key features of Vulgar Latin and Romance include:

* Almost total loss of and final unstressed .
* Conversion of the distinction of vowel length into a distinction of height, and subsequent merger of some of these phonemes. Most Romance languages merged short with long and short with long .
* Monophthongization of into and into .
* Loss of marginal phonemes such as aspirates (, , and ), which became plain voiceless, and the close front-rounded vowel , which became unrounded.
* Loss of before and (CL sponsa > VL sposa), though this phenomenon's influence on the later development of Romance languages was limited due to written influence and learned borrowings. 
* Palatalization of before and , probably first into , then , before finally developing into or . See Pope, Chap 6, Section 4. 
* Palatalization of before and , and of , into , then further into in some Romance varieties. 
* Palatalization of followed by vowel (if not preceded by s, t, x) into . This merged with in dialects where had developed into this sound, but remained separate elsewhere (e.g. Italian).
* The change of (except after ) and between vowels, into .

==Examples==

The following examples are both in verse, which demonstrates several features more clearly than prose.

===From Classical Latin===
Virgil's Aeneid, Book 1, verses 14. Quantitative metre. Translation: "I sing of arms and the man, who, driven by fate, came first from the borders of Troy to Italy and the Lavinian shores; he much afflicted both on lands and on the deep by the power of the gods, because of fierce Juno's vindictive wrath."

# Ancient Roman orthography (before 2nd century) "The word-divider is regularly found on all good inscriptions, in papyri, on wax tablets, and even in graffiti from the earliest Republican times through the Golden Age and well into the Second Century. ... Throughout these periods the word-divider was a dot placed half-way between the upper and the lower edge of the line of writing. ... As a rule, interpuncta are used simply to divide words, except that prepositions are only rarely separated from the word they govern, if this follows next. ... The regular use of the interpunct as a word-divider continued until sometime in the Second Century, when it began to fall into disuse, and Latin was written with increasing frequency, both in papyrus and on stone or bronze, in scriptura continua." E. Otha Wingo, Latin Punctuation in the Classical Age, Mouton, 1972, pp 1516. 
#:
#:
#:
#:
# Traditional (19th century) English orthography
#:Arma virmque cano, Troj qui primus ab oris
#:Italiam, fato profugus, Lavniaque venit
#:Litora; multm ille et terris jactatus et alto
#:Vi superum, sv memorem Junonis ob iram.
# Modern orthography with macrons (as Oxford Latin Dictionary)
#:Arma uirumque can, Triae qu prmus ab rs
#:taliam ft profugus, Luniaque unit
#:ltora; multum ille et terrs iacttus et alt
#:u superum, saeuae memorem Innis ob ram.
# Classical Roman pronunciation
#:
#:
#:
#:

Note the elisions in mult(um) and ill(e) in the third line. For a fuller discussion of the prosodic features of this passage, see Dactylic hexameter.

Some manuscripts have "Lavina" rather than "Lavinia" in the second line.

===From Medieval Latin===

Beginning of Pange Lingua by St Thomas Aquinas (13th century). Rhymed accentual metre. Translation: "Extol, tongue, the mystery of the glorious body and the precious blood, which the fruit of a noble womb, the king of nations, poured out as the price of the world."

1. Traditional orthography as in Roman Catholic service books (stressed syllable marked with an acute accent on words of three syllables or more).

:Pange lingua glorisi
:Crporis mystrium,
:Sanguinsque pretisi,
:quem in mundi prtium
:fructus ventris genersi
:Rex effdit gntium.

2. "Italianate" ecclesiastical pronunciation

:
:
:
:
:
:

==Article notes==

==See also==

*Latin alphabet
*Latin grammar
*Latin regional pronunciation
*Traditional English pronunciation of Latin
*Deutsche Aussprache des Lateinischen  traditional German pronunciation
*Schulaussprache des Lateinischen  revised "school" pronunciation
*Franzsische Aussprache des Lateins - traditional French pronunciation

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* [http://la.raycui.com/ ]: Classical and ecclesiastical Latin pronunciation with audio examples
* 
* 



[[Latin conjugation]]

Latin verbs have four main patterns of conjugation. As in a number of other languages, most Latin verbs have an active voice and a passive voice. There also exist deponent and semi-deponent Latin verbs (verbs with a passive form but active meaning), as well as defective verbs (verbs with a perfect form but present meaning). Sometimes the verbs of the third conjugation with a present stem on - (short i) are regarded as a separate pattern of conjugation, and are called the fifth conjugation.

Conjugation is the creation of derived forms of a verb from basic forms, or principal parts. It may be affected by person, number, gender, tense, mood, voice or other language-specific factors. 

In a dictionary, Latin verbs are always listed with four "principal parts" (or fewer for deponent and defective verbs) which allow the reader to deduce the other conjugated forms of the verbs. These are:
# the first person singular of the present indicative active
# the present infinitive active
# the first person singular of the perfect indicative active
# the supine or, in some texts, the perfect passive participle, which are nearly always identical. Texts that commonly list the perfect passive participle use the future active participle for intransitive verbs. Some verbs lack this principal part altogether.

For simple verb paradigms, see the appendix pages for first conjugation, second conjugation, third conjugation, and fourth conjugation.

== Properties ==
The Latin verbs have the following properties:
* three persons: first, second, and third;
* two numbers: singular and plural;
* three times: present, past, and future, and two aspects: perfective (finished) and imperfective (unfinished), which combine to form six tenses: present, perfect, imperfect, pluperfect, future, and future perfect;
* three finite moods: indicative, subjunctive, and imperative, of which only the indicative is conjugated fully in all tenses and persons;
* four non-finite forms: infinitive, gerund, participle, and supine; and
* two voices: active and passive.

== Conjugations ==
There are four conjugations in Latin which define patterns of verb inflection. However the grouping in conjugations is based solely on the behaviour of the verb in the present system, and the stems for other forms cannot be inferred from the present stem, so several forms of the verb are necessary to be able to produce the full range of Latin verbal forms. Most Latin verbs belong to one of the four verb conjugations, though some, like esse (to be), do not.

=== First conjugation ===
The first conjugation is characterized by the vowel  and can be recognized by the -re ending of the present active infinitive form. The principal parts usually adhere to one of the following patterns:
* perfect has the suffix v. The vast majority of first-conjugation verbs adhere to this pattern, which is considered to be "regular", for example:
** port, portre, portv, porttum, "to carry, to bring";
** am, amre, amv, amtum, "to love, to be fond of";
* perfect has the suffix u, for example:
** sec, secre, secu, sectum, "to cut, to divide";
** fric, fricre, fricu, frictum, "to rub";
** vet, vetre, vetu, vetitum, "to forbid, to prohibit";
* perfect has the suffix  and vowel lengthening in the stem, for example:
** lav, lavre, lv, lautum, "to wash, to bathe";
** iuv, iuvre, iv, itum, "to help, to assist";
* perfect is reduplicated, for example:
** st, stre, stet, statum, "to stand";
** d, dare, ded, datum, "to give, to bestow"; this verb is irregular.

=== Second conjugation ===
The second conjugation is characterized by the vowel , and can be recognized by the -e ending of the first person present indicative and the -re ending of the present active infinitive form. The principal parts usually adhere to one of the following patterns:
* perfect has the suffix u. Verbs which adhere to this pattern are considered to be "regular". Examples:
** terre, terrre, terru, territus (to frighten, to deter)
** doce, docre, docu, doctus (to teach, to instruct)
** tene, tenre, tenu, tentus (to hold, to keep)
* perfect has the suffix v. Examples:
** dle, dlre, dlv, dltus (to destroy, to efface)
** cie, cire, cv, citus (to arouse, to stir)
* perfect has the suffix s (which combines with a preceding c or g to x). Examples:
** auge, augre, aux, auctus (to increase, to enlarge)
** iube, iubre, iuss, iussus (to order, to bid)
* perfect is reduplicated with . Examples:
** morde, mordre, momord, morsus (to bite, to nip)
** sponde, spondre, spopond, spnsus (to vow, to promise)
* perfect has suffix  and vowel lengthening in the stem. Examples:
** vide, vidre, vd, vsus (to see, to notice)
** fove, fovre, fv, ftus (to caress, to cherish)
* perfect has suffix  and no perfect passive participle. Examples:
** strde, strdere, strd (to hiss, to creak)
** ferve, fervre, ferv (sometimes fervu) (to boil, to seethe)

=== Third conjugation ===
The third conjugation is characterized by a short thematic vowel, which alternates between e, i, and u in different environments. Verbs of this conjugation end in an ere in the present active infinitive. There is no regular rule for constructing the perfect stem of third-conjugation verbs, but the following patterns are used:
* perfect has suffix s (x when c or h comes at the end of the root). Examples:
** carp, carpere, carps, carptus (to pluck, to select)
** trah, trahere, trx, trctus (to drag, to draw)
** ger, gerere, gess, gestus (to wear, to bear)
** flect, flectere, flex, flexus (to bend, to twist)
* perfect is reduplicated with suffix . Examples:
** curr, currere, cucurr, cursus (to run, to race)
** caed, caedere, cecd, caesus (to kill, to slay)
** tang, tangere, tetig, tctus (to touch, to hit)
** pell, pellere, pepul, pulsus (to beat, to drive away)
* perfect has suffix -v. Examples:
** pet, petere, petv, pettus (to seek, to attack)
** lin, linere, lv, ltus (to smear, to befoul)
** ser, serere, sv, satus (to sow, to plant)
** ter, terere, trv, trtus (to rub, to wear out)
** stern, sternere, strv, strtus (to spread, to stretch out)
* perfect has suffix  and vowel lengthening in the stem. Examples:
** ag, agere, g, ctus (to do, to drive)
** leg, legere, lg, lctus (to collect, to read)
** em, emere, m, mptus (to buy, to purchase)
** vinc, vincere, vc, victus (to conquer, to master)
** fund, fundere, fd, fsus (to pour, to utter)
* perfect has suffix  only. Examples:
** c, cere, c, ctus (to strike, to smite)
** vert, vertere, vert, versus (to turn, to alter)
** vs, vsere, vs, vsus (to visit)
* perfect has suffix u. Examples:
** met, metere, messu, messus (to reap, to harvest)
** vom, vomere, vomu, vomitus (to vomit)
** col, colere, colu, cultus (to cultivate, to till)
** tex, texere, texu, textus (to weave, to plait)
** gign, gignere, genu, genitus (to beget, to cause)
* present tense stem has suffix u. Examples:
** minu, minuere, minu, mintus (to lessen, to diminish)
** ru, ruere, ru, rutus (to collapse, to hurl down)
** stru, struere, strx, strctus (to build, to erect)
* Present tense indicative first person singular form has suffix with sc. Examples:
** nsc, nscere, nv, ntus (to investigate, to learn)
** adolsc, adolscere, adolv (to grow up, to mature)
** flrsc, flrscere, flru (to begin to flourish, to blossom)
** haersc, haerscere, haes, haesus (to adhere, to stick)
** psc, pscere, pv, pstus (to feed, to nourish)

Intermediate between the third and fourth conjugation are the third-conjugation verbs with suffix i.
.

=== Fourth conjugation ===
The fourth conjugation is characterized by the vowel  and can be recognized by the re ending of the present active infinitive. Principal parts of verbs in the fourth conjugation generally adhere to the following patterns:
* perfect has suffix v. Verbs which adhere to this pattern are considered to be "regular". Examples:
** audi, audre, audv, audtus (to hear, listen (to))
** mni, mnre, mnv, mntus (to fortify, to build)
* perfect has suffix u. Examples:
** aperi, aperre, aperu, apertus (to open, to uncover)
* perfect has suffix s (-x when c comes at the end of the root). Examples:
** saepi, saepre, saeps, saeptus (to surround, to enclose)
** sanci, sancre, snx, snctus (to confirm, to ratify)
** senti, sentre, sns, snsus (to feel, to perceive)
* perfect has suffix  and vowel lengthening in the stem. Examples:
** veni, venre, vn, ventrus (to come, to arrive)

== Personal endings ==
Personal endings are used in all tenses. The present, imperfect, future, pluperfect and future perfect use the same personal endings in the active voice. However, the perfect, pluperfect and future perfect do not have personal endings in the passive voice as these are formed by a participle and part of esse. The perfect uses its own personal endings in the active voice.

 Active voice Passive voice 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 Present tense, etc. First person , m mus or, r mur 
 Second person s tis ris min 
 Third person t nt tur ntur 
 Perfect First person  imus 
 Second person ist istis 
 Third person it runt / -re 

== Tenses of the imperfective aspect ==
The tenses of the imperfective aspect are present, imperfect, and future tense. Verb forms in the imperfective aspect express an action that has (or had) not been completed. Consider for concreteness the following verbs:
* the first conjugation verb port, portre, portv, porttum (to carry, to bring)
* the second conjugation verb terre, terrre, terru, territum (to frighten, to deter)
* the third conjugation verb pet, petere, petv, pettum (to seek, to attack)
* the fourth conjugation verb audi, audre, audv, audtum (to hear, to listen (to))

In all the conjugations except for the third conjugation, the re is removed from the second principal part (for example, portre without the suffix re becomes port) to form the present stem, which is used for all of the tenses in the imperfective aspect. In the third conjugation, the  ending of the present indicative is dropped in order to form the present stem (for example, the present indicative form of regere is reg, and without the - it is the present stem, reg). Occasionally, the terminating vowel of the stem is lengthened and/or shortened, and sometimes completely changed. This is often true both in the third conjugation and in the subjunctive mood of all conjugations.

=== Present tense ===
The present tense (Latin tempus praesns) is used to show an uncompleted action that happens in the current time. The present tense does not have a tense sign. Instead, the personal endings are added to the bare present stem. However, in this tense the thematic vowel, most notably the  in the third conjugation, changes the most frequently.

==== Present indicative ====
The present indicative expresses general truths, facts, demands and desires. Most commonly, a verb like port can be translated as "I carry," "I do carry," or "I am carrying". In all but the third conjugation, only the thematical vowel of the stem is used. In the third conjugation, the e is only used in the second person singular in the passive for a less difficult pronunciation. Otherwise, it becomes either an i or u. The first person singular of the indicative active present is the first principal part. All end in .

 Present active indicative 
 portre terrre petere audre 
 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 First Person port portmus terre terrmus pet petimus audi audmus 
 Second Person ports porttis terrs terrtis petis petitis auds audtis 
 Third Person portat portant terret terrent petit petunt audit audiunt 

Add the passive endings to form the passive voice. The passive portor can be translated as "I am carried," or "I am being carried".

 Present passive indicative 
 portre terrre petere audre 
 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 First person portor portmur terreor terrmur petor petimur audior audmur 
 Second person portris portmin terrris terrmin peteris petimin audris audmin 
 Third person porttur portantur terrtur terrentur petitur petuntur audtur audiuntur 

Notice that in the second person singular of petere, the thematic vowel is e (peteris, not petiris).

====Present subjunctive====
The present subjunctive may be used to assert many things. In general, in independent sentences, it is translated hortatorily (only in the third person plural), jussively and optatively. Portem can be translated as "Let me carry." or "May I carry." Portmus can be "Let us carry".

Some alterations have occurred in the vowels from the indicative and subjunctive.
*The first conjugation now uses an e and an .
*The second conjugation uses ea and e.
*The third conjugation uses a or .
*The fourth conjugation uses ia or i.

"Let's beat that giant", "Defeat all liars", or "She wears a diamond/tiara" are helpful mnemonics for remembering this. First conjugation verbs have an "e" in their stem (we), second conjugation verbs have an "-ea" (eat), third conjugation verbs have an "a" (caviar), and fourths have an "ia" (caviar). Other acceptable mnemonics include she reads a diary, he beats a liar, everybody eats apple iambics, lets steal a fiat, he cheats a friar, or Clem eats clams in Siam.

 Present active subjunctive 
 portre terrre petere audre 
 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 First person portem portmus terream terremus petam petmus audiam audimus 
 Second person ports porttis terres terretis pets pettis audis auditis 
 Third person portet portent terreat terreant petat petant audiat audiant 

Like the indicative, active personal endings may be replaced by passive personal endings. Porter can be translated as "Let me be carried" or "May I be carried." Hortatorily, Portmur can be "Let us be carried".

 Present passive subjunctive 
 portre terrre petere audre 
 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 First person porter portmur terrear terremur petar petmur audiar audimur 
 Second person portris portmin terreris terremin petris petmin audiris audimin 
 Third person porttur portentur terretur terreantur pettur petantur auditur audiantur 

====Present imperative====
The present imperative conveys commands, pleas and recommendations. Port can be translated as "(You) Carry" or simply, "Carry". The imperative present occurs only in the second person.
*The second person singular in the active voice uses only the bare stem, and does not add an imperative ending.

 Present active imperative 
 portre terrre petere audre 
 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 Second person port portte terr terrte pete petite aud audte 

The imperative present of the passive voice is rarely used, except in the case of deponent verbs, whose passive forms carry active meaning. Portmin can be translated as "(You) Be carried". The deponent sequmin, on the other hand, means "(You) Follow!".
*The singular uses the alternate form of the present passive indicative (which looks like the present active infinitive) and the plural uses the present passive indicative form of the second person plural.

 Present passive imperative 
 portre terrre petere audre 
 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 Second person portre portmin terrre terrmin petere petimin audre audmin 

===Imperfect===
The imperfect (Latin tempus imperfectum) indicates a perpetual, but incomplete action in the past. It is recognized by the tense signs b and b in the indicative, and re and r in the subjunctive.

====Imperfect indicative====
The imperfect indicative simply expresses an action in the past that was not completed. Portbam can be translated to mean, "I was carrying," "I carried," or "I used to carry".
*In the indicative, the imperfect employs its tense signs ba and b before personal endings are added.

 Imperfect active indicative 
 portre terrre petere audre 
 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 First person portbam portbmus terrbam terrbmus petbam petbmus audibam audibmus 
 Second person portbs portbtis terrbs terrbtis petbs petbtis audibs audibtis 
 Third person portbat portbant terrbat terrbant petbat petbant audibat audibant 

As with the present tense, active personal endings are taken off, and passive personal endings are put in their place. Portbar can be translated as "I was being carried," "I kept being carried," or "I used to be carried".

 Imperfect passive indicative 
 portre terrre petere audre 
 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 First person portbar portbmur terrbar terrbmur petbar petbmur audibar audibmur 
 Second person portbris portbmin terrbris terrbmin petbris petbmin audibris audibmin 
 Third person portbtur portbantur terrbtur terrbantur petbtur petbantur audibtur audibantur 

====Imperfect subjunctive====
In the subjunctive, the imperfect is quite important, especially in subordinate clauses. Independently, it is largely translated conditionally. Portrem can mean, "I should carry," or "I would carry".
*Unlike the indicative, the subjunctive does not modify the thematic vowel. The third conjugation's thematical remains short as an e, and the fourth conjugation does not use an i before the imperfect signs. It keeps its .
*In the subjunctive, the imperfect employs its tense signs re and r before personal endings.
*The verb esse (to be) has two imperfect subjunctives: one using the present infinitive (essem, esses, esset, essemus, essetis, essent) and one using the future infinitive (forem, fores, foret, foremus, foretis, forent).

 Imperfect active subjunctive 
 portre terrre petere audre 
 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 First person portrem portrmus terrrem terrrmus peterem petermus audrem audrmus 
 Second person portrs portrtis terrrs terrrtis peters petertis audrs audrtis 
 Third person portret portrent terrret terrrent peteret peterent audret audrent 

As with the indicative subjunctive, active endings are removed, and passive endings are added. Portrer may be translated as "I should be carried," or "I would be carried."

 Imperfect passive subjunctive 
 portre terrre petere audre 
 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 First person portrer portrmur terrrer terrrmur peterer petermur audrer audrmur 
 Second person portrris portrmin terrrris terrrmin peterris petermin audrris audrmin 
 Third person portrtur portrentur terrrtur terrrentur petertur peterentur audrtur audrentur 

===Future tense===
The future tense (Latin tempus futrum simplex) expresses an uncompleted action in the future. It is recognized by its tense signs b, bi, bu, a and  in the indicative and the vowel  in the imperative mood.

====Future indicative====
The future tense always refers to an incomplete action. In addition, the future tense is stricter in usage temporally in Latin than it is in English. Standing alone, portb can mean, "I shall carry," or "I will carry." 
*The first and second conjugations use b, bi and bu as signs for the future indicative.
*The third and fourth conjugations replace their thematic vowels with a,  and . The fourth conjugation inserts an  before the a, e and .

 Future active indicative 
 portre terrre petere audre 
 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 First person portb portbimus terrb terrbimus petam petmus audiam audimus 
 Second person portbis portbitis terrbis terrbitis pets pettis audis auditis 
 Third person portbit portbunt terrbit terrbunt petet petent audiet audient 

As with all imperfective system tenses, active personal endings are removed, and passive personal endings are put on. Portbor translates as, "I shall be carried."

 Future passive indicative 
 portre terrre petere audre 
 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 First person portbor portbimur terrbor terrbimur petar petmur audiar audimur 
 Second person portberis portbimin terrberis terrbimin petris petmin audiris audimin 
 Third person portbitur portbuntur terrbitur terrbuntur pettur petentur auditur audientur 

Notice that the penultimate vowel in the second person singular of portre and terrre is e, not i (portberis and terrberis, instead of the expected portbiris and terrbiris).

====Future imperative====
The so-called future imperative was an archaic and formal form of the imperative; by the classical period, it was chiefly used in legal documents and the like. A few irregular or defective verbs (meminisse 'remember') used this form as their only imperative.

Portt can be translated as "You shall carry".
*As mentioned previously, the vowel  is used as a sign of the future imperative.

 Future active imperative 
 portre terrre petere audre 
 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 Second person portt porttte terrt terrtte petit petitte audt audtte 
 Third person portt portant terrt terrent petit petunt audt audiunt 

The ending -r marks the passive voice in the future imperative. The second person plural is absent here. Porttor translates as "You shall be carried."

 Future passive imperative 
 portre terrre petere audre 
 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 Second person porttor  terrtor  petitor  audtor  
 Third person porttor portantor terrtor terrentor petitor petuntor audtor audiuntor 

==Perfective aspect tenses==
The tenses of the perfective aspect, which are the perfect, pluperfect and future perfect tenses, are used to express actions that have been, had been, or will have been completed. The verbs used for explanation are:

:1st Conjugation: port, portre, portv, porttum  to carry, bring
:2nd Conjugation: terre, terrre, terru, territum  to frighten, deter
:3rd Conjugation: pet, petere, petv, pettum  to seek, attack
:4th Conjugation: audi, audre, audv, audtum  to hear, listen (to)

To find the stem for the third principal part in all of the conjugations, the  is removed from it. For example, from portv, portv is formed. This is the perfect stem, and it is used for all of the tenses in the perfective aspect. The perfective aspect verbs also use the perfect passive participle in the passive voice. See below to see how it is formed. Along with these participles, the verb esse, which means, "to be", is used.

Unlike the imperfective aspect, inflection does not deviate from conjugation to conjugation.

===Perfect===
The perfect (Latin tempus perfectum) refers to an action completed in the past. Tense signs are only used in this tense with the indicative. The tense signs of the subjunctive are eri and er.

====Perfect indicative====
The indicative perfect expresses a finished action in the past. If the action were not finished, but still lies in the past, one would use the imperfect. Portv is translated as "I carried," "I did carry," or "I have carried."
*As aforementioned, the indicative perfect in the active voice has its special personal endings.

 Perfect active indicative 
 portre terrre petere audre 
 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 First Person portv portvimus terru terruimus petv petvimus audv audvimus 
 Second Person portvist portvistis terruist terruistis petvist petvistis audvist audvistis 
 Third Person portvit portvrunt terruit terrurunt petvit petvrunt audvit audvrunt 

In the passive voice, the imperfect passive participle is used with the auxiliary verb esse. It uses the present indicative form of esse. Porttus sum translates as "I was carried," or "I have been carried."

 Perfect passive indicative 
 portre terrre petere audre 
 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 First Person porttus sum portt sumus territus sum territ sumus pettus sum pett sumus audtus sum audt sumus 
 Second Person porttus es portt estis territus es territ estis pettus es pett estis audtus es audt estis 
 Third Person porttus est portt sunt territus est territ sunt pettus est pett sunt audtus est audt sunt 

====Perfect subjunctive====
Like the imperfect subjunctive, the perfect subjunctive is largely used in subordinate clauses. Independently, it is usually translated as the potential subjunctive. By itself, portverim translates as "I may have carried."
*The tense signs eri and er are used before the personal endings are added.

 Perfect active subjunctive 
 portre terrre petere audre 
 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 First Person portverim portvermus terruerim terruermus petverim petvermus audverim audvermus 
 Second Person portvers portvertis terruers terruertis petvers petvertis audvers audvertis 
 Third Person portverit portverint terruerit terruerint petverit petverint audverit audverint 

The passive voice uses the perfect passive participle with the subjunctive present forms of esse. Porttus sim means, "I may have been carried."

 Perfect passive subjunctive 
 portre terrre petere audre 
 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 First Person porttus sim portt smus territus sim territ smus pettus sim pett smus audtus sim audt smus 
 Second Person porttus ss portt stis territus ss territ stis pettus ss pett stis audtus ss audt stis 
 Third Person porttus sit portt sint territus sit territ sint pettus sit pett sint audtus sit audt sint 

===Pluperfect===
The pluperfect (Latin tempus pls quam perfectum) expresses an action which was completed before another completed action. It is recognized by the tense signs era and er in the indicative and isse and iss in the subjunctive.

====Pluperfect indicative====
As with English, in Latin, the pluperfect indicative is used to assert an action that was completed before another (perfect). Portveram translates as "I had carried."
*The tense sign er is employed before adding the personal endings, with the long  following the usual rules for shortening before final -m, -t, and -nt.

 Pluperfect active indicative 
 portre terrre petere audre 
 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 First Person portveram portvermus terrueram terruermus petveram petvermus audveram audvermus 
 Second Person portvers portvertis terruers terruertis petvers petvertis audvers audvertis 
 Third Person portverat portverant terruerat terruerant petverat petverant audverat audverant 

In the passive voice, the perfect passive participle is used with esse in the imperfect indicative. Porttus eram is translated as "I had been carried."

 Pluperfect passive indicative 
 portre terrre petere audre 
 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 First Person porttus eram portt ermus territus eram territ ermus pettus eram pett ermus audtus eram audt ermus 
 Second Person porttus ers portt ertis territus ers territ ertis pettus ers pett ertis audtus ers audt ertis 
 Third Person porttus erat portt erant territus erat territ erant pettus erat pett erant audtus erat audt erant 

====Pluperfect subjunctive====
The pluperfect subjunctive is to the perfect subjunctive as the imperfect subjunctive is to the present subjunctive. Simply put, it is used with the perfect subjunctive in subordinate clauses. Like the imperfect subjunctive, it is translated conditionally independently. Portvissem is translated as "I should have carried," or "I would have carried."
*The tense signs isse and iss are used before the personal endings.

 Pluperfect active subjunctive 
 portre terrre petere audre 
 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 First Person portvissem portvissmus terruissem terruissmus petvissem petvissmus audvissem audvissmus 
 Second Person portvisss portvisstis terruisss terruisstis petvisss petvisstis audvisss audvisstis 
 Third Person portvisset portvissent terruisset terruissent petvisset petvissent audvisset audvissent 

As always, the passive voice uses the perfect passive participle. The imperfect subjunctive of esse is used here. Porttus essem may mean "I should have been carried," or "I could have been carried," in the conditional sense.

 Pluperfect passive subjunctive 
 portre terrre petere audre 
 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 First Person porttus essem portt essmus territus essem territ essmus pettus essem pett essmus audtus essem audt essmus 
 Second Person porttus esss portt esstis territus esss territ esstis pettus esss pett esstis audtus esss audt esstis 
 Third Person porttus esset portt essent territus esset territ essent pettus esset pett essent audtus esset audt essent 

===Future perfect===
The least used of all the tenses, the future perfect (Latin tempus futrum exctum) conveys an action that will have been completed before another action. It is signified by the tense signs er and eri. The future perfect is the only tense that occurs in a single mood.

====Future perfect indicative====
As said, the future perfect is used to mention an action that will have been completed in futurity before another action. It is often used with the future tense. In simple translation, portver means, "I will have carried," or "I shall have carried."

*The tense signs er and eri are used before the personal endings.

 Future perfect active indicative 
 portre terrre petere audre 
 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 First Person portver portverimus terruer terruerimus petver petverimus audver audverimus 
 Second Person portveris portveritis terrueris terrueritis petveris petveritis audveris audveritis 
 Third Person portverit portverint terruerit terruerint petverit petverint audverit audverint 

As with all perfective aspect tenses, the perfect passive participle is used in the passive voice. However, the future perfect uses the future indicative of esse as the auxiliary verb. Porttus er is "I will have been carried," or "I shall have been carried."

 Future perfect passive indicative 
 portre terrre petere audre 
 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 First Person porttus er portt erimus territus er territ erimus pettus er pett erimus audtus er audt erimus 
 Second Person porttus eris portt eritis territus eris territ eritis pettus eris pett eritis audtus eris audt eritis 
 Third Person porttus erit portt erunt territus erit territ erunt pettus erit pett erunt audtus erit audt erunt 

==Non-finite forms==
The non-finite forms of verbs are participles, infinitives, supines, gerunds and gerundives. The verbs used are:

:1st Conjugation: port, portre, portv, porttum  to carry, bring
:2nd Conjugation: terre, terrre. terru, territum  to frighten, deter
:3rd Conjugation: pet, petere, petv, pettum  to seek, attack
:4th Conjugation: audi, audre, audv, audtum  to hear, listen (to)

===Participles ===

There are four participles: present active, perfect passive, future passive, and future active.
*The present active participle is declined like a third declension adjective with one ending.
**In the first and second conjugations, the present active is formed by taking the present stem and adding an ns. The genitive singular form adds an ntis, and the thematicals  and  are shortened.
**In the third conjugation, the e of the present stem is lengthened. In the genitive, the  is short again.
**In the fourth conjugation, the  is shortened, and an  is placed. Of course, this  is short in the genitive.
**Puer portns translates into "carrying boy."
*The perfect passive participle is declined like a first and second declension adjective.
**In all conjugations, the perfect participle is formed by removing the um from the supine, and adding a us (masculine nominative singular).
**Puer porttus translates into "carried boy."
*The future active participle is declined like a first and second declension adjective.
**In all conjugations the um is removed from the supine, and an rus (masculine nominative singular) is added.
**Puer porttrus translates into "boy going to carry," or "boy who is going to carry."
*The future passive participle is formed by taking the present stem, adding "-nd-", and then the adjective ending "-us, -a, -um". Thus "laudare" forms "laudandus". 
**The literal translation is "about to be praised", but this often extends a sense of obligation, thus "must be praised". Thus the "future passive participle" is often cross-listed as the "gerundive" (see below).

 Participles 
 portre terrre petere audre 
 Present Active portns, antis terrns, entis petns, entis audins, entis 
 Perfect Passive porttus, a, um territus, a, um pettus, a, um audtus, a, um 
 Future Active porttrus, a, um territrus, a, um pettrus, a, um audtrus, a, um 
 Future Passive portandus, a, um terrendus, a, um petendus, a, um audindus, a, um 

===Infinitives ===

There are six infinitives. They are in the present active, present passive, perfect active, perfect passive, future active and future passive.
*The present active infinitive is the second principal part (in regular verbs). It plays an important role in the syntactic construction of Accusativus cum infinitivo, for instance.
**Portre means, "to carry."
*The present passive infinitive is formed by adding a r to the present stem. This is only so for the first, second and fourth conjugations. In the third conjugation, the thematical vowel, e, is taken from the present stem, and an  is added.
**Portr translates into "to be carried."
*The perfect active infinitive is formed by adding an isse onto the perfect stem.
**Portvisse translates into "to have carried."
*The perfect passive infinitive uses the perfect passive participle along with the auxiliary verb esse. The perfect passive infinitive must agree with what it is describing in number and gender.
**Porttus esse means, "to have been carried."
*The future active infinitive uses the future active participle with the auxiliary verb esse.
**Porttrus esse means, "to be going to carry." The future active infinitive must agree with what it is describing in number and gender.
**Esse has two future infinitives: futurus esse and fore (fore is mostly used in a substitute expression for the Future Passive Infinitive)
*The future passive infinitive uses the supine with the auxiliary verb r.
**Porttum r is translated as "to be going to be carried." This is normally used in indirect speech. For example: Omns sentres dxrunt templum conditum r. "All of the senators said that a temple would be built."

 Infinitives 
 portre terrre petere audre 
 Present Active portre terrre petere audre 
 Present Passive portr terrr pet audr 
 Perfect Active portvisse terruisse petvisse audvisse 
 Perfect Passive porttus esse territus esse pettus esse audtus esse 
 Future Active porttrus esse territrus esse pettrus esse audtrus esse 
 Future Passive porttum r territum r pettum r audtum r 
 +Here, masculine endings are used. 

The Future Passive Infinitive was actually not very commonly used (Wheelock's Latin mentions it exists but makes it a point to avoid using it in any practice examples). In practice, the Romans themselves often used an alternate expression, "fore ut" followed by a subjunctive clause.

===Supine ===

The supine is the fourth principal part. It resembles a masculine noun of the fourth declension. Supines only occur in the accusative and ablative cases.
*The accusative form ends in a um, and is used with a verb of motion in order to show the purpose. Thus, it is only used with verbs like cedere, venre, etc. The accusative form of a supine can also take an object if needed.
**Pater vnit porttum lbers sus.  The father came to carry his children.
*The ablative, which ends in a , is used with the Ablative of Specification.
**Arma haec facillima portt erant.  These arms were the easiest to carry.

 Supine 
 portre terrre petere audre 
 Accusative porttum territum pettum audtum 
 Ablative portt territ pett audt 

===Gerund ===

The gerund is formed similarly to the present active participle. However, the ns becomes an ndus, and the preceding  or  is shortened. Gerunds are neuter nouns of the second declension, but the nominative case is not present. The gerund is a noun, meaning "the act of doing (the verb)", and forms a suppletive paradigm to the infinitive, which cannot be declined. For example, the genitive form portand can mean "of carrying", the dative form portand can mean "to carrying", the accusative form portandum can mean "carrying", and the ablative form portand can mean "by carrying", "in respect to carrying", etc.

 Gerund 
 portre terrre petere audre 
 Genitive portand terrend petend audiend 
 Dative portand terrend petend audiend 
 Accusative portandum terrendum petendum audiendum 
 Ablative portand terrend petend audiend 
 Locative portand terrend petend audiend 

One common use of the gerund is with the preposition ad to indicate purpose. For example paratus ad oppugnandum could be translated as "ready to attack". However the gerund was avoided when an object was introduced, and a passive construction with the gerundive was preferred. For example for "ready to attack the enemy" the construction paratus ad hostes oppugnandos is preferred over paratus ad hostes oppugnandum. 

===Gerundive ===
The gerundive has a form similar to that of the gerund, but it is a first and second declension adjective, and functions as a future passive participle (see above). It means "(which is) to be ...ed". Often, the gerundive is used with an implicit esse, to show obligation.

*Puer portandus "The boy to be carried"
*Oratio laudanda est means "The speech is to be praised". In such constructions a substantive in dative may be used to identify the agent of the obligation (dativus auctoris), as in Oratio nobis laudanda est meaning "The speech is to be praised by us" or "We must praise the speech".

 Gerundive 
 portre terrre petere audre 
 portandus, a, um terrendus, a, um petendus, a, um audiendus, a, um 

For some examples of uses of Latin gerundives, see the Gerundive article.

==Periphrastic conjugations==
There are two periphrastic conjugations. One is active, and the other is passive.

===Active===
The first periphrastic conjugation uses the future participle. It is combined with the forms of esse. It is translated as "I am going to carry," "I was going to carry", etc.

 Conjugation Translation 
 Pres. Ind. porttrus sum I am going to carry 
 Imp. Ind. porttrus eram I was going to carry 
 Fut. Ind. porttrus er I shall be going to carry 
 Perf. Ind. porttrus fu I have been going to carry 
 Plup. Ind. porttrus fueram I had been going to carry 
 Fut. Perf. Ind. porttrus fuer I shall have been going to carry 
 Pres. Subj. porttrus sim I may be going to carry 
 Imp. Subj. porttrus essem I should be going to carry 
 Perf. Subj. porttrus fuerim I may have been going to carry 
 Plup. Subj. porttrus fuissem I should have been going to carry 

===Passive ===
The second periphrastic conjugation uses the gerundive. It is combined with the forms of esse and expresses necessity. It is translated as "I am to be carried," "I was to be carried", etc., or as "I have to (must) be carried," "I had to be carried," etc.

 Conjugation Translation 
 Pres. Ind. portandus sum I am to be carried 
 Imp. Ind. portandus eram I was to be carried 
 Fut. Ind. portandus er I will deserve to be carried 
 Perf. Ind. portandus fu I was to be carried 
 Plup. Ind. portandus fueram I had deserved to be carried 
 Fut. Perf. Ind. portandus fuer I will have deserved to be carried 
 Pres. Subj. portandus sim I may deserve to be carried 
 Imp. Subj. portandus essem I should deserve to be carried 
 Perf. Subj. portandus fuerim I may have deserved to be carried 
 Plup. Subj. portandus fuissem I should have deserved to be carried 
 Pres. Inf. portandus esse To deserve to be carried 
 Perf. Inf. portandus fuisse To have deserved to be carried 

==Peculiarities==
===Irregular verbs===
There are a few irregular verbs in Latin that are not grouped into a particular conjugation (such as esse and posse), or deviate slightly from a conjugation (such as ferre, re, and dare). It consists of the following list and their compounds (such as conferre). Many irregular verbs lack a fourth principal part.

:sum, esse, fu, futrum  to be, exist
:possum, posse, potu  to be able, can
:e, re, v / , tum  to go
:vol, velle, volu  to wish, want
:nl, nlle, nlu  to not want, refuse
:ml, mlle, mlu  to prefer
:fer, ferre, tul, ltum  to bear, endure, carry, bring
:f, fier, factus sum  to become, happen, be made
:ed, sse, d, sum  to eat, waste
:d, dare, ded, datum  to give, bestow

===Deponent and semi-deponent verbs===
Deponent verbs are verbs that are passive in form (that is, conjugated as though in the passive voice) but active in meaning. These verbs have only three principal parts, since the perfect of ordinary passives is formed periphrastically with the perfect participle, which is formed on the same stem as the supine. Some examples coming from all conjugations are:

:1st Conjugation: mror, mrr, mrtus sum  to admire, wonder
:2nd Conjugation: polliceor, pollicr, pollicitus sum  to promise, offer
:3rd Conjugation: loquor, loqu, loctus sum  to speak, say
:4th Conjugation: orior, orr, ortus sum  to rise, spring up

Deponent verbs use active conjugations for tenses that do not exist in the passive: the gerund, the supine, the present and future participles and the future infinitive. They cannot be used in the passive themselves, and their analogues with "active" form do not in fact exist: one cannot directly translate "The word is said" with any form of loqu, and there are no forms like loqu, loquis, loquit, etc.

Semi-deponent verbs form their imperfective aspect tenses in the manner of ordinary active verbs; but their perfect are built periphrastically like deponents and ordinary passives; thus semideponent verbs have a perfect active participle instead of a perfect passive participle. An example:

:aude, audre, ausus sum  to dare, venture

Note: In the Romance languages, which lack deponent or passive verb forms, the Classical Latin deponent verbs either disappeared (being replaced with non-deponent verbs of a similar meaning) or changed to a non-deponent form. For example, in Spanish and Italian, mrr changed to mirar(e) by changing all the verb forms to the previously nonexistent "active form", and aude changed to osar(e) by taking the participle ausus and making an -ar(e) verb out of it (note that au went to o).

===Third conjugation i verbs===
There is a rather prolific subset of important verbs within the third conjugation. They have an i present in the first principal part (ior for deponents), and resemble the fourth conjugation in some forms. Otherwise, they are still conjugated as normal, third conjugation verbs. Thus, these verbs are called third conjugation i verbs or third conjugation i-stems. Some examples are:

:capi, capere, cp, captum  to take, seize, understand
:cupi, cupere, cupv, cuptum  to desire, long for
:faci, facere, fc, factum - to do, make
:morior, mor, mortuus sum (dep.)  to die, decay
:patior, pat, passus sum (dep.)  to suffer, undergo, endure
:rapi, rapere, rapu, raptum - to plunder, take up, seize, snatch, carry away

They resemble the fourth conjugation in the following instances.

:Present indicative (first person singular, third person plural)  capi, capiunt, etc.
:Indicative imperfect  capibam, capibmus, etc.
:Indicative future  capiam, capimus, etc.
:Subjunctive present  capiam, capimus, etc.
:Imperative future (third person plural)  capiunt, etc.
:Present Active Participle  capins, entis
:Gerund  capiend, capiendum, etc.
:Gerundive  capiendus, a, um

===Defective verbs===
Defective verbs are verbs that are conjugated in only some instances. 
*Some verbs are conjugated only in the perfective aspect's tenses, yet have the imperfective aspect's tenses' meanings. As such, the perfect becomes the present, the pluperfect becomes the imperfect, and the future perfect becomes the future. Therefore, the defective verb d means, "I hate." These defective verbs' principal parts are given in vocabulary with the indicative perfect in the first person and the perfect active infinitive. Some examples are:

::d, disse  to hate
::memin, meminisse  to remember
::coep, coepisse  to have begun
*A few verbs, the meanings of which usually have to do with speech, appear only in certain occurrences.

::Cedo (plur. cette), which means "Hand it over" or "Out with it" is only in the imperative mood, and only is used in the second person.

The following are conjugated irregularly:

====Aio ====
:

 Conjugation of ai 
 IndicativePresent IndicativeImperfect SubjunctivePresent 
 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 First Person ai  aibam aibmus   
 Second Person ais  aibs aibtis ais*  
 Third Person ait aiunt aibat aibant aiat aiant* 

:Present Active Participle:  ains, entis

====Inquam ====

 Conjugation of inquam 
 Present indicative Futureindicative Perfectindicative Imperfectindicative 
 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 First person inquam inquimus   inqui    
 Second person inquis  inquis  inquist    
 Third person inquit inquiunt inquiet  inquit  inquibat  

====Fari ====

 Conjugation of fr 
 Presentindicative Futureindicative Perfectindicative Pluperfectindicative Presentimperative 
 
 Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 
 First Person for  fbor  ftus sum  ftus eram    
 Second Person         fre  
 Third Person ftur fantur fbitur        

:Present Active Participle  fns, fantis
:Present Active Infinitive  fr (variant: frier)
:Supine  (acc.) ftum, (abl.) ft
:Gerund  (gen.) fand, (dat. and abl.) fand, no accusative
:Gerundive  fandus, a, um

The Romance languages lost many of these verbs, but others (such as d) survived but became regular fully conjugated verbs (in Italian, odiare).

===Impersonal verbs===
Impersonal verbs are those lacking a person. In English impersonal verbs are usually used with the neuter pronoun "it" (as in "It seems," or "It storms"). Latin uses the third person singular. These verbs lack a fourth principal part. A few examples are:

:pluit, pluere, pluvit  to rain (it rains)
:ningit, ningere, ninxit  to snow (it snows)
:oportet, oportre, oportuit  to be proper (it is proper, one should/ought to)
:licet, licre, licuit  to be permitted (it is allowed )

The third person forms of esse may also be seen as impersonal when seen from the perspective of English:

:Nox aestva calida fuit.  It was a hot, summer night.
:Est e qu terram colunt.  It is they who till the land.

===Irregular future active participles===
As stated, the future active participle is normally formed by removing the um from the supine, and adding a rus. However, some deviations occur.

 presentactiveinfinitive supine futureactiveparticiple 
 juvre jtum juvtrus 
 lavre lautum lavtrus 
 parere partum paritrus 
 ruere rutum ruitrus 
 secre sectum sectrus 
 fru fructum fruitrus 
 mor mortuum moritrus 
 orr ortum oritrus 

===Alternative verb forms===
Several verb forms may occur in alternative forms (in some authors these forms are fairly common, if not more common than the canonical ones):
*The ending ris in the passive voice may be re as in:
::portbris  portbre
*The ending runt in the perfect may be re (primarily in poetry) as in:
::portvrunt  portvre

===Syncopated verb forms===
Like most Romance languages, syncopated forms and contractions are present in Latin. They may occur in the following instances:
*Perfect stems that end in a v may be contracted when inflected.
::portvisse  portsse
::portvist  portst
::portverant  portrant
::portvisset  portsset
*The compounds of noscere (to learn) and movre (to move, dislodge) can also be contracted.
::novist  nost
::novistis  nostis
::commoveram  commoram
::commovers  commors

==Summary of forms==

===The four conjugations in the present tense of the indicative mood===

 The Four Conjugations, Indicative Mood 
 1st 2nd 3rd 3rd (i-stem) 4th 
 laud, laudre, laudv, laudtus terre, terrre, terru, territus ag, agere, g, actus capi, capere, cp, captus audi, audre, audv, audtus 
 Active Passive Active Passive Active Passive Active Passive Active Passive 
 Present 
 1st Singular laud laudor terro terreor ag agor capi capior audi audior 
 2nd Person lauds laudris terrs terrris agis ageris capis caperis auds audris (audre) 
 3rd Person laudat laudtur terret terrtur agit agitur capit capitur audit audtur 
 1st Plural laudmus laudmur terrmus terrmur agimus agimur capimus capimur audmus audmur 
 2nd Person laudtis laudmin terrtis terrmin agitis agimin capitis capimin audtis audmin 
 3rd Person laudant laudantur terrent terrentur agunt aguntur capiunt capiuntur audiunt audiuntur 

==Notes==
 Futrus esse is sometimes contracted as fore as seen in Caesar's De Bello Gallico.
The archaic uncontracted form potesse occurs frequently in Lucretius.
 Form moriri, Ovid, Metamorphoses (poem) 14.215 
 Used by Cicero frequently.
 Used personally by Lucretius (2.627): ningunt 
 

==See also==
* Grammatical conjugation
* Latin declension
* Latin mnemonics
* Romance copula
* William Whitaker's Words

== References ==
* 
* 

==External links==

* Verbix automatically conjugates verbs in Latin.
* Latin Verb Synopsis Drill tests a user on his ability to conjugate verbs correctly.
* Arbuckle Latin Conjugator automatically conjugates and translates verbs in Latin.



[[Louisa May Alcott]]

Louisa May Alcott (November 29, 1832  March 6, 1888) was an American novelist best known as author of the novel Little Women and its sequels Little Men and Jo's Boys. Raised by her transcendentalist parents, Abigail May and Amos Bronson Alcott in New England, she grew up among many of the well-known intellectuals of the day such as Ralph Waldo Emerson, Nathaniel Hawthorne, and Henry David Thoreau. Nevertheless, her family suffered severe financial difficulties and Alcott worked to help support the family from an early age. She began to receive critical success for her writing in the 1860s. Early in her career, she sometimes used the pen name A. M. Barnard. With her pen name Louisa wrote novels for young adults in juvenile hall.

Published in 1868, Little Women is set in the Alcott family home, Orchard House, in Concord, Massachusetts and is loosely based on Alcott's childhood experiences with her three sisters. The novel was very well received and is still a popular children's novel today. Alcott was an abolitionist and a feminist. She died in Boston.

==Childhood and early work==
Alcott was born on November 29, 1832, in Germantown, which is now part of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, on her father's 33rd birthday. She was the daughter of transcendentalist and educator Amos Bronson Alcott and social worker Abby May and the second of four daughters: Anna Bronson Alcott was the eldest; Elizabeth Sewall Alcott and Abigail May Alcott were the two youngest. The family moved to Boston in 1838, Obituary: Louisa May Alcott, New York Times, March 7, 1888. The obituary indicates that the family moved to Boston when Alcott was 6 years old, therefore in 1838-9. This is supported by the United States Census, 1850, which records that her younger sister, Elizabeth, was born in Massachusetts and was aged 15 (therefore born around 1835) at the time of the census. where Alcott's father established an experimental school and joined the Transcendental Club with Ralph Waldo Emerson and Henry David Thoreau. Bronson Alcott's opinions on education and tough views on child-rearing shaped young Alcott's mind with a desire to achieve perfection, a goal of the transcendentalists. His attitudes towards Alcott's sometimes wild and independent behavior, and his inability to provide for his family, sometimes created conflict between Bronson Alcott and his wife and daughters. 

In 1840, after several setbacks with the school, the Alcott family moved to a cottage on 2 acre of land, situated along the Sudbury River in Concord, Massachusetts. The three years they spent at the rented Hosmer Cottage were described as idyllic. By 1843, the Alcott family moved, along with six other members of the Consociate Family, to the Utopian Fruitlands community for a brief interval in 18431844. After the collapse of the Utopian Fruitlands, they moved on to rented rooms and finally, with Abigail May Alcott's inheritance and financial help from Emerson, they purchased a homested in Concord. They moved into the home they named "Hillside" on April 1, 1845. Matteson, John. Eden's Outcasts: The Story of Louisa May Alcott and Her Father. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2007: 174. ISBN 978-0-393-33359-6 
Louisa May Alcott
Alcott's early education included lessons from the naturalist Henry David Thoreau, but she received the majority of her schooling from her father, who was strict and believed in "the sweetness of self-denial". She also received some instruction from writers and educators such as Ralph Waldo Emerson, Nathaniel Hawthorne, and Margaret Fuller, all of whom were family friends. She later described these early years in a newspaper sketch entitled "Transcendental Wild Oats". The sketch was reprinted in the volume Silver Pitchers (1876), which relates the family's experiment in "plain living and high thinking" at Fruitlands.

Poverty made it necessary for Alcott to go to work at an early age as a teacher, seamstress, governess, domestic helper, and writer. Her sisters also supported the family, working as seamstresses, while their mother took on social work among the Irish immigrants. Only the youngest, May, was able to attend public school. Due to all of these pressures, writing became a creative and emotional outlet for Alcott. Her first book was Flower Fables (1849), a selection of tales originally written for Ellen Emerson, daughter of Ralph Waldo Emerson.

As an adult, Alcott was an abolitionist and a feminist. In 1847, she and her family served as station masters on the Underground Railroad, when they housed a fugitive slave for one week and in 1848 Alcott read and admired the "Declaration of Sentiments", published by the Seneca Falls Convention on women's rights, advocating for women's suffrage and became the first woman to register to vote in Concord, Massachusetts in a school board election. The 1850s were hard times for the Alcotts. At one point in 1857, unable to find work and filled with such despair, Alcott contemplated suicide. During that year, she read Elizabeth Gaskell's biography of Charlotte Bront and found many parallels to her own life. In 1858, her younger sister Elizabeth died, and her older sister Anna married a man by the name of John Pratt. This felt, to Alcott, to be a breaking up of their sisterhood. 

==Literary success==
Louisa May Alcott
In 1860, Alcott began writing for the Atlantic Monthly. When the American Civil War broke out, she served as a nurse in the Union Hospital at Georgetown, D.C., for six weeks in 18621863. Her letters home  revised and published in the Commonwealth and collected as Hospital Sketches (1863, republished with additions in 1869)  brought her first critical recognition for her observations and humor. It was originally written for the Boston anti-slavery paper The Commonwealth. She speaks out about the mismanagement of hospitals and the indifference and callousness of some of the surgeons she encountered. Her main character Trib showed a passage from innocence to maturity and is a "serious and eloquent witness". Her novel Moods (1864), based on her own experience, was also promising.

In the mid-1860s, Alcott wrote passionate, fiery novels and sensational stories under the nom de plume A. M. Barnard. Among these are A Long Fatal Love Chase and Pauline's Passion and Punishment. Her protagonists for these tales are willful and relentless in their pursuit of their own aims, which often include revenge on those who have humiliated or thwarted them. She also produced wholesome stories for children, and after their positive reception, she did not generally return to creating works for adults. Adult-oriented exceptions include the anonymous novelette A Modern Mephistopheles (1875), which attracted suspicion that it was written by Julian Hawthorne; and the semi-autobiographical tale Work (1873).

Alcott became even more successful with the publication by the Roberts Brothers of the first part of Little Women: or Meg, Jo, Beth and Amy (1868), a semi-autobiographical account of her childhood with her sisters in Concord, Massachusetts. Part two, or Part Second, also known as Good Wives (1869), followed the March sisters into adulthood and their respective marriages. Little Men (1871) detailed Jo's life at the Plumfield School that she founded with her husband Professor Bhaer at the conclusion of Part Two of Little Women. Jo's Boys (1886) completed the "March Family Saga".
Louisa May Alcott commemorative stamp, 1940 issue
In Little Women, Alcott based her heroine "Jo" on herself. But whereas Jo marries at the end of the story, Alcott remained single throughout her life. She explained her "spinsterhood" in an interview with Louise Chandler Moulton, "I am more than half-persuaded that I am a man's soul put by some freak of nature into a woman's body ... because I have fallen in love with so many pretty girls and never once the least bit with any man." However, Alcott's romance while in Europe with the young Polish man Ladislas "Laddie" Wisniewski was detailed in her journals but then deleted by Alcott herself before her death. Alcott identified Laddie as the model for Laurie in Little Women, and there is strong evidence this was the significant emotional relationship of her life. Likewise, every character seems to be paralleled to some extent, from Beth's death mirroring Lizzie's to Jo's rivalry with the youngest, Amy, as Alcott felt a sort of rivalry for May, at times. "Louisa May Alcott: The Woman Behind Little Women," Harriet Reisen, 2009 Little Women Introduction, Penguin Classics, 1989. ISBN 0-14-039069-3 Though Alcott never married, she did take in May's daughter, Louisa, after May's death in 1879 from childbed fever, caring for little "Lulu" until her death. 

Little Women was well received, with critics and audiences finding it suitable for many age groups. A reviewer of Eclectic Magazine called it "the very best of books to reach the hearts of the young of any age from six to sixty,". It was also said to be a fresh, natural representation of daily life.

Louisa May Alcott's grave in Sleepy Hollow Cemetery, Concord, Massachusetts.
Along with Elizabeth Stoddard, Rebecca Harding Davis, Anne Moncure Crane, and others, Alcott was part of a group of female authors during the Gilded Age, who addressed womens issues in a modern and candid manner. Their works were, as one newspaper columnist of the period commented, "among the decided 'signs of the times'" Review 2  No Title from The Radical, May 1868, see References below 

==Later years==
Alcott, who continued to write until her death, suffered chronic health problems in her later years, Maura Lerner, Star Tribune, August 12, 2007. including vertigo. She and her earliest biographers attributed her illness and death to mercury poisoning. During her American Civil War service, Alcott contracted typhoid fever and was treated with a compound containing mercury. Recent analysis of Alcott's illness, however, suggests that her chronic health problems may have been associated with an autoimmune disease, not acute mercury exposure. Moreover, a late portrait of Alcott shows rashes on her cheeks, which is a characteristic of lupus. Hirschhorn and Greaves (2007), pp. 243259. 

Alcott died at age 55 of a stroke in Boston, on March 6, 1888, two days after her father's death. Her last words were "Is it not meningitis?" vu.union.edu  Famous Last Words She is buried in Sleepy Hollow Cemetery in Concord, near Emerson, Hawthorne, and Thoreau, on a hillside now known as "Authors' Ridge". Nancy Isenberg and Andrew Burstein, eds., Mortal Remains: Death in Early America (University of Pennsylvania Press, 2003), p. 244 n42 

==Selected works==
Bust of Louisa May Alcott
* The Inheritance (1849, unpublished until 1997)
* Flower Fables (1849)
* Hospital Sketches (1863)
* The Rose Family: A Fairy Tale (1864)
* Moods (1865, revised 1882)
* Morning-Glories and Other Stories (1867)
* The Mysterious Key and What It Opened (1867)
* Little Women or Meg, Jo, Beth and Amy (1868)
* Three Proverb Stories (includes "Kitty's Class Day", "Aunt Kipp" and "Psyche's Art") (1868)
*A Strange Island, (1868)
* Part Second of Little Women, also known as "Good Wives" (1869)
*Perilous Play, (1869)
* An Old Fashioned Girl (1870)
* Will's Wonder Book (1870)
* Little Men: Life at Plumfield with Jo's Boys (1871)
* Aunt Jo's Scrap-Bag (18721882)
* "Transcendental Wild Oats" (1873)
* (1873)
* Eight Cousins or The Aunt-Hill (1875)
* Beginning Again, Being a Continuation of Work (1875)
* Silver Pitchers, and Independence: A Centennial Love Story" (1876)
* Rose in Bloom: A Sequel to Eight Cousins (1876)
* Under the Lilacs (1878)
* (1880)
* The Candy Country (1885)
* Jo's Boys and How They Turned Out: A Sequel to "Little Men" (1886)
* Lulu's Library (18861889)
* A Garland for Girls (1888)
* Comic Tragedies (1893 )

As A. M. Barnard
* Behind a Mask, or a Woman's Power (1866)
* The Abbot's Ghost, or Maurice Treherne's Temptation (1867)
* A Long Fatal Love Chase (1866  first published 1995)

Published anonymously
* A Modern Mephistopheles (1877)

==Footnotes==

==References==
* , Editor. "Alcott in Her Own Time: A Biographical Chronicle of Her Life, Drawn from Recollections, Interviews, and Memoirs by Family, Friends and Associates." University of Iowa Press, Iowa City, Iowa, 2005. ISBN 0-87745-938-X.
*Review 2  No Title from The Radical (18651872). May 1868. American Periodical Series 1740  1900. (link is password only) (January 29, 2007).

==Further reading==

* 

* 
*

* 
* 

* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

Sources
*Works by or about Louisa May Alcott at Internet Archive (scanned books original editions color illustrated)
* 
* Works by Louisa May Alcott at Online Books Page
* Works by Louisa May Alcott at Project Gutenberg Australia
* Audio books of Louisa May Alcott's works at LibriVox
* Index entry for Louisa May Alcott at Poets' Corner
* Bibliography (including primary works and information on secondary literature  critical essays, theses and dissertations)
* 
Archival Materials
* Guide to Louisa May Alcott papers, MS Am 800.23 at Houghton Library, Harvard University
* Guide to Louisa May Alcott additional papers, 18391888, MS Am 2114 at Houghton Library, Harvard University
* Guide to Louisa May Alcott additional papers, 18451945, MS Am 1817 at Houghton Library, Harvard University
* Guide to Louisa May Alcott additional papers, 18491887, MS Am 1130.13 at Houghton Library, Harvard University
Other
* The Louisa May Alcott Society A scholarly organization devoted to her life and works.
* Louisa May Alcott, the real woman who wrote Little Women. Documentary materials.
* Obituary, New York Times, March 7, 1888, Louisa M. Alcott Dead
* Minneapolis Tribune, March 7, 1888, OBITUARY: Miss Louisa M. Alcott
* Encyclopaedia Britannica, Louisa May Alcott



[[LDS]]

LDS may refer to:

==Science, technology and engineering==
* Loeys-Dietz Syndrome, an autosomal dominant genetic syndrome
* Laser Direct Structuring, a method for forming metal traces, such as circuits or antennae, on an injection-molded plastic part; see molded interconnect device
* LDS fluid, an hydraulic fluid used in some Citron hydropneumatic suspension systems
* LDS (automobile), various single seat race cars built for the South African Formula One Championship by Louis Douglas Serrurier
* Leak detection system, system for detecting (and sometimes locating) leaks in pipelines
* Linear dynamic system, a mathematical model

==Organisations==
* Latter-day Saints, also known as Mormons
* Liberal Democracy of Slovenia, a Slovenian political party
* Loughborough Design School, a department of Loughborough University, UK

==Other uses==
* Laus Deo Semper, 'Praise to God Always', associated with use by the Jesuits
* LDS Podebrady (Laboratory of Distant Studies), project of the Institute for Language and Preparatory Studies, Charles University, Czech Republic
* Licentiate of Dental Surgery, a dental degree
* Leeds railway station, England, by National Rail station code

==See also==
* LDS Hospital, Salt Lake City, Utah, US
* LD (disambiguation)
* LSD (disambiguation) 



[[LALR parser]]

In computer science, an LALR parser or Look-Ahead LR parser is a simplified version of a canonical LR parser, to parse (separate and analyze) a text according to a set of production rules specified by a formal grammar for a computer language. ("LR" means left-to-right, rightmost derivation.) The LALR parser technique was invented by Frank DeRemer for his 1969 PhD dissertation, Practical Translators for LR(k) languages, in order to address the practical difficulties at that time of implementing canonical LR parsers. The simplification results in a parser with significantly reduced memory requirements but decreased language-recognition power. However, this power is enough for many mainstream computer languages, LR Parsing: Theory and Practice, Nigel P. Chapman, p. 8687 including Java, though the reference grammars for many languages fail to be LALR due to being ambiguous. The addition of some hand-written code, specific to the language being parsed, can improve the power of the LALR parser.

In practice LALR parsers are not written by hand, instead being automatically generated from the grammar by an LALR parser generator such as Yacc or GNU Bison. The automatically generated code may be augmented by hand-written code to augment the power of the resulting parser.

== History ==

In 1965, Donald Knuth invented the LR parser (Left to Right, Rightmost derivation). The LR parser can recognize any deterministic context-free language in linear-bounded time. Rightmost derivation has very large memory requirements and implementing an LR parser was impractical due to the limited memory of computers at that time. To address this shortcoming, in 1969, Frank DeRemer proposed two simplified versions of the LR parser, namely the Look-Ahead LR (LALR) and the Simple LR parser that had much lower memory requirements at the cost of less language-recognition power, with the LALR parser being the most-powerful alternative. In 1977, memory optimizations for the LR parser were invented but still the LR parser was less memory-efficient than the simplified alternatives.

In 1979, Frank DeRemer and Tom Pennello announced a series of optimizations for the LALR parser that would further improve its memory efficiency. Their work was published in 1982. 

== Overview ==
Generally, the LALR parser refers to the LALR(1) parser, just as the LR parser generally refers to the LR(1) parser. The "(1)" denotes one-token lookahead, to resolve differences between rule patterns during parsing. Similarly, there is an LALR(2) parser with two-token lookahead, and LALR(k) parsers with k-token lookup, but these are rare in actual use. The LALR parser is based on the LR(0) parser, so it can also be denoted LALR(1) = LA(1)LR(0) (1 token of lookahead, LR(0)) or more generally LALR(k) = LA(k)LR(0) (k tokens of lookahead, LR(0)). There is in fact a two-parameter family of LA(k)LR(j) parsers for all combinations of j and k, which can be derived from the LR(j + k) parser, Parsing Techniques: A Practical Guide, by Dick Grune and Ceriel J. H. Jacobs, "9.7 LALR(1)", p. 302 but these do not see practical use.

As with other types of LR parsers, an LALR parser is quite efficient at finding the single correct bottom-up parse in a single left-to-right scan over the input stream, because it does not need to use backtracking. Being a lookahead parser by definition, it always uses a lookahead, with being the most-common case.

== Relation to other parsers ==
=== LR parsers ===
The LALR(1) parser is less powerful than the LR(1) parser, and more powerful than the SLR(1) parser, though they all use the same production rules. The simplification that the LALR parser introduces consists in merging rules that have identical kernel item sets, because during the LR(0) state-construction process the lookaheads are not known. This reduces the power of the parser because not knowing the lookahead symbols can confuse the parser as to which grammar rule to pick next, resulting in reduce/reduce conflicts. All conflicts that arise in applying a LALR(1) parser to an unambiguous LR(1) grammar are reduce/reduce conflicts. The SLR(1) parser performs further merging, which introduces additional conflicts.

The standard example of an LR(1) grammar that cannot be parsed with the LALR(1) parser, exhibiting such a reduce/reduce conflict, is: "7.9 LR(1) but not LALR(1)", CSE 756: Compiler Design and Implementation, Eitan Gurari, Spring 2008 "Why is this LR(1) grammar not LALR(1)?" 
 S  a E c
  a F d
  b F c
  b E d
 E  e
 F  e

In the LALR table construction, two states will be merged into one state and later the lookaheads will be found to be ambiguous. The one state with lookaheads is:

 E  e. {c,d}
 F  e. {c,d}

An LR(1) parser will create two different states (with non-conflicting lookaheads), neither of which is ambiguous. In an LALR parser this one state has conflicting actions (given lookahead c or d, reduce to E or F), a "reduce/reduce conflict"; the above grammar will be declared ambiguous by a LALR parser generator and conflicts will be reported.

To recover, this ambiguity is resolved by choosing E, because it occurs before F in the grammar. However, the resultant parser will not be able to recognize the valid input sequence b e c, since the ambiguous sequence e c is reduced to (E  e) c, rather than the correct (F  e) c, but b E c is not in the grammar.

=== LL parsers ===
The LALR(k) parsers are incomparable with LL(k) parsers: for any j and k both greater than 0, there are LALR(j) grammars that are not LL(k) grammars and conversely. In fact, it is undecidable whether a given LL(1) grammar is LALR(k) for any . 

Depending on the presence of empty derivations, a LL(1) grammar can be equal to a SLR(1) or a LALR(1) grammar. If the LL(1) grammar has no empty derivations it is SLR(1) and if all symbols with empty derivations have non-empty derivations it is LALR(1). If symbols having only an empty derivation exist, the grammar may or may not be LALR(1). 

== Implementation issues ==

Because the LALR parser performs a right derivation instead of the more intuitive left derivation, understanding how it works is quite difficult. This makes the process of finding a correct and efficient LALR grammar very demanding and time-consuming. For the same reason, error-reporting can be quite hard because LALR parser errors cannot always be interpreted into messages with high-level terms meaningful for the end user. However, any LR(k &gt; 0) table makes it trivial to at least enumerate the various tokens that would have been valid options when a syntax error occurred, for low-level error messages. For this reason, the recursive descent parser is sometimes preferred over the LALR parser. This parser requires more hand-written code because of its lower language-recognition power. However, it does not have the special difficulties of the LALR parser because it performs left-derivation. Notable examples of this phenomenon are the C-language and C++ parsers of the Gnu Compiler Collection. These started as LALR parsers but were later changed to recursive-descent parsers. "GCC 3.4 Release Series Changes, New Features, and Fixes", GCC.gnu.org. "GCC 4.1 Release Series Changes, New Features, and Fixes", GCC.gnu.org. 

== See also ==
* Comparison of parser generators
* Context-free grammar
* Lookahead in parsing
* Parser generator
* Token scanner

== Notes ==

== References ==

* 
* 

== External links ==
* Parsing Simulator This simulator is used to generate parsing tables LALR and resolve the exercises of the book.
* JS/CC JavaScript based implementation of a LALR(1) parser generator, which can be run in a web-browser or from the command-line.
* LALR(1) tutorial, a flash card-like tutorial on LALR(1) parsing.



[[Language center]]

The term language center (or more accurately centers, e.g. Broca's area and Wernicke's area) refers to the areas of the brain which serve a particular function for speech processing and production.

== Current scientific consensus ==
New medical imaging techniques such as PET and fMRI have allowed researchers to generate pictures showing which areas of a living brain are active at a given time. In the past, research was primarily based on observations of loss of ability resulting from damage to the cerebral cortex. Indeed, medical imaging has represented a radical step forward for research on speech processing. Since then, a whole series of relatively large areas of the brain have been found to be involved in speech processing. In more recent research, subcortical regions (those lying below the cerebral cortex such as the putamen and the caudate nucleus) as well as the pre-motor areas (BA 6) have received increased attention. It is now generally assumed that the following structures of the cerebral cortex near the primary and secondary auditory cortexes play a fundamental role in speech processing:

* Superior temporal gyrus (STG): morphosyntactic processing (anterior section), integration of syntactic and semantic information (posterior section)
* Inferior frontal gyrus (IFG, Brodmann area (BA) 45/47): syntactic processing, working memory
* Inferior frontal gyrus (IFG, BA 44): syntactic processing, working memory
* Middle temporal gyrus (MTG): lexical semantic processing

The left hemisphere is usually dominant in right-handed people, although bilateral activations are not uncommon in the area of syntactic processing. It is now accepted that the right hemisphere plays an important role in the processing of suprasegmental acoustic features like prosody.

Most areas of speech processing develop in the second year of life in the dominant half (hemisphere) of the brain, which often (though not necessarily) corresponds to the opposite of the dominant hand. 98 percent of right-handed people are left-hemisphere dominant, and the majority of left-handed people as well.

== Older models ==
Language Areas of the brain. The Angular Gyrus is represented in orange, Supramarginal Gyrus is represented in yellow, Broca's area is represented in blue, Wernicke's area is represented in green and the Primary Auditory Cortex is represented in pink.
The differentiation of speech production into only two large sections of the brain (i.e. Broca's and Wernicke's areas), accepted long before the advent of medical imaging techniques, is now considered outdated. Broca's Area was first suggested to play a role in speech function by the French neurologist and anthropologist Paul Broca in 1861. The basis for this discovery was analysis of speech problems resulting from injuries to this region of the brain, located in the inferior frontal gyrus. Lesions to Broca's Area resulted primarily in disruptions to speech production. Damage to Wernicke's Area, which is located in the lower part of the temporal lobe, lead mainly to disruptions in speech reception. This area was named for German doctor Carl Wernicke, who discovered it in 1874 in the course of his research into aphasias (loss of ability to speak).

Broca's Area is today still considered an important language center, playing a central role in processing syntax, grammar, and sentence structure.

In summary, these early research efforts demonstrated that semantic and structural speech production takes place in different areas of the brain.

==See also==
*Language module

== Further reading ==
* Donald Loritz: How the Brain evolved Language, Oxford University Press 1999, ISBN 0-19-511874-X (hardcover), ISBN 0-19-515124-0 (paperback)
* Friederici, A.D.: Towards a neural basis of auditory sentence processing. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6:78, 2002.
* Kaan, E. and Swaab, T.Y.: The brain circuitry of syntactic comprehension. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6:350, 2002.
* Dronkers, N.F., Pinker, S. & Damasio, A.: Language and the Aphasias. In: Kandel, E.R., Schwartz, J.H. & Jessel, T.M. (eds.) Principles of Neuroscience, Fourth Edition, New York: McGraw-Hill, 2000, 11691187



[[Lift (force)]]

Boeing 747-8F landing
A fluid flowing past the surface of a body exerts a force on it. Lift is the component of this force that is perpendicular to the oncoming flow direction. It contrasts with the drag force, which is the component of the surface force parallel to the flow direction. If the fluid is air, the force is called an aerodynamic force. In water, it is called a hydrodynamic force.

Lift is the force generated by propellers and wings to propel aircraft and keep them in the air. Birds, bats, insects, fish, flying reptiles, and even falling plant seeds have usefully exploited lift for millions of years.

==Overview==
Forces on an airfoil
Lift is most commonly associated with the wing of a fixed-wing aircraft, although lift is also generated by propellers, kites, helicopter rotors, rudders, sails and keels on sailboats, hydrofoils, wings on auto racing cars, wind turbines and other streamlined objects. Lift is also exploited in the animal world, and even in the plant world by the seeds of certain trees. While the common meaning of the word "lift" assumes that lift opposes weight, lift in its technical sense can be in any direction since it is defined with respect to the direction of flow rather than to the direction of gravity. When an aircraft is flying straight and level (cruise) most of the lift opposes gravity. The amount of lift will be (usually slightly) more or less than gravity depending on the thrust level and vertical alignment of the thrust line. A side thrust line will result in some lift opposing side thrust as well. However, when an aircraft is climbing, descending, or banking in a turn the lift is tilted with respect to the vertical. Clancy, L.J., Aerodynamics, Section 14.6 Lift may also be entirely downwards in some aerobatic manoeuvres, or on the wing on a racing car. In this last case, the term downforce is often used. Lift may also be largely horizontal, for instance on a sail on a sailboat.
 
An airfoil is a streamlined shape that is capable of generating significantly more lift than drag. Clancy, L.J., Aerodynamics, Section 5.2 Non-streamlined objects such as bluff bodies and flat plates may also generate lift when moving relative to the fluid, but will have a higher drag coefficient dominated by pressure drag. Drag of Blunt Bodies and Streamlined Bodies
http://www.efluids.com/efluids/bicycle/bicycle_pages/blunt.jsp#bluff 

==Description of lift on an airfoil==

There are several ways to explain how an airfoil generates lift. Some are more complicated or more mathematically rigorous than others; some have been shown to be incorrect. "There are many theories of how lift is generated. Unfortunately, many of the theories found in encyclopedias, on web sites, and even in some textbooks are incorrect, causing unnecessary confusion for students." NASA http://www.grc.nasa.gov/WWW/K-12/airplane/wrong1.html "Most of the texts present the Bernoulli formula without derivation, but also with very little explanation. When applied to the lift of an airfoil, the explanation and diagrams are almost always wrong. At least for an introductory course, lift on an airfoil should be explained simply in terms of Newtons Third Law, with the thrust up being equal to the time rate of change of momentum of the air downwards." Cliff Swartz et al. Quibbles, Misunderstandings, and Egregious Mistakes - Survey of High-School Physics Texts THE PHYSICS TEACHER Vol. 37, May 1999 pg 300 http://scitation.aip.org/getpdf/servlet/GetPDFServlet?filetype=pdf&id=PHTEAH000037000005000297000001&idtype=cvips&doi=10.1119/1.880292&prog=normal "One explanation of how a wing of an airplane gives lift is that as a result of the shape of the airfoil, the air flows faster over the top than it does over the bottom because it has farther to travel. Of course, with our thin-airfoil sails, the distance along the top is the same as along the bottom so this explanation of lift fails." The Aerodynamics of Sail Interaction by Arvel Gentry Proceedings of the Third AIAA Symposium on the Aero/Hydronautics of Sailing 1971 http://www.arvelgentry.com/techs/The%20Aerodynamics%20of%20Sail%20Interaction.pdf "An explanation frequently given is that the path along the upper side of the aerofoil is longer and the air thus has to be faster. This explanation is wrong." A comparison of explanations of the aerodynamic lifting force Klaus Weltner Am. J. Phys. Vol.55 No.January 1, 1987 "The lift on the body is simple...it's the re-action of the solid body to the turning of a moving fluid...Now why does the fluid turn the way that it does? That's where the complexity enters in because we are dealing with a fluid. ...The cause for the flow turning is the simultaneous conservation of mass, momentum (both linear and angular), and energy by the fluid. And it's confusing for a fluid because the mass can move and redistribute itself (unlike a solid), but can only do so in ways that conserve momentum (mass times velocity) and energy (mass times velocity squared)... A change in velocity in one direction can cause a change in velocity in a perpendicular direction in a fluid, which doesn't occur in solid mechanics... So exactly describing how the flow turns is a complex problem; too complex for most people to visualize. So we make up simplified "models". And when we simplify, we leave something out. So the model is flawed. Most of the arguments about lift generation come down to people finding the flaws in the various models, and so the arguments are usually very legitimate." Tom Benson of NASA's Glenn Research Center in an interview with AlphaTrainer.Com http://www.alphatrainer.com/pages/corner.htm For example, there are explanations based directly on Newtons laws of motion and explanations based on Bernoullis principle. Either can be used to explain lift. "Both approaches are equally valid and equally correct, a concept that is central to the conclusion of this article." Charles N. Eastlake An Aerodynamicists View of Lift, Bernoulli, and Newton THE PHYSICS TEACHER Vol. 40, March 2002 http://www.df.uba.ar/users/sgil/physics_paper_doc/papers_phys/fluids/Bernoulli_Newton_lift.pdf This article will start with a simple explanation based on Newton's laws; more complicated and alternative explanations will follow.

===Newton's laws: lift and the deflection of the flow===

====Deflection====
Streamlines around an airfoil in a wind tunnel. Note the curved streamlines above and below the foil, and the overall downward deflection of the air.

Lift is a reaction forcean airfoil deflects the air as it passes the airfoil. "...the effect of the wing is to give the air stream a downward velocity component. The reaction force of the deflected air mass must then act on the wing to give it an equal and opposite upward component." In: Since the foil must exert a force on the air to change its direction, the air must exert a force of equal magnitude but opposite direction on the foil. In the case of an airplane wing, the wing exerts a downward force on the air and the air exerts an upward force on the wing. "Essentially, due to the presence of the wing (its shape and inclination to the incoming flow, the so-called angle of attack), the flow is given a downward deflection, as shown in Fig. 2. It is Newtons third law at work here, with the flow then exerting a reaction force on the wing in an upward direction, thus generating lift." Vassilis Spathopoulos Flight Physics for Beginners: Simple Examples of Applying Newtons Laws The Physics Teacher Vol. 49, September 2011 pg 373 http://tpt.aapt.org/resource/1/phteah/v49/i6/p373_s1 "The main fact of all heaver-than-air flight is this: the wing keeps the airplane up by pushing the air down." In: "The lift generated by an airplane is, on account of the principles of action and reaction, necessarily connected with a descending current in all its details." Ludwig Prandtl, as quoted by John D. Anderson in Introduction to Flight pg 332 "Birds and aircraft fly because they are constantly pushing
air downwards:
L = dp/dt 
Here L is the lift force and dp/dt is the rate at which
downward momentum is imparted to the airflow." Flight without Bernoulli Chris Waltham THE PHYSICS TEACHER Vol. 36, Nov. 1998 http://www.df.uba.ar/users/sgil/physics_paper_doc/papers_phys/fluids/fly_no_bernoulli.pdf "When air flows over and under an airfoil inclined at a small angle to its direction, the air is turned from its course. Now, when a body is moving in a uniform speed in a straight line, it requires force to alter either its direction or speed. Therefore, the sails exert a force on the wind and, since action and reaction are equal and opposite, the wind exerts a force on the sails." In: "That's what the wings are for. They divert the air they reach and deflect it downwards." Cliff Swartz Numbers Count The Physics Teacher Vol 34 Dec 1996 pg 536 http://scitation.aip.org/getpdf/servlet/GetPDFServlet?filetype=pdf&id=PHTEAH000034000009000536000001&idtype=cvips&doi=10.1119/1.2344560&prog=normal 

This follows from the second and third of Newton's laws of motion: The net force on an object is equal to its rate of momentum change, and: To every action there is an equal and opposite reaction. , Vol. 1, 101 and 102. 

The air changes direction as it passes the airfoil and follows a path that is curved. Whenever airflow changes direction, a reaction force is generated opposite to the directional change. "Lift is a force generated by turning a moving fluid... If the body is shaped, moved, or inclined in such a way as to produce a net deflection or turning of the flow, the local velocity is changed in magnitude, direction, or both. Changing the velocity creates a net force on the body." 

====Pressure differences====
Lift may also be described in terms of air pressure: pressure is the normal force per unit area. Wherever there is net force there is also a pressure difference, thus deflection/flow turning indicates the presence of a net force and therefore a pressure difference. The direction of the net force implies that the average pressure on the upper surface of the wing is lower than the average pressure on the underside. A uniform pressure surrounding a body does not create a net force. (See buoyancy). Therefore pressure differences are needed to exert a force on a body immersed in a fluid. For example, see: "...if a streamline is curved, there must be a pressure gradient across the streamline..." 

Whenever a fluid follows a curved path, there is a pressure gradient perpendicular to the flow direction. This direct relationship between curved streamlines and pressure differences was derived from Newton's second law by Leonhard Euler in 1754:

:

where R is the radius of curvature, p is the pressure,  is the density, and v is the velocity. This formula shows that higher velocities and tighter curvatures create larger pressure differentials and that for straight flow (R  ) the pressure difference is zero. Thus a distribution of the pressure is created which is given in Euler's equation. The physical reason is the aerofoil which forces the streamline to follow its curved surface. The low pressure at the upper side of the aerofoil is a consequence of the curved surface." A comparison of explanations of the aerodynamic lifting force Klaus Weltner Am. J. Phys. Vol.55 No.January 1, 1987 pg 53 http://scitation.aip.org/getpdf/servlet/GetPDFServlet?filetype=pdf&id=AJPIAS000055000001000050000001&idtype=cvips&doi=10.1119/1.14960&prog=normal 

====Flow on both sides of the wing====
Variation of the pressure around an airfoil as obtained by a solution of the Euler equations.
In the picture above, observe that the air is turned both above and below the wing so both the upper and lower surface contribute to the flow turning and therefore the lift. In fact, for typical airfoils at subsonic speeds the top surface contributes more flow turning than the bottom surface, and the pressure deviation along the top is significantly larger than along the bottom. A common explanation describes lift as merely the result of the air molecules bouncing off the lower surface of the wing, but since this ignores the airflow around the top of the wing it usually leads to incorrect results. However, at hypersonic speeds, this model becomes applicable. "...newtonian theory is used frequently to estimate the pressure distribution of a hypersonic body." Fundamentals of Aerodynamics 3rd ed. by John D. Anderson, Jr. McGraw-Hill 2001 ISBN 0-07-237335-0 p. 686. http://www.grc.nasa.gov/WWW/K-12/airplane/wrong2.html 

====Angle of attack====
The arrow is the vector representing the velocity of the air in the free stream around a stationary two-dimensional airfoil. The upper red line is the chord line of the airfoil and the lower red line is parallel to the arrow. The angle &alpha; is the angle of attack.
The angle of attack is the angle between an airfoil and the oncoming air. A symmetrical airfoil will generate zero lift at zero angle of attack. But as the angle of attack increases, the air is deflected through a larger angle and the vertical component of the airstream velocity increases, resulting in more lift. For small angles a symmetrical airfoil will generate a lift force roughly proportional to the angle of attack. "You can argue that the main lift comes from the fact that the wing is angled slightly upward so that air striking the underside of the wing is forced downward. The Newton's 3rd law reaction force upward on the wing provides the lift. Increasing the angle of attack can increase the lift, but it also increases drag so that you have to provide more thrust with the aircraft engines" hyperphysics Georgia State University Department of Physics and Astronomy http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/hbase/fluids/angatt.html "If we enlarge the angle of attack we enlarge the deflection of the airstream by the airfoil. This results in the enlargement of the vertical component of the velocity of the airstream... we may expect that the lifting force depends linearly on the angle of attack. This dependency is in complete agreement with the results of experiments..." Klaus Weltner A comparison of explanations of the aerodynamic lifting force Am. J. Phys. 55(1), January 1987 pg 52 

As the angle of attack grows larger, the lift reaches a maximum at some angle; increasing the angle of attack beyond this critical angle of attack causes the air to become turbulent and separate from the wing; there is less deflection downward so the airfoil generates less lift. The airfoil is said to be stalled. "The decrease of angles exceeding 25 is plausible. For large angles of attack we get turbulence and thus less deflection downward." Klaus Weltner A comparison of explanations of the aerodynamic lifting force Am. J. Phys. 55(1), January 1987 pg 52 

Cambered airfoils will generate lift at zero angle of attack. When the chordline is horizontal, the trailing edge has a downward direction and since the air follows the trailing edge it is deflected downward. "With an angle of attack of 0, we can explain why we already have a lifting force. The air stream behind the aerofoil follows the trailing edge. The trailing edge already has a downward direction, if the chord to the middle line of the profile is horizontal." Klaus Weltner A comparison of explanations of the aerodynamic lifting force Am. J. Phys. 55(1), January 1987 pg 52 When a cambered airfoil is upside down, the angle of attack can be adjusted so that the lift force is upwards. This explains how a plane can fly upside down. "...the important thing about an aerofoil (say an aircraft wing) is not so much that its upper surface is humped and its lower surface is nearly flat, but simply that it moves through the air at an angle. This also avoids the otherwise difficult paradox that an aircraft can fly upside down!" N. H. Fletcher Mechanics of Flight Physics Education July 1975 http://iopscience.iop.org/0031-9120/10/5/009/pdf/0031-9120_10_5_009.pdf "It requires adjustment of the angle of attack, but as clearly demonstrated in almost every air show, it can be done." hyperphysics Georgia State University Department of Physics and Astronomy http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/hbase/fluids/airfoil.html#c2 

====Limitations of deflection/turning====
* While the theory correctly reasons that deflection implies that there must be a force on the wing, it does not explain why the air is deflected. Intuitively, one can say that the air follows the curve of the foil, Most students will be happy with the streamline pattern around a lifting wing ... because it intuitively looks right but this is not very rigorous or precise.
* The theory, while correct in as far as it goes, is not sufficiently detailed to support the precise calculations required for engineering. "We have used a very simple physical model relying only on Newtons second law to reproduce all the salient features of a rigorous fluid dynamical treatment of flight... The model has its limitations; we cannot calculate real performance with it." "Measuring lift by measuring the increase in
downward vertical velocity in the flow coming off the trailing edge of the airfoil is conceptually possible. This downward velocity is definitely there and is known as downwash. I have never heard of anyone actually measuring it with sufficient precision to calculate lift, not because it is physically unsound but because it is not a practical experiment." Charles N. Eastlake An Aerodynamicists View of Lift, Bernoulli, and Newton THE PHYSICS TEACHER Vol. 40, March 2002 http://www.df.uba.ar/users/sgil/physics_paper_doc/papers_phys/fluids/Bernoulli_Newton_lift.pdf "Finally we obtain dp/dz = p v^2/R. Curved streamlines within a flow are related to pressure gradients. Unfortunately this equation cannot be integrated directly. The integration requires the knowledge of the total flow field." Physics of Flight - reviewed
by Klaus WELTNER http://user.uni-frankfurt.de/~weltner/Physics%20of%20Flight%20internet%202011.pdf Thus, textbooks on aerodynamics use more complex models to provide a full description of lift.

===Bernoulli's principle: lift, pressure, and speed===

Bernoulli's principle states that within an airflow of constant energy, when the air flows through a region of lower pressure it speeds up and vice versa. "A complete statement of Bernoulli's Theorem is as follows: "In a flow where no energy is being added or taken away, the sum of its various energies is a constant: consequently where the velocity increasees the pressure decreases and vice versa."" Norman F Smith Bernoulli, Newton and Dynamic Lift Part I School Science and Mathematics Vol 73 Issue 3 http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1949-8594.1973.tb08998.x/pdf Thus, there is a direct mathematical relationship between the pressure and the speed, so if one knows the speed at all points within the airflow one can calculate the pressure, and vice versa. For any airfoil generating lift, there must be a pressure imbalance, i.e. lower average air pressure on the top than on the bottom. Bernoulli's principle states that this pressure difference must be accompanied by a speed difference.

Bernoulli's principle does not explain why the air flows faster over the top of the wing; to explain that requires some other physical reasoning. "Although the Bernoulli principle can be used to determine the net force and the lifting force upon a solid body once the pressure and velocity distribution around the body have been specified, this flow regime is a consequence of viscosity, and cannot be explained without recourse to the Coanda effect, circulation, and the curvature of the wing. Hence the Bernoulli principle explanation is subservient to an explanation of lift which employs the latter concepts." Gordon McCabe Explanation and discovery in aerodynamics http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/2573/1/aero.pdf It is in providing that additional reasoning where some explanations oversimplify things.

====Conservation of mass====

Streamlines around an airfoil in a wind tunnel. Note the narrower streamtubes above and the wider streamtubes below the foil.

If one takes the experimentally observed flow around an airfoil as a starting point, then lift can be explained in terms of pressures using Bernoulli's principle and conservation of mass. 

Returning to the picture from the previous section, the flow approaching an airfoil can be divided into streamtubes, which are defined based on the area between two streamlines. By definition, fluid never crosses a streamline in a steady flow. Assuming that the air is incompressible, the rate of flow (e.g. liters or gallons per minute) must be constant within each streamtube since matter is not created or destroyed. If a streamtube becomes narrower, the flow speed must increase in the narrower region to maintain the constant flow rate. This idea is called "conservation of mass", and for incompressible flow mass is conserved within each streamtube. "The effect of squeezing streamlines together as they divert around the front of
an airfoil shape is that the velocity must increase to keep the mass flow constant since the area between the streamlines has become smaller." Charles N. Eastlake An Aerodynamicists View of Lift, Bernoulli, and Newton THE PHYSICS TEACHER Vol. 40, March 2002 http://www.df.uba.ar/users/sgil/physics_paper_doc/papers_phys/fluids/Bernoulli_Newton_lift.pdf 

The picture shows that the upper stream tubes constrict as they flow up and around the airfoil. Conservation of mass says that the flow speed must increase as the stream tube area decreases. Similarly, the lower stream tubes expand and the flow slows down.

From Bernoulli's principle, the pressure on the upper surface where the flow is moving faster is lower than the pressure on the lower surface where it is moving slower. The pressure difference thus creates a net aerodynamic force, pointing upward and downstream to the flow direction. The component of the force perpendicular to the free stream is lift; the component parallel to the freestream is drag. In conjunction with this force by the air on the airfoil, the airfoil imparts an equal-and-opposite force on the surrounding air that creates the downwash, in accordance with Newton's third law. Measuring the momentum transferred to the downwash is another way to determine the amount of lift on the airfoil. , pp. 6869 and pp. 153155. 

====Limitations of explanations based on Bernoulli's principle====

*The explanation above does not explain why the streamtubes change size. To see why the air flows the way it does requires more sophisticated analysis. "There is no way to predict, from Bernoulli's equation alone, what the pattern of streamlines will be for a particular wing." Halliday and Resnick Fundamentals of Physics 3rd Ed. Extended pg 378 "The generation of lift may be explained by starting from the shape of streamtubes above and below an airfoil. With a constriction above and an expansion below, it is easy to demonstrate lift, again via the Bernoulli equation. However, the reason for the shape of the streamtubes remains obscure..." Jaakko Hoffren Quest for an Improved Explanation of Lift American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 2001 pg 3 http://corsair.flugmodellbau.de/files/area2/LIFT.PDF "There is nothing wrong with the Bernoulli principle, or with the statement that the air goes faster over the top of the wing. But, as the above discussion suggests, our understanding is not complete with this explanation. The problem is that we are missing a vital piece when we apply Bernoullis principle. We can calculate the pressures around the wing if we know the speed of the air over and under the wing, but how do we determine the speed?" How Airplanes Fly: A Physical Description of Lift David Anderson and Scott Eberhardt http://www.allstar.fiu.edu/aero/airflylvl3.htm 

*Sometimes a geometrical argument is offered to demonstrate why the streamtubes change size: it is asserted that the top "obstructs" or "constricts" the air more than the bottom, hence narrower streamtubes. For conventional wings that are flat on the bottom and curved on top this makes some intuitive sense. But it does not explain how flat plates, symmetric airfoils, sailboat sails, or conventional airfoils flying upside down can generate lift, and attempts to calculate lift based on the amount of constriction do not predict experimental results. "The problem with the "Venturi" theory is that it attempts to provide us with the velocity based on an incorrect assumption (the constriction of the flow produces the velocity field). We can calculate a velocity based on this assumption, and use Bernoulli's equation to compute the pressure, and perform the pressure-area calculation and the answer we get does not agree with the lift that we measure for a given airfoil." NASA Glenn Research Center http://www.grc.nasa.gov/WWW/K-12/airplane/wrong3.html "A concept...uses a symmetrical convergent-divergent channel, like a longitudinal section of a Venturi tube, as the starting point. It is widely known that, when such a device is put in a flow, the static pressure in the tube decreases. When the upper half of the tube is removed, a geometry resembling the airfoil is left, and suction is still maintained on top of it. Of course, this explanation is flawed too, because the geometry change affects the whole flowfield and there is no physics involved in the description." Jaakko Hoffren Quest for an Improved Explanation of Lift Section 4.3 American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 2001 http://corsair.flugmodellbau.de/files/area2/LIFT.PDF "This answers the apparent mystery of how a symmetric airfoil can produce lift. ... This is also true of a flat plate at non-zero angle of attack." Charles N. Eastlake An Aerodynamicists View of Lift, Bernoulli, and Newton http://www.df.uba.ar/users/sgil/physics_paper_doc/papers_phys/fluids/Bernoulli_Newton_lift.pdf "This classic explanation is based on the difference of streaming velocities caused by the airfoil. There remains, however, a question: How does the airfoil cause the difference in streaming velocities? Some books don't give any answer, while others just stress the picture of the streamlines, saying the airfoil reduces the separations of the streamlines at the upper side (Fig. 1). They do not say how the airfoil manages to do this. Thus this is not a sufficient answer." Klaus Weltner Bernoulli's Law and Aerodynamic Lifting Force The Physics Teacher February 1990 pg 84. http://scitation.aip.org/getpdf/servlet/GetPDFServlet?filetype=pdf&id=PHTEAH000028000002000084000001&idtype=cvips&prog=normal 

*In deriving Bernoulli's principle, assumptions may be made (such as constant energy or incompressible flow) that are not applicable to real-world airfoils. For instance, a sailboat that is accelerating is removing energy from the flow while an airplane in level flight is adding energy to the flow, so energy is not constant. For high speed aircraft moving at transonic speeds the effects of compressibility can't be neglected. "One of the complicated equations with which we bedevil our students is due to Bernoulli.... Once having derived the equation, however, we like to apply it to all sorts of phenomena that dont satisfy the constraints. For instance, we ascribe lift on airfoils to the air going over the top of the foil with greater speed and thus less pressure. But air isnt incompressible and the streamlines are all mixed up and dissipated with turbulence." Misconceptions for Grown-Ups Clifford E. Swartz THE PHYSICS TEACHER Vol. 36, April 1998 pg 200 "Unfortunately, applying Bernoulli's equation and ignoring the problem's complexity ... (gives) the false impression that restrictions used in deriving an equation like Bernoulli's equation can be ignored in the later applications of that equation. Bernoulli's equation is derived assuming incompressible fluids, and therefore can only be applied to air in special circumstances. Our objections to the use of Bernoulli's equation to explain airfoil lift in introductory texts are that it sets a bad example in illustrating to students that it is all right (perhaps even good physics) to apply an equation to a situation in which it appears to violate the conditions assumed in deriving the equation, and that it does not lead to a clear understanding of how airfoils generate lift." Huebner & Jagannathan letter published in American Journal of Physics Vol 56 No 9 1988 pg 855 http://scitation.aip.org/getpdf/servlet/GetPDFServlet?filetype=pdf&id=AJPIAS000056000009000855000002&idtype=cvips&doi=10.1119/1.15757&prog=normal "Another fundamental problem with this description is that the airs pressure and speed are not related by the Bernoulli equation for a real wing in flight! The Bernoulli equation is a statement of the conservation of energy. For it to be applied the system must be in equilibrium and no energy added to the system. As you will see in the discussion below, a great deal of energy as added to the air. Before the wing came by the air was standing
still. After the passage of the wing there is a great deal of air in motion. A 250-ton jet at
cruse speed is doing a lot of work to stay in the air. Much of the fuel that is burned is
adding energy to the air to create lift. Thus the Bernoulli equation is not applicable." The Newtonian Description of Lift of a Wing-Revised David F. Anderson & Scott Eberhardt http://home.comcast.net/~clipper-108/Lift_AAPT.pdf "Although the Bernoulli equation is very useful for qualatative descriptions of many features of fluid flow, such descriptions are often grossly inaccurate when compared with the quantitative results of experiments. Prominent reasons for the discrepancies are that gasses like air are hardly incompressible, and liquids like water are hardly inviscid, which invalidates the assumptions made in deriving the Bernoulli equation. In addition it is often difficult to maintain steady, streamlined flow without turbulence, and the introduction of turbulence can greatly affect the results" Paul A. Tipler and Gene Mosca Physics for Scientists and Engineers 6th ed. 2008 W. H. Freeman and Company pg 445 isbn 1-4292-0124-X 

*A common explanation using Bernoulli's principle asserts that the air must traverse both the top and bottom in the same amount of time and that this explains the increased speed on the (longer) top side of the wing. But this assertion is false; it is typically the case that the air parcels traveling over the upper surface will reach the trailing edge before those traveling over the bottom. "...there is nothing in aerodynamics requiring the top and bottom flows having to reach the trailing edge at the same time. This idea is a completely erroneous explanation for lift. The flow on top gets to the trailing edge long before the flow
on the bottom because of the circulation flow field." Arvel Gentry Origins of Lift http://www.arvelgentry.com/techs/origins_of_lift.pdf 

===A more detailed physical description===
Flow around an airfoil: the dots move with the flow. Note that the velocities are much higher at the upper surface than at the lower surface. The black dots are on timelines, which split into two  an upper and lower part  at the leading edge. The part of a timeline below the airfoil does not catch up with the one above. Colors of the dots indicate streamlines. The airfoil is a KrmnTrefftz airfoil, with parameters x = 0.08, y = +0.08 and n = 1.94. The angle of attack is 8, and the flow is a potential flow.

Lift is generated in accordance with the fundamental principles of physics. The most relevant physics reduce to three principles: "Analysis of fluid flow is typically presented to engineering students in terms of three fundamental principles: conservation of mass, conservation of momentum, and conservation of energy." Charles N. Eastlake An Aerodynamicists View of Lift, Bernoulli, and Newton THE PHYSICS TEACHER Vol. 40, March 2002 http://www.df.uba.ar/users/sgil/physics_paper_doc/papers_phys/fluids/Bernoulli_Newton_lift.pdf 
* Conservation of Momentum, which is a direct consequence of Newton's laws of motion, especially Newton's second law which relates the net force on an element of air to its rate of momentum change,
* Conservation of Mass, including the common assumption that the airfoil's surface is impermeable for the air flowing around, and
* Conservation of Energy, which says that energy is neither created nor destroyed.

In addition, one needs an expression relating the fluid stresses (consisting of pressure and shear stress components) to the properties of the flow. "The main relationships comprising the NS equations are the basic conservation laws for mass, momentum, and energy. To have a complete equation set we also need an equation
of state relating temperature, pressure, and density, and formulas defining the other required gas properties." Doug McLean Understanding Aerodynamics: Arguing from the Real Physics page 14 Wiley Print ISBN 9781119967514 Online ISBN 9781118454190 http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781118454190.ch3/pdf The pressure depends on the other flow properties, such as its mass density, through the (thermodynamic) equation of state, while the shear stresses are related to the flow through the air's viscosity. 

====NavierStokes and Euler equations====

The above conditions can be expressed as partial differential equations that constrain the fluid flow. Unlike the physics of rigid bodies where the equations of motion describe the physical location of the rigid body, fluid dynamics describes the flow as a velocity field, i.e. a solution associates each point in space with a vector that represents the speed and direction of the flow at that point. Once the velocity field is solved for, other quantities of interest may be computed from the velocity field. For instance, Bernoulli's equation can be used to determine the pressure at each point on the airfoil from the speed of the velocity field. The pressures can then be "added up" (integrated) to determine the net aerodynamic force.

Application of the viscous shear stresses to Newton's second law for an airflow results in the NavierStokes equations. These equations are notoriously difficult to solve, but in many instances approximations suffice for a good description of lifting airfoils. In large parts of the flow viscosity may be neglected; such an inviscid flow can be described mathematically through the Euler equations, resulting from the Navier-Stokes equations when the viscosity is neglected. Neither the Navier-Stokes equations nor the Euler equations lend themselves to exact analytic solutions; usually engineers have to resort to numerical solutions to solve them, but Euler's equation can be solved by making further simplifying assumptions. Jaakko Hoffren Quest for an Improved Explanation of Lift Section 4.3 American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 2001 http://corsair.flugmodellbau.de/files/area2/LIFT.PDF 

====Potential flow, the Kutta condition, and circulation====

Uniform flow plus vortex flow (circulation) gives the total flow below.

One further simplifying approximation is to assume that the flow is irrotational, i.e. that the flow does not rotate around itself. Mathematically, this is expressed by saying that the curl of the flow field is everywhere equal to zero. Irrotational flows have two nice properties: 1) an irrotational flow can be expressed as the gradient of a scalar function called a potential (the flow is then called potential flow) 2) solutions to complicated flows can be expressed as the sum of simpler flow fields. These two properties make the calculations tractable. "...whenever the velocity field is irrotational, it can be expressed as the gradient of a scalar function we
call a velocity potential : V = . The existence of a velocity potential can greatly simplify the analysis of inviscid flows by way of potential-flow theory..." Doug McLean Understanding Aerodynamics: Arguing from the Real Physics p 26 Wiley http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781118454190.ch3/pdf Elements of Potential Flow California State University Los Angeles http://instructional1.calstatela.edu/cwu/me408/Slides/PotentialFlow/PotentialFlow.htm 

In particular, solutions can be expressed as the sum of a uniform flow (i.e. a steady flow equal to the free stream velocity) plus a free vortex flow, i.e. a circular flow around the airfoil with the speed inversely proportional to the radius. ""...we can visualize the true flow over an airfoil...as the superposition of a uniform flow and a circulatory flow..." John D Anderson Introduction to Flight 4th Ed. pg 325 (Vortex flow is irrotational, except at the center of its circulation; since the center is inside the airfoil, the flow itself remains irrotational.) A vortex flow of any strength may be added to this uniform flow and the equation is solved, thus there are many flows that solve the Euler equations. IRROTATIONAL PLANE FLOWS OF AN INVISCID FLUID UNIVERSITY OF GENOA FACULTY OF ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING http://www.diam.unige.it/~irro/lecture_e.html 

In order to arrive at a unique (physical) solution, one can apply the Kutta condition, which says that for steady flow the rear stagnation point is coincident with the trailing edge of the airfoil. The magnitude of the vortex flow is adjusted so that the Kutta condition is met. Another way to say this is that the airflow around the airfoil develops enough vorticity to satisfy the Kutta condition. Vorticity is measured by a number called the circulation, so an airfoil in a steady flow will develop sufficient circulation to satisfy the Kutta condition.

Streamlines and streamtubes around a NACA 0012 airfoil at moderate angle of attack. The stagnation line is the boundary between the two shaded streamtubes.
The image to the right shows the streamlines over a NACA 0012 airfoil computed using potential flow theory and applying the Kutta condition as a boundary condition. Potential Flow over a NACA Four-Digit Airfoil from the Wolfram Demonstrations Project http://demonstrations.wolfram.com/PotentialFlowOverANACAFourDigitAirfoil/ The stagnation streamline is the streamline that intersects the airfoil. In the front it typically intersects the airfoil on the lower surface near the leading edge. The stagnation streamline leaves the airfoil at the sharp trailing edge, according to the Kutta condition.

The physical interpretation of circulation is that the vortex flow adds to the uniform flow above the wing and subtracts from it below the wing. Thus, the speed of the air above the wing is higher than below it, as can be seen in the narrower streamtube. By Bernoulli's principle, this implies a pressure difference and therefore lift. The amount of lift is directly proportional to the circulation. "On the top side of the airfoil, the circulation vectors are in the same direction as the free stream direction, therefore causing the flow to speed up. This increase in speed means lower pressures (according to Bernoulli's equation). On the bottom
side of the airfoil, the circulation vector is opposite the general flow direction so the fluid tends to be slowed down resulting in increased pressure. The difference in pressure forces between the top and bottom sides of an airfoil are what gives us lift." Arvel Gentry The Origins of Lift January 2006 http://www.arvelgentry.com/techs/origins_of_lift.pdf 

====Flowfield formation====

Consider the case of an airfoil accelerating from rest in a viscous flow. When there is no flow, there is no lift and the aerodynamic forces acting on the airfoil are zero. At the instant when the flow is turned on, the flow is undeflected downstream of the airfoil and there are two stagnation points on the airfoil (where the flow velocity is zero): one near the leading edge on the bottom surface, and another on the upper surface near the trailing edge. The dividing line between the upper and lower streamtubes intersects the body at the stagnation points. Since the flow speed is zero at these points, by Bernoulli's principle the static pressure at these points is at a maximum. As long as the second stagnation point is at its initial location on the upper surface of the wing, the circulation around the airfoil is zero and, in accordance with the KuttaJoukowski theorem, there is no lift. The net pressure difference between the upper and lower surfaces is zero. 

The effects of viscosity are contained within a thin layer of fluid called the boundary layer, close to the body. As flow over the airfoil commences, the flow along the lower surface turns at the sharp trailing edge and flows along the upper surface towards the upper stagnation point. The flow in the vicinity of the sharp trailing edge is very fast and the resulting viscous forces cause the boundary layer to accumulate into a vortex on the upper side of the airfoil between the trailing edge and the upper stagnation point. Clancy, L.J., Aerodynamics, Figure 4.7 This is called the starting vortex. The starting vortex and the bound vortex around the surface of the wing are two halves of a closed loop. As the starting vortex increases in strength the bound vortex also strengthens, causing the flow over the upper surface of the airfoil to accelerate and drive the upper stagnation point towards the sharp trailing edge. As this happens, the starting vortex is shed into the wake, Clancy, L.J., Aerodynamics, Figure 4.8 and is a necessary condition to produce lift on an airfoil. If the flow were stopped, there would be a corresponding "stopping vortex". Despite being an idealization of the real world, the vortex system set up around a wing is both real and observable; the trailing vortex sheet most noticeably rolls up into wing-tip vortices.

The upper stagnation point continues moving downstream until it is coincident with the sharp trailing edge (as stated by the Kutta condition). The flow downstream of the airfoil is deflected downward from the free-stream direction and, from the reasoning above in the basic explanation, there is now a net pressure difference between the upper and lower surfaces and an aerodynamic force is generated.

===Other alternative explanations for the generation of lift===

Many other alternative explanations for the generation of lift by an airfoil have been put forward, a few of which are presented here. Most of them are intended to explain the phenomenon of lift to a general audience. Although the explanations may share features in common with the explanations above, additional assumptions and simplifications may be introduced. This can reduce the validity of an alternative explanation to a limited sub-class of lift generating conditions, or might not allow a quantitative analysis. Several theories introduce assumptions which proved to be wrong, like the equal transit-time theory.

====False explanation based on equal transit-time====
An illustration of the (incorrect) equal transit-time explanation of airfoil lift.
Basic or popular sources often describe the "Equal Transit-Time" theory of lift, which incorrectly assumes that the parcels of air that divide at the leading edge of an airfoil must rejoin at the trailing edge, forcing the air traveling along the longer upper surface to go faster. Bernoulli's Principle is then cited to conclude that since the air moves slower along the bottom of the wing, the air pressure must be higher, pushing the wing up. "The airfoil of the airplane wing, according to the textbook explanation that is more or less standard in the United States, has a special shape with more curvature on top than on the bottom; consequently, the air must travel farther over the top surface than over the bottom surface. Because the air must make the trip over the top and bottom surfaces in the same elapsed time ..., the velocity over the top surface will be greater than over the bottom. According to Bernoulli's theorem, this velocity difference produces a pressure difference which is lift." Bernoulli and Newton in Fluid Mechanics Norman F. Smith The Physics Teacher November 1972 Volume 10, Issue 8, pp. 451 http://scitation.aip.org/getpdf/servlet/GetPDFServlet?filetype=pdf&id=PHTEAH000010000008000451000001&idtype=cvips&doi=10.1119/1.2352317&prog=normal 

However, there is no physical principle that requires equal transit time and experimental results show that this assumption is false. In fact, the air moving over the top of an airfoil generating lift moves much faster than the equal transit theory predicts. "The actual velocity over the top of an airfoil is much faster than that predicted by the "Longer Path" theory and particles moving over the top arrive at the trailing edge before particles moving under the airfoil." Further, the theory violates Newton's third law of motion, since it describes a force on the wing with no opposite force. "Unfortunately, this explanation falls to earth on three counts. First, an airfoil need not have more curvature on its top than on its bottom. Airplanes can and do fly with perfectly symmetrical airfoils; that is with airfoils that have the same curvature top and bottom. Second, even if a humped-up (cambered) shape is used, the claim that the air must traverse the curved top surface in the same time as it does the flat bottom surface...is fictional. We can quote no physical law that tells us this. Third  and this is the most serious  the common textbook explanation, and the diagrams that accompany it, describe a force on the wing with no net disturbance to the airstream. This constitutes a violation of Newton's third law." Bernoulli and Newton in Fluid Mechanics Norman F. Smith The Physics Teacher November 1972 Volume 10, Issue 8, pp. 451 http://tpt.aapt.org/resource/1/phteah/v10/i8 
 http://www.telegraph.co.uk/science/science-news/9035708/Cambridge-scientist-debunks-flying-myth.html Cambridge scientist debunks flying myth UK Telegraph 24 Jan 2012 A visualization of the typical retarded flow over the lower surface of the wing and the accelerated flow over the upper surface starts at 5:29 in the video. 

The assertion that the air must arrive simultaneously at the trailing edge is sometimes referred to as the "Equal Transit-Time Fallacy". A false explanation for lift has been put forward in mainstream books, and even in scientific exhibitions. Known as the "equal transit-time" explanation, it states that the parcels of air which are divided by an airfoil must rejoin again; because of the greater curvature (and hence longer path) of the upper surface of an aerofoil, the air going over the top must go faster in order to "catch up" with the air flowing around the bottom. Therefore, because of its higher speed the pressure of the air above the airfoil must be lower. Despite the fact that this "explanation" is probably the most common of all, it is false.

It has recently been dubbed the "Equal transit-time fallacy". ...it leaves the impression that Professor Bernoulli is somehow to blame for the "equal transit time" fallacy... The fallacy of equal transit time can be deduced from consideration of a flat plate, which will indeed produce lift, as anyone who has handled a sheet of plywood in the wind can testify. Fallacy 1: Air takes the same time to move across the top of an aerofoil as across the bottom. "There is a popular fallacy called the equal transit-time fallacy that claims the two halves rejoin at the trailing edge of the aerofoil." Ethirajan Rathakrishnan Theoretical Aerodynamics John Wiley & sons 2013 section 4.10.1 

====Coand effect====

In a limited sense, the Coand effect refers to the tendency of a fluid jet to stay attached to an adjacent surface that curves away from the flow, and the resultant entrainment of ambient air into the flow. The effect is named for Henri Coand, the Romanian aerodynamicist who exploited it in many of his patents.

More broadly, some consider the effect to include the tendency of any fluid boundary layer to adhere to a curved surface, not just the boundary layer accompanying a fluid jet. It is in this broader sense that the Coand effect is used by some to explain why the air flow remains attached to the top side of an airfoil. Jef Raskin, for example, describes a simple demonstration, using a straw to blow over the upper surface of a wing. The wing deflects upwards, thus demonstrating that the Coand effect creates lift. This demonstration correctly demonstrates the Coand effect as a fluid jet (the exhaust from a straw) adhering to a curved surface (the wing). However, the upper surface in this flow is a complicated, vortex-laden mixing layer, while on the lower surface the flow is quiescent. The physics of this demonstration are very different from that of the general flow over the wing. The usage in this sense is encountered in some popular references on aerodynamics. In the aerodynamics field, the Coand effect is commonly defined in the more limited sense above 
 
 and viscosity is used to explain why the boundary layer attaches to the surface of a wing. 

==Methods to determine lift on an airfoil==

===Lift coefficient===

If the lift coefficient for a wing at a specified angle of attack is known (or estimated using a method such as thin airfoil theory), then the lift produced for specific flow conditions can be determined using the following equation: 

:

where 
* L is lift force,
*  is air density,
* v is true airspeed,
* A is planform area, and
* is the lift coefficient at the desired angle of attack, Mach number, and Reynolds number 

 

===KuttaJoukowski theorem===

Lift can be calculated using potential flow theory by imposing a circulation. It is often used by practising aerodynamicists as a convenient quantity in calculations, for example thin-airfoil theory and lifting-line theory.

The circulation is the contour integral of the tangential velocity of the air on a closed loop (also called a 'circuit') around the boundary of an airfoil. It can be understood as the total amount of "spinning" (or vorticity) of air around the airfoil. The section lift/span can be calculated using the KuttaJoukowski theorem: 

:

where is the air density, is the free-stream airspeed. Kelvin's circulation theorem states that circulation is conserved for any circuit moving with the fluid. Clancy, L.J., Aerodynamics, Section 7.27 When an aircraft is at rest, circulation is zero.

The challenge when using the KuttaJoukowski theorem to determine lift is to determine the appropriate circulation for a particular airfoil. In practice, this is done by applying the Kutta condition, which uniquely prescribes the circulation for a given geometry and free-stream velocity.

A physical understanding of the theorem can be observed in the Magnus effect, which is a lift force generated by a spinning cylinder in a freestream. Here the necessary circulation is induced by the mechanical rotation acting on the boundary layer, causing it to induce a faster flow around one side of the cylinder and a slower flow around the other. The asymmetric distribution of airspeed around the cylinder then produces a circulation in the outer inviscid flow. Clancy, L.J., Aerodynamics, Sections 4.5 and 4.6 

===Pressure integration===
The force on the wing can be examined in terms of the pressure differences above and below the wing, which can be related to velocity changes by Bernoulli's principle.

The total lift force is the integral of vertical pressure forces over the entire wetted surface area of the wing: Anderson, John D. (2004), Introduction to Flight, Section 5.7 (5th edition), McGraw-Hill. ISBN 0-07-282569-3 

:

where:
* L is the lift,
* A is the wing surface area,
* p is the value of the pressure,
* n is the normal unit vector pointing into the wing, and
* k is the vertical unit vector, normal to the freestream direction.

The above lift equation neglects the skin friction forces, which typically have a negligible contribution to the lift compared to the pressure forces. By using the streamwise vector i parallel to the freestream in place of k in the integral, we obtain an expression for the pressure drag Dp (which includes induced drag in a 3D wing). If we use the spanwise vector j, we obtain the side force Y.

:

One method for calculating the pressure is Bernoulli's equation, which is the mathematical expression of Bernoulli's principle. This method ignores the effects of viscosity, which can be important in the boundary layer and to predict friction drag, which is the other component of the total drag in addition to Dp.

The Bernoulli principle states that the sum total of energy within a parcel of fluid remains constant as long as no energy is added or removed. It is a statement of the principle of the conservation of energy applied to flowing fluids.
 
A substantial simplification proposes that other forms of energy changes are inconsequential during the flow of air around a wing and that energy transfer in/out of the air is not significant, so the sum of pressure energy and speed energy for any particular parcel of air must be constant. Consequently, an increase in speed must be accompanied by a decrease in pressure and vice-versa. It is named for the Dutch-Swiss mathematician and scientist Daniel Bernoulli, though it was previously understood by Leonhard Euler and others.

Bernoulli's principle provides an explanation of pressure difference in the absence of air density and temperature variation (a common approximation for low-speed aircraft). If the air density and temperature are the same above and below a wing, a naive application of the ideal gas law requires that the pressure also be the same. Bernoulli's principle, by including air velocity, explains this pressure difference. The principle does not, however, specify the air velocity. This must come from another source, e.g., experimental data.

In order to solve for the velocity of inviscid flow around a wing, the Kutta condition must be applied to simulate the effects of viscosity. The Kutta condition allows for the correct choice among an infinite number of flow solutions that otherwise obey the laws of conservation of mass and conservation of momentum.

==Lift forces on bluff bodies==

The flow around bluff bodies  i.e. without a streamlined shape, or stalling airfoils  may also generate lift, besides a strong drag force. This lift may be steady, or it may oscillate due to vortex shedding. Interaction of the object's flexibility with the vortex shedding may enhance the effects of fluctuating lift and cause vortex-induced vibrations. For instance, the flow around a circular cylinder generates a Krmn vortex street: vortices being shed in an alternating fashion from each side of the cylinder. The oscillatory nature of the flow is reflected in the fluctuating lift force on the cylinder, whereas the mean lift force is negligible. The lift force frequency is characterised by the dimensionless Strouhal number, which depends (among others) on the Reynolds number of the flow. 

For a flexible structure, this oscillatory lift force may induce vortex-induced vibrations. Under certain conditions  for instance resonance or strong spanwise correlation of the lift force  the resulting motion of the structure due to the lift fluctuations may be strongly enhanced. Such vibrations may pose problems and threaten collapse in tall man-made structures like industrial chimneys. 

==See also==

* Aerodynamic force
* Aileron
* Airfoil
* Airplane
* Angle of attack
* Banked turn
* Bernoulli's principle
* Bilgeboard
* Boomerang
* Centerboard
* Chord (aircraft)
* Circulation control wing
* Coanda effect
* Diving plane
* Downforce
* Drag coefficient
* Drag (force)
* Drag (physics)
* Fin
* Flipper (anatomy)
* Flow separation
* Fluid
* Fluid dynamics
* Foil (fluid mechanics)
* Formula One car
* Glider
* Hydrofoil
* Keel (hydrodynamic)
* Kssner effect
* Kutta condition
* KuttaJoukowski theorem
* Lift coefficient
* Lift-induced drag
* Lift-to-drag ratio
* Lifting-line theory
* NACA airfoil
* Newton's third law
* Planform
* Propeller
* Rudder
* Sail (aerodynamics)
* Skeg
* Spoiler (automotive)
* Stall (flight)
* Surfboard fin
* Surface
* Trim tab
* Wing
* Wingtip vortices

==References and notes==

==Further reading==

*Introduction to Flight, John D. Anderson, Jr., McGraw-Hill, ISBN 0-07-299071-6  The author is the Curator of Aerodynamics at the Smithsonian Institution's National Air & Space Museum and Professor Emeritus at the University of Maryland.
*Understanding Flight, by David Anderson and Scott Eberhardt, McGraw-Hill, ISBN 0-07-136377-7  The authors are a physicist and an aeronautical engineer. They explain flight in non-technical terms and specifically address the equal-transit-time myth. Turning of the flow around the wing is attributed to the Coanda effect, which is quite controversial.
* Aerodynamics, Clancy, L.J. (1975), Section 4.8, Pitman Publishing Limited, London ISBN 0-273-01120-0.
* Aerodynamics, Aeronautics, and Flight Mechanics, McCormick, Barnes W., (1979), Chapter 3, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York ISBN 0-471-03032-5.
*Fundamentals of Flight, Richard S. Shevell, Prentice-Hall International Editions, ISBN 0-13-332917-8  This book is primarily intended as a text for a one semester undergraduate course in mechanical or aeronautical engineering, although its sections on theory of flight are understandable with a passing knowledge of calculus and physics.
*"Observation of Perfect Potential Flow in Superfluid", Paul P. Craig and John R. Pellam (1957) Physical Review 108(5), pp. 11091112,  Experiments under superfluidity conditions, resulting in the vanishing of lift in inviscid flow since the Kutta condition no longer is satisfied.
*"Aerodynamics at the Particle Level", Charles A. Crummer (2005, revised 2012)  A treatment of aerodynamics emphasizing the particle nature of air, as opposed to the fluid approximation commonly used. http://arxiv.org/pdf/nlin/0507032.pdf
*"Flight without Bernoulli" Chris Waltham Vol. 36, Nov. 1998 THE PHYSICS TEACHER  using a physical model relying only on Newtons second law, the author presents a rigorous fluid dynamical treatment of flight. http://www.df.uba.ar/users/sgil/physics_paper_doc/papers_phys/fluids/fly_no_bernoulli.pdf
*Bernoulli, Newton, and Dynamic Lift Norman F. Smith School Science and Mathematics vol 73 Part I: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1949-8594.1973.tb09040.x/pdf Part II http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1949-8594.1973.tb08998.x/pdf

==External links==

* Discussion of the apparent "conflict" between the various explanations of lift
* NASA tutorial, with animation, describing lift
* NASA FoilSim II 1.5 beta. Lift simulator.
* Explanation of Lift with animation of fluid flow around an airfoil
* A treatment of why and how wings generate lift that focuses on pressure.
* Physics of Flight  reviewed. Online paper by Prof. Dr. Klaus Weltner.
* How do Wings Work?  Holger Babinsky
* Plane and Pilot Magazine Bernoulli Or Newton: Who's Right About Lift?
* One Minute Physics How Does a Wing actually work? You Tube video



[[Leo III the Isaurian]]

Leo III the Isaurian also known as the Syrian (Greek:    , Len III ho Isauros), (c. 685  18 June 741) was Byzantine Emperor from 717 until his death in 741. He put an end to a period of instability, successfully defended the Empire against the invading Umayyads, and forbade the veneration of icons. 

==Life==
A Leo III base gold solidus, minted in Rome.

===Early life===
Leo, whose original name was Konon, was born in Germanikeia in the Syrian province of Commagene (modern Kahramanmara in Turkey). Some, including the Byzantine chronicler Theophanes, have claimed that Konon's family had been resettled in Thrace, where he entered the service of Emperor Justinian II, when the latter was advancing on Constantinople with an army of 100,000 horsemen provided by Tervel of Bulgaria in 705.

After the victory of Justinian II, Leo was dispatched on a diplomatic mission to Alania and Lazica to organize an alliance against the Umayyad Caliphate under Al-Walid I. Leo was appointed commander (stratgos) of the Anatolic theme by Emperor Anastasius II. On his deposition Leo joined with his colleague Artabasdus, the stratgos of the Armeniac theme, in conspiring to overthrow the new Emperor Theodosius III. Artabasdus was betrothed to Anna, 
daughter of Leo as part of the agreement.

===Siege of Constantinople===

Leo entered Constantinople on 25 March 717 and forced the abdication of Theodosios III, becoming emperor as Leo III. The new Emperor was immediately forced to attend to the Second Arab siege of Constantinople, which commenced in August of the same year. The Arabs were Umayyad forces sent by Caliph Sulayman ibn Abd al-Malik and serving under his brother Maslama ibn Abd al-Malik. They had taken advantage of the civil discord in the Byzantine Empire to bring a force of 80,000 to 150,000 men and a massive fleet to the Bosphorus. Guilland, Rodolphe. "Lexpdition de Maslama contre Constantinople (717720)" in tudes Byzantines. Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 1959, pp. 109133. 

Careful preparations, begun three years earlier under Anastasius II, and the stubborn resistance put up by Leo wore out the invaders. An important factor in the victory of the Byzantines was their use of Greek fire. Treadgold. History of the Byzantine State, p. 347. The Arab forces also fell victim to Bulgarian reinforcements arriving to aid the Byzantines. Leo was allied with the Bulgarians but the chronicler Theophanes the Confessor was uncertain if they were still serving under Tervel or his eventual successor Kormesiy of Bulgaria. 

Unable to continue the siege in the face of the Bulgarian onslaught, the impenetrability of Constantinople's walls, and their own exhausted provisions, the Arabs were forced to abandon the siege in August, 718. Sulayman himself had died the previous year and his successor Umar II would not attempt another siege. The siege had lasted 12 months.

===Administration===

Having thus preserved the Empire from extinction, Leo proceeded to consolidate its administration, which in the previous years of anarchy had become completely disorganized. In 718 he suppressed a rebellion in Sicily and in 719 did the same on behalf of the deposed Emperor Anastasios II. 

Leo secured the Empire's frontiers by inviting Slavic settlers into the depopulated districts and by restoring the army to efficiency; when the Umayyad Caliphate renewed their invasions in 726 and 739, as part of the campaigns of Hisham ibn Abd al-Malik, the Arab forces were decisively beaten, particularly at Akroinon in 740. His military efforts were supplemented by his alliances with the Khazars and the Georgians.

Leo undertook a set of civil reforms including the abolition of the system of prepaying taxes which had weighed heavily upon the wealthier proprietors, the elevation of the serfs into a class of free tenants and the remodelling of family, maritime law and criminal law, notably substituting mutilation for the death penalty in many cases. The new measures, which were embodied in a new code called the Ecloga (Selection), published in 726, met with some opposition on the part of the nobles and higher clergy. The Emperor also undertook some reorganization of the theme structure by creating new themata in the Aegean region.

===Iconoclasm===
Leo's most striking legislative reforms dealt with religious matters, especially iconoclasm ("Icon-breaking," therefore an iconoclast is an "Icon-breaker"). Ladner, Gerhart. "Origin and Significance of the Byzantine Iconoclastic Controversy." Mediaeval Studies, 2, 1940, pp. 127149. After an apparently successful attempt to enforce the baptism of all Jews and Montanists in the empire (722), he issued a series of edicts against the worship of images (726729). Treadgold. History of the Byzantine State, pp. 350, 352353. This prohibition of a custom which had been in use for centuries, seems to have been inspired by a genuine desire to improve public morality, and received the support of the official aristocracy and a section of the clergy. A majority of the theologians and all the monks opposed these measures with uncompromising hostility, and in the western parts of the Empire the people refused to obey the edict.

A revolt which broke out in Greece, mainly on religious grounds, was crushed by the imperial fleet in 727. In 730, Patriarch Germanos I of Constantinople resigned rather than subscribe to an iconoclastic decree. Leo had him replaced by Anastasios, Treadgold. History of the Byzantine State, p. 353. who willingly sided with the Emperor on the question of icons. Thus Leo suppressed the overt opposition of the capital.

In the Italian Peninsula, the defiant attitude of Popes Gregory II and Gregory III on behalf of image-veneration led to a fierce quarrel with the Emperor. The former summoned councils in Rome to anathematize and excommunicate the iconoclasts (730, 732); In 740 Leo retaliated by transferring Southern Italy and Illyricum from the papal diocese to that of the Patriarch of Constantinople. Treadgold. History of the Byzantine State, pp. 354355. The struggle was accompanied by an armed outbreak in the exarchate of Ravenna in 727, which Leo finally endeavoured to subdue by means of a large fleet. But the destruction of the armament by a storm decided the issue against him; his southern Italian subjects successfully defied his religious edicts, and the Exarchate of Ravenna became effectively detached from the Empire.

The emperor died of dropsy in June 741.
Example of the miliaresion silver coins, first struck by Leo III to commemorate the coronation of his son, Constantine V, as co-emperor in 720.

==Family==
With his wife Maria, Leo III had four known children:
* Anna, who married Artabasdus.
* Constantine V, who succeeded as emperor.
* Irene
* Kosmo

==Footnotes==

==Further reading==
*Entry of "Leo III" in The Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium, ed. Alexander Kazhdan. New York: Oxford University Press, 1991.

==External links==

 
 



[[Lombards]]

8th-century Lombard sculpture depicting female martyrs based on a Byzantine model. Tempietto Longobardo, Cividale del Friuli

The Lombards or Langobards (, Italian Longobardi), were a Germanic tribe who ruled Italy from 568 to 774.

The Lombard historian Paul the Deacon wrote in the Historia Langobardorum that the Lombards descended from a small tribe called the Winnili Priester, 16. From the Old Germanic Winnan, meaning "fighting", "winning". who dwelt in southern Scandinavia Harrison, D.; Svensson, K. (2007). Vikingaliv Flth & Hssler, Vrnamo. ISBN 978-91-27-35725-9 p. 74 (Scadanan) before migrating to seek new lands. In the 1st century AD they formed part of the Suebi, in northwestern Germany. By the end of the 5th century they had moved into the area roughly coinciding with modern Austria north of the Danube river, where they subdued the Heruls and later fought frequent wars with the Gepids. The Lombard king Audoin defeated the Gepid leader Thurisind in 551 or 552; his successor Alboin eventually destroyed the Gepids at the Battle of Asfeld in 567.

Following this victory, Alboin decided to lead his people to Italy, which had become severely depopulated after the long Gothic War (535554) between the Byzantine Empire and the Ostrogothic Kingdom there. The Lombards were joined by numerous Saxons, Heruls, Gepids, Bulgars, Thuringians, and Ostrogoths, and their invasion of Italy was almost unopposed. By late 569 they had conquered all the principal cities north of the Po River except Pavia, which fell in 572. At the same time, they occupied areas in central and southern Italy. They established a Lombard Kingdom in Italy, later named Regnum Italicum ("Kingdom of Italy"), which reached its zenith under the 8th-century ruler Liutprand. In 774, the Kingdom was conquered by the Frankish King Charlemagne and integrated into his Empire. However, Lombard nobles continued to rule parts of the Italian peninsula well into the 11th century when they were conquered by the Normans and added to their County of Sicily. Their legacy is apparent in the regional name, Lombardy.

==History==

===Early history===
===Legendary origins and name===

Paul the Deacon, historian of the Lombards, circa 720-799.

The fullest account of Lombard origins, history, and practices is the Historia Langobardorum (History of the Lombards) of Paul the Deacon, written in the 8th century. Paul's chief source for Lombard origins, however, is the 7th-century Origo Gentis Langobardorum (Origin of the Lombard People).

The Origo Gentis Langobardorum tells the story of a small tribe called the Winnili dwelling in southern Scandinavia Harrison, D. & Svensson, K. (2007). Vikingaliv Flth & Hssler, Vrnamo. 978-91-27-35725-9 p. 74 (Scadanan) (the Codex Gothanus writes that the Winnili first dwelt near a river called Vindilicus on the extreme boundary of Gaul). CG, II. The Winnili were split into three groups and one part left their native land to seek foreign fields. The reason for the exodus was probably overpopulation. Menghin, 13. The departing people were led by the brothers Ybor and Aio and their mother Gambara Priester, 16. Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie, I, 336. Old Germanic for "Strenuus", "Sibyl". and arrived in the lands of Scoringa, perhaps the Baltic coast Priester, 16 or the Bardengau on the banks of the Elbe. Hammerstein-Loxton, 56. Scoringa was ruled by the Vandals and their chieftains, the brothers Ambri and Assi, who granted the Winnili a choice between tribute or war.

The Winnili were young and brave and refused to pay tribute, saying "It is better to maintain liberty by arms than to stain it by the payment of tribute." PD, VII. The Vandals prepared for war and consulted Godan (the god Odin ), who answered that he would give the victory to those whom he would see first at sunrise. PD, VIII. The Winnili were fewer in number and Gambara sought help from Frea (the goddess Frigg ), who advised that all Winnili women should tie their hair in front of their faces like beards and march in line with their husbands. So Godan spotted the Winnili first and asked, "Who are these long-beards?," and Frea replied, "My lord, thou hast given them the name, now give them also the victory." OGL, appendix 11. From that moment onwards, the Winnili were known as the Longbeards (Latinised as Langobardi, Italianised as Lombardi, and Anglicized as Lombards).

When Paul the Deacon wrote the Historia between 787 and 796 he was a Catholic monk and devoted Christian. He thought the pagan stories of his people "silly" and "laughable". Priester, 17 Paul explained that the name "Langobard" came from the length of their beards. PD, I, 9. A modern theory suggests that the name "Langobard" comes from Langbarr, a name of Odin. Pohl and Erhart. Nedoma, 449&ndash;445. Priester states that when the Winnili changed their name to "Lombards", they also changed their old agricultural fertility cult to a cult of Odin, thus creating a conscious tribal tradition. Priester, 17. Frhlich inverts the order of events in Priester and states that with the Odin cult, the Lombards grew their beards in resemblance of the Odin of tradition and their new name reflected this. Frhlich, 19. Bruckner remarks that the name of the Lombards stands in close relation to the worship of Odin, whose many names include "the Long-bearded" or "the Grey-bearded", and that the Lombard given name Ansegranus ("he with the beard of the gods") shows that the Lombards had this idea of their chief deity. Bruckner, 30&ndash;33. 

====Archaeology and migrations====
Distribution of Langobardic burial fields at the Lower Elbe Lands (according to W. Wegewitz)

The first mention of the Lombards occurred between AD 9 and 16, by the Roman court historian Velleius Paterculus, who accompanied a Roman expedition as prefect of the cavalry. Paterculus says that under Tiberius the "power of the Langobardi was broken, a race surpassing even the Germans in savagery". Velleius, Hist. Rom. II, 106. Schmidt, 5. 

From the combined testimony of Strabo (AD 20) and Tacitus (AD 117), the Lombards dwelt near the mouth of the Elbe shortly after the beginning of the Christian era, next to the Chauci. Menghin, 15. Strabo states that the Lombards dwelt on both sides of the Elbe. Menghin, 15. He treats them as a branch of the Suebi, and states thatNow as for the tribe of the Suebi, it is the largest, for it extends from the Rhenus to the Albis; and a part of them even dwell on the far side of the Albis, as, for instance, the Hermondori and the Langobardi; and at the present time these latter, at least, have, to the last man, been driven in flight out of their country into the land on the far side of the river. Strabo, VII, 1, 3. The German archaeologist Willi Wegewitz defined several Iron Age burial sites at the lower Elbe as Langobardic. Wegewitz, Das langobardische Brandgrberfeld von Putensen, Kreis Harburg (1972), 1&ndash;29. Problemi della civilita e dell'economia Longobarda, Milan (1964), 19ff. The burial sites are crematorial and are usually dated from the 6th century BC through the 3rd century AD, so a settlement breakoff seems unlikely. Menghin, 17. The lands of the lower Elbe fall into the zone of the Jastorf Culture and became Elbe-Germanic, differing from the lands between Rhine, Weser, and the North Sea. Menghin, 18. Archaeological finds show that the Lombards were an agricultural people. Priester, 18. 

Tacitus also counted the Lombards as a remote and aggressive Suebian tribe, one of those united in worship of the deity Nerthus, who he referred to as "Mother Earth", and also as subjects of Marobod the King of the Marcomanni. Tacitus, Ann. II, 45. Marobod had made peace with the Romans, and that is why the Lombards were not part of the Germanic confederacy under Arminius at the Battle of Teutoburg Forest in AD 9. In AD 17, war broke out between Arminius and Marobod. Tacitus records:

Lombard migration from Scandinavia

In 47, a struggle ensued amongst the Cherusci and they expelled their new leader, the nephew of Arminius, from their country. The Lombards appeared on the scene with sufficient power to control the destiny of the tribe that had been the leader in the struggle for independence thirty-eight years earlier, for they restored the deposed leader to sovereignty again. Tacitus, Annals, XI, 16, 17. 

To the south, Cassius Dio reported that just before the Marcomannic Wars, 6,000 Lombards and Obii (sometimes thought to be Ubii), crossed the Danube and invaded Pannonia. Cassius Dio, 71, 3, 1. Menghin 16. The two tribes were defeated, whereupon they desisted from their invasion and sent Ballomar, King of the Marcomanni, as ambassador to Aelius Bassus, who was then administering Pannonia. Peace was made and the two tribes returned to their homes, which in the case of the Lombards was the lands of the lower Elbe. Priester, 21. Zeuss, 471. Wiese, 38. Schmidt, 35&ndash;36. At about this time, in his Germania Tacitus says that "their scanty numbers are a distinction" because "surrounded by a host of most powerful tribes, they are safe, not by submitting, but by daring the perils of war". Tacitus, Germania, 38-40 

In the mid-2nd century, the Lombards apparently appeared in the Rhineland, because according to Claudius Ptolemy, the Suebic Lombards lived "below" the Bructeri and Sugambri, and between these and the Tencteri. To their east stretching northwards to the central Elbe are the Suebi Angili. Ptolemy, Geogr. II, 11, 9. Menghin, 15. But Ptolemy also mentions the "Laccobardi" to the north of the above-mentioned Suebic territories, east of the Angrivarii on the Weser, and south of the Chauci on the coast, probably indicating a Lombard expansion from the Elbe to the Rhine. Ptolemy, Geogr. II, 11, 17. Menghin, 15 This double mention has been interpreted as an editorial error by Gudmund Schtte, in his analysis of Ptolemy. Schtte, Ptolemy's Maps of Northern Europe, pages 34, and 118 However, the Codex Gothanus also mentions Patespruna (Paderborn) in connection with the Lombards. Codex Gothanus, II. 

From the 2nd century onwards, many of the Germanic tribes recorded as active during the Principate started to unite into bigger tribal unions, such as the Franks, Alamanni, Bavarii, and Saxons. Priester, 14. Menghin, 16. The Lombards are not mentioned at first, perhaps because they were not initially upon the border of Rome, or perhaps because they were subjected to a larger tribal union, like the Saxons. It is, however, highly probable that when the bulk of the Lombards migrated, a considerable part remained behind and afterwards became absorbed by the Saxon tribes in the Elbe region, while the emigrants alone retained the name of Lombards. Hartmann, II, pt I, 5. However, the Codex Gothanus states that the Lombards were subjected by the Saxons around 300 but rose up against them under their first king, Agelmund, who ruled for thirty years. Menghin, 17, 19. Codex Gothanus, II. In the second half of the 4th century, the Lombards left their homes, probably due to bad harvests, and embarked on their migration. Zeuss, 471. Wiese, 38. Schmidt, 35&ndash;36. Priester, 21&ndash;22. HGL, X. 

The Lombard state in Slovakia, Ukraine, Hungary, Poland, the Czech Republic, and Austria in 526.

The migration route of the Lombards in 489, from their homeland to "Rugiland", encompassed several places: Scoringa (believed to be the their land on the Elbe shores), Mauringa, Golanda, Anthaib, Banthaib, and Vurgundaib (Burgundaib). Hammerstein-Loxton, 56. Bluhme. HGL, XIII. According to the Ravenna Cosmography, Mauringa was the land east of the Elbe. Cosmographer of Ravenna, I, 11. 

The crossing into Mauringa was very difficult. The Assipitti (possibly the Usipetes) denied them passage through their lands and a fight was arranged for the strongest man of each tribe. The Lombard was victorious, passage was granted, and the Lombards reached Mauringa. Hodgkin, Ch. V, 92. HGL, XII. 

The Lombards departed from Mauringa and reached Golanda. Scholar Ludwig Schmidt thinks this was further east, perhaps on the right bank of the Oder. Schmidt, 49. Schmidt considers the name the equivalent of Gotland, meaning simply "good land." Hodgkin, V, 143. This theory is highly plausible; Paul the Deacon mentions the Lombards crossing a river, and they could have reached Rugiland from the Upper Oder area via the Moravian Gate. Menghin, Das Reich an der Donau, 21. 

Moving out of Golanda, the Lombards passed through Anthaib and Banthaib until they reached Vurgundaib, believed to be the old lands of the Burgundes. K. Priester, 22. Bluhme, Gens Langobardorum Bonn, 1868 In Vurgundaib, the Lombards were stormed in camp by "Bulgars" (probably Huns) Menghin, 14. and were defeated; King Agelmund was killed and Laimicho was made king. He was in his youth and desired to avenge the slaughter of Agelmund. Hist. gentis Lang., Ch. XVII The Lombards themselves were probably made subjects of the Huns after the defeat but rose up and defeated them with great slaughter, Hist. gentis Lang., Ch. XVII. gaining great booty and confidence as they "became bolder in undertaking the toils of war." PD, XVII. 

In the 540s, Audoin (ruled 546560) led the Lombards across the Danube once more into Pannonia, where they received Imperial subsidies as Justinian encouraged them to battle the Gepids.

===Kingdom in Italy, 568&ndash;774===

====Invasion and conquest of the Italian peninsula====
The Lombard possessions in Italy: The Lombard Kingdom (Neustria, Austria and Tuscia) and the Lombard Duchies of Spoleto and Benevento
In 560, Audoin was succeeded by his son Alboin, a young and energetic leader who defeated the neighboring Gepidae and made them his subjects; in 566, he married Rosamund, daughter of the Gepid king Cunimund. In the spring of 568, Alboin led the Lombard migration into Italy: 

Various other people who either voluntarily joined or were subjects of King Alboin were also part of the migration: 

The first important city to fall was Forum Iulii (Cividale del Friuli) in northeastern Italy, in 569. There, Alboin created the first Lombard duchy, which he entrusted to his nephew Gisulf. Soon Vicenza, Verona and Brescia fell into Germanic hands. In the summer of 569, the Lombards conquered the main Roman centre of northern Italy, Milan. The area was then recovering from the terrible Gothic Wars, and the small Byzantine army left for its defence could do almost nothing. The Exarch sent to Italy by Emperor Justin II, Longinus, could defend only coastal cities that could be supplied by the powerful Byzantine fleet. Pavia fell after a siege of three years, in 572, becoming the first capital city of the new Lombard kingdom of Italy. In the following years, the Lombards penetrated further south, conquering Tuscany and establishing two duchies, Spoleto and Benevento under Zotto, which soon became semi-independent and even outlasted the northern kingdom, surviving well into the 12th century. The Byzantines managed to retain control of the area of Ravenna and Rome, linked by a thin corridor running through Perugia.

When they entered Italy, some Lombards retained their native form of paganism, while some were Arian Christians. Hence they did not enjoy good relations with the Catholic Church. Gradually, they adopted Roman titles, names, and traditions, and partially converted to orthodoxy (in the 7th century), though not without a long series of religious and ethnic conflicts. By the time Paul the Deacon was writing, the Lombard language, dress and even hairstyles had all disappeared. "The New Cambridge Medieval History: c. 500-c. 700" by Paul Fouracre and Rosamond McKitterick (page 8) 

The whole Lombard territory was divided into 36 duchies, whose leaders settled in the main cities. The king ruled over them and administered the land through emissaries called gastaldi. This subdivision, however, together with the independent indocility of the duchies, deprived the kingdom of unity, making it weak even when compared to the Byzantines, especially after they began to recover from the initial invasion. This weakness became even more evident when the Lombards had to face the increasing power of the Franks. In response, the kings tried to centralize power over time, but they definitively lost control over Spoleto and Benevento in the attempt.

=====Langobardia major=====

*Duchy of Friuli
*Duchy of Ceneda
*Duchy of Vicenza
*Duchy of Verona
*Duchy of Trent
*Duchy of Brescia
*Duchy of Persiceta

*Duchy of Bergamo
*Duchy of San Giulio
*Duchy of Pavia
*Duchy of Turin
*Duchy of Asti
*Duchy of Tuscia

=====Langobardia minor=====
*Duchy of Spoleto and List of Dukes of Spoleto
*Duchy of Benevento and List of Dukes and Princes of Benevento

====Arian monarchy====
The Frankish Merovingian King Chlothar II in combat with the Lombards
In 572 Alboin was murdered in Verona in a plot led by his wife, Rosamund, who later fled to Ravenna. His successor, Cleph, was also assassinated, after a ruthless reign of 18 months. His death began an interregnum of years (the "Rule of the Dukes") during which the dukes did not elect any king, a period regarded as a time of violence and disorder. In 584, threatened by a Frankish invasion, the dukes elected as king Cleph's son, Authari. In 589, he married Theodelinda, daughter of Garibald I of Bavaria, the Duke of Bavaria. The Catholic Theodelinda was a friend of Pope Gregory I and pushed for Christianization. In the meantime, Authari embarked on a policy of internal reconciliation and tried to reorganize royal administration. The dukes yielded half their estates for the maintenance of the king and his court in Pavia. On the foreign affairs side, Authari managed to thwart the dangerous alliance between the Byzantines and the Franks.

Authari died in 591 and was succeeded by Agilulf, the duke of Turin, who also married Theodelinda in the same year. Agilulf successfully fought the rebel dukes of northern Italy, conquering Padua in 601, Cremona and Mantua in 603, and forcing the Exarch of Ravenna to pay tribute. Agilulf died in 616; Theodelinda reigned alone until 628 when she was succeeded by Adaloald. Arioald, the head of the Arian opposition who had married Theodelinda's daughter Gundeperga, later deposed Adaloald. 

Arioald was succeeded by Rothari, regarded by many authorities as the most energetic of all Lombard kings. He extended his dominions, conquering Liguria in 643 and the remaining part of the Byzantine territories of inner Veneto, including the Roman city of Opitergium (Oderzo). Rothari also made the famous edict bearing his name, the Edictum Rothari, which established the laws and the customs of his people in Latin: the edict did not apply to the tributaries of the Lombards, who could retain their own laws. Rothari's son Rodoald succeeded him in 652, still very young, and was killed by the Catholic party.

At the death of King Aripert I in 661, the kingdom was split between his children Perctarit, who set his capital in Milan, and Godepert, who reigned from Pavia (Ticinum). Perctarit was overthrown by Grimoald, son of Gisulf, duke of Friuli and Benevento since 647. Perctarit fled to the Avars and then to the Franks. Grimoald managed to regain control over the duchies and deflected the late attempt of the Byzantine emperor Constans II to conquer southern Italy. He also defeated the Franks. At Grimoald's death in 671 Perctarit returned and promoted tolerance between Arians and Catholics, but he could not defeat the Arian party, led by Arachi, duke of Trento, who submitted only to his son, the philo-Catholic Cunincpert.

The Lombards engaged in fierce battles with Slavic peoples during these years: In 62326 the Lombards unsuccessfully attacked Carantanians; in 66364, the Slavs raided the Vipava Valley and the Friuli.

====Catholic monarchy====
King Liutprand - (712-744)"was a zealous Catholic, generous and a great founder of monasteries" 
Religious strife and the Slavic raids remained a source of struggle in the following years. In 705, the Friuli Lombards were defeated and lost the land to the west of the Soa River, namely the Gorizia Hills and the Venetian Slovenia. A new ethnic border was established that has lasted for over 1200 years up until the present time. 

The Lombard reign began to recover only with Liutprand the Lombard (king from 712), son of Ansprand and successor of the brutal Aripert II. He managed to regain a certain control over Spoleto and Benevento, and, taking advantage of the disagreements between the Pope and Byzantium concerning the reverence of icons, he annexed the Exarchate of Ravenna and the duchy of Rome. He also helped the Frankish marshal Charles Martel to drive back the Arabs. The Slavs were defeated in the Battle of Lavariano when they tried to conquer the Friulian Plain in 720. Liutprand's successor Aistulf conquered Ravenna for the Lombards for the first time but had to relinquish it when he was subsequently defeated by the king of the Franks, Pippin III, who was called by the Pope. 

After the death of Aistulf, Ratchis attempted to become king of Lombardy, but he was deposed by Desiderius, duke of Tuscany, the last Lombard to rule as king. Desiderius managed to take Ravenna definitively, ending the Byzantine presence in northern Italy. He decided to reopen struggles against the Pope, who was supporting the dukes of Spoleto and Benevento against him, and entered Rome in 772, the first Lombard king to do so. But when Pope Hadrian I called for help from the powerful Frankish king Charlemagne, Desiderius was defeated at Susa and besieged in Pavia, while his son Adelchis was forced to open the gates of Verona to Frankish troops. Desiderius surrendered in 774, and Charlemagne, in an utterly novel decision, took the title "King of the Lombards". Before then the Germanic kingdoms had frequently conquered each other, but none had adopted the title of King of another people. Charlemagne took part of the Lombard territory to create the Papal States.

The Lombardy region in Italy, which includes the cities of Brescia, Bergamo, Milan, and the old capital Pavia, is a reminder of the presence of the Lombards.

===Later history===
====United Principality of Benevento, 774&ndash;849====
Lombard Duchy of Benevento in the 8th century

Though the kingdom centred on Pavia in the north fell to Charlemagne, the Lombard-controlled territory to the south of the Papal States was never subjugated by Charlemagne or his descendants. In 774, Duke Arechis II of Benevento, whose duchy had only nominally been under royal authority, though certain kings had been effective at making their power known in the south, claimed that Benevento was the successor state of the kingdom. He tried to turn Benevento into a secundum Ticinum: a second Pavia. He tried to claim the kingship, but with no support and no chance of a coronation in Pavia.

Charlemagne came down with an army, and his son Louis the Pious sent men, to force the Beneventan duke to submit, but his submission and promises were never kept and Arechis and his successors were de facto independent. The Beneventan dukes took the title princeps (prince) instead of that of king.

The Lombards of southern Italy were thereafter in the anomalous position of holding land claimed by two empires: the Carolingian Empire to the north and west and the Byzantine Empire to the east. They typically made pledges and promises of tribute to the Carolingians, but effectively remained outside Frankish control. Benevento meanwhile grew to its greatest extent yet when it imposed a tribute on the Duchy of Naples, which was tenuously loyal to Byzantium and even conquered the Neapolitan city of Amalfi in 838. At one point in the reign of Sicard, Lombard control covered most of southern Italy save the very south of Apulia and Calabria and Naples, with its nominally attached cities. It was during the 9th century that a strong Lombard presence became entrenched in formerly Greek Apulia. However, Sicard had opened up the south to the invasive actions of the Saracens in his war with Andrew II of Naples and when he was assassinated in 839, Amalfi declared independence and two factions fought for power in Benevento, crippling the principality and making it susceptible to external enemies.

The civil war lasted ten years and ended with a peace treaty imposed in 849 by Emperor Louis II, the only Frankish king to exercise actual sovereignty over the Lombard states. The treaty divided the kingdom into two states: the Principality of Benevento and the Principality of Salerno, with its capital at Salerno on the Tyrrhenian Sea.

====Southern Italy and the Arabs, 836&ndash;915====

Andrew II of Naples hired Saracen mercenaries for his war with Sicard of Benevento in 836; Sicard responded with other Muslim mercenaries. The Saracens initially concentrated their attacks on Sicily and Byzantine Italy, but soon Radelchis I of Benevento called in more mercenaries, who destroyed Capua in 841. Landulf the Old founded the present-day Capua, "New Capua", on a nearby hill. In general, the Lombard princes were less inclined to ally with the Saracens than with their Greek neighbours of Amalfi, Gaeta, Naples, and Sorrento. Guaifer of Salerno, however, briefly put himself under Muslim suzerainty.

In 847 a large Muslim force seized Bari, until then a Lombard gastaldate under the control of Pandenulf. Saracen incursions proceeded northwards until Adelchis of Benevento sought the help of his suzerain, Louis II, who allied with the Byzantine emperor Basil I to expel the Arabs from Bari in 869. An Arab landing force was defeated by the emperor in 871. Adelchis and Louis remained at war until the death of Louis in 875. Adelchis regarded himself as the true successor of the Lombard kings, and in that capacity he amended the Edictum Rothari, the last Lombard ruler to do so.

After the death of Louis, Landulf II of Capua briefly flirted with a Saracen alliance, but Pope John VIII convinced him to break it off. Guaimar I of Salerno fought the Saracens with Byzantine troops. Throughout this period the Lombard princes swung in allegiance from one party to another. Finally, towards 915, Pope John X managed to unite the Christian princes of southern Italy against the Saracen establishments on the Garigliano river. The Saracens were ousted from Italy in the Battle of the Garigliano in 915.

====The Lombard principalities in the 10th century====
Italy around the turn of the millennium, showing the Lombard states in the south on the eve of the arrival of the Normans.

The independent state of Salerno inspired the gastalds of Capua to move towards independence, and by the end of the century they were styling themselves "princes" and as a third Lombard state. The Capuan and Beneventan states were united by Atenulf I of Capua in 900. He subsequently declared them to be in perpetual union, and they were separated only in 982, on the death of Pandulf Ironhead. With all of the Lombard south under his control, except Salerno, Atenulf felt safe to use the title princeps gentis Langobardorum ("prince of the Lombard people"), which Arechis II had begun using in 774. Among Atenulf's successors the principality was ruled jointly by fathers, sons, brothers, cousins, and uncles for the greater part of the century. Meanwhile, the prince Gisulf I of Salerno began using the title Langobardorum gentis princeps around mid-century, but the ideal of a united Lombard principality was realised only in December 977, when Gisulf died and his domains were inherited by Pandulf Ironhead, who temporarily held almost all Italy south of Rome and brought the Lombards into alliance with the Holy Roman Empire. His territories were divided upon his death.

Landulf the Red of Benevento and Capua tried to conquer the principality of Salerno with the help of John III of Naples, but with the aid of Mastalus I of Amalfi, Gisulf repulsed him. The rulers of Benevento and Capua made several attempts on Byzantine Apulia at this time, but late in the century, the Byzantines, under the stiff rule of Basil II, gained ground on the Lombards.

The principal source for the history of the Lombard principalities in this period is the Chronicon Salernitanum, composed late in the 10th century at Salerno.

====Norman conquest, 1017&ndash;1078====

The diminished Beneventan principality soon lost its independence to the papacy and declined in importance until it fell in the Norman conquest of southern Italy. The Normans, first called in by the Lombards to fight the Byzantines for control of Apulia and Calabria (under the likes of Melus of Bari and Arduin, among others), had become rivals for hegemony in the south. The Salernitan principality experienced a golden age under Guaimar III and Guaimar IV, but under Gisulf II, the principality shrank to insignificance and fell in 1078 to Robert Guiscard, who had married Gisulf's sister Sichelgaita. The Capua principality was hotly contested during the reign of the hated Pandulf IV, the Wolf of the Abruzzi, and, under his son, it fell, almost without contest, to the Norman Richard Drengot (1058). The Capuans revolted against Norman rule in 1091, expelling Richard's grandson Richard II and setting up one Lando IV.

Capua was again put under Norman rule after the Siege of Capua of 1098 and the city quickly declined in importance under a series of ineffectual Norman rulers. The independent status of these Lombard states is in general attested by the ability of their rulers to switch suzerains at will. Often the legal vassal of pope or emperor (either Byzantine or Holy Roman), they were the real power-brokers in the south until their erstwhile allies, the Normans, rose to preeminence: The Lombards regarded the Normans as barbarians and the Byzantines as oppressors. Regarding their own civilisation as superior, the Lombards did indeed provide the environment for the illustrious Schola Medica Salernitana.

==Culture==

===Language===

The Lombardic language is extinct (unless Cimbrian and Mocheno represent surviving dialects). The Germanic language declined beginning in the 7th century, but may have been in scattered use until as late as about the year 1000. The language is preserved only fragmentarily, the main evidence being individual words quoted in Latin texts. In the absence of Lombardic texts, it is not possible to draw any conclusions about the language's morphology and syntax. The genetic classification of the language is based entirely on phonology. Since there is evidence that Lombardic participated in, and indeed shows some of the earliest evidence for, the High German consonant shift, it is classified as an Elbe Germanic or Upper German dialect.

Lombardic fragments are preserved in runic inscriptions. Among the primary source texts are short inscriptions in the Elder Futhark, among them the "bronze capsule of Schretzheim" (c. 600). There are a number of Latin texts that include Lombardic names, and Lombardic legal texts contain terms taken from the legal vocabulary of the vernacular. In 2005, there were claims that the inscription of the Pernik sword may be Lombardic.

The Italian language preserves a large number of Lombardic words, although it is not always easy to distinguish them from other Germanic languages such as Gothic and Frankish. They often bear some resemblance to English words, as Lombardic was akin to Saxon. For instance, landa from land, guardia from wardan (warden), guerra from werra (war), and guadare from wadjan (to wade).

===Social structure===

====Migration Period society====
The Lombard kings can be traced back as early as c. 380 and thus to the beginning of the Great Migration. Kingship developed amongst the Germanic peoples when the unity of a single military command was found necessary. Schmidt believed that the Germanic tribes were divided according to cantons and that the earliest government was a general assembly that selected canton chiefs and war leaders in times of conflict. All such figures were probably selected from a caste of nobility. As a result of the wars of their wanderings, royal power developed such that the king became the representative of the people, but the influence of the people upon the government did not fully disappear. Schmidt, 76&ndash;77. Paul the Deacon gives an account of the Lombard tribal structure during the migration:

. . . in order that they might increase the number of their warriors, Lombards confer liberty upon many whom they deliver from the yoke of bondage, and that the freedom of these may be regarded as established, they confirm it in their accustomed way by an arrow, uttering certain words of their country in confirmation of the fact.

Complete emancipation appears to have been granted only among the Franks and the Lombards. Schmidt, 47 n3. 

====Society of the Catholic kingdom====

Lombard society was divided into classes comparable to those found in the other Germanic successor states of Rome, Frankish Gaul and Visigothic Spain. There was a noble class, a class of free persons beneath them, a class of unfree non-slaves (serfs), and finally slaves. The aristocracy itself was poorer, more urbanised, and less landed than elsewhere. Aside from the richest and most powerful of the dukes and the king himself, Lombard noblemen tended to live in cities (unlike their Frankish counterparts) and hold little more than twice as much in land as the merchant class (a far cry from provincial Frankish aristocrats who held vast swathes of land, hundreds of times larger than those beneath his status). The aristocracy by the 8th century was highly dependent on the king for means of income related especially to judicial duties: many Lombard nobles are referred to in contemporary documents as iudices (judges) even when their offices had important military and legislative functions as well.

The freemen of the Lombard kingdom were far more numerous than in Frank lands, especially in the 8th century, when they are almost invisible in surviving documentary evidence. Smallholders, owner-cultivators, and rentiers are the most numerous types of person in surviving diplomata for the Lombard kingdom. They may have owned more than half of the land in Lombard Italy. The freemen were exercitales and viri devoti, that is, soldiers and "devoted men" (a military term like "retainers"); they formed the levy of the Lombard army, and they were sometimes, if infrequently, called to serve, though this seems not to have been their preference. The small landed class, however, lacked the political influence necessary with the king (and the dukes) to control the politics and legislation of the kingdom. The aristocracy was more thoroughly powerful politically if not economically in Italy than in contemporary Gaul and Spain.

The urbanisation of Lombard Italy was characterised by the citt ad isole (or "city as islands"). It appears from archaeology that the great cities of Lombard Italy  Pavia, Lucca, Siena, Arezzo, Milan  were themselves formed of minute islands of urbanisation within the old Roman city walls. The cities of the Roman Empire had been partially destroyed in the series of wars of the 5th and 6th centuries. Many sectors were left in ruins and ancient monuments became fields of grass used as pastures for animals, thus the Roman Forum became the Campo Vaccino, the field of cows. The portions of the cities that remained intact were small, modest, contained a cathedral or major church (often sumptuously decorated), and a few public buildings and townhomes of the aristocracy. Few buildings of importance were stone, most were wood. In the end, the inhabited parts of the cities were separated from one another by stretches of pasture even within the city walls.

====Lombard states====
*Lombard state on the Carpathians (6th century)
*Lombard state in Pannonia (6th century)
*Kingdom of Italy and List of Kings of the Lombards
*Principality of Benevento and List of Dukes and Princes of Benevento
*Principality of Salerno and List of Princes of Salerno
*Principality of Capua and List of Princes of Capua

===Religious history===
====Paganism====
 
St. Barbatus of Benevento observed many pagan rituals and traditions amongst the Lombards authorised by the Duke Romuald, son of King Grimoald: 
 

====Christianisation====
The Lombards were first touched by Christianity while still in Pannonia, but only touched: Their conversion and Christianisation was largely nominal and far from complete. During the reign of Wacho, they were Roman Catholics allied with the Byzantine Empire, but Alboin converted to Arianism as an ally of the Ostrogoths and invaded Italy. All these Christian conversions primarily affected the aristocracy, while the common people remained pagan.

In Italy, the Lombards were intensively Christianised, and the pressure to convert to Catholicism was great. With the Bavarian queen Theodelinda, a Catholic, the monarchy was brought under heavy Catholic influence. After initial support for the anti-Rome party in the Schism of the Three Chapters, Theodelinda remained a close contact and supporter of Pope Gregory I. In 603, Adaloald, the heir to the throne, received a Catholic baptism. During the next century, Arianism and paganism continued to hold out in Austria (the northeast of Italy) and in the Duchy of Benevento. A succession of Arian kings were militarily aggressive and presented a threat to the Papacy in Rome. In the 7th century, the nominally Christian aristocracy of Benevento was still practising pagan rituals, such as sacrifices in "sacred" woods. By the end of the reign of Cunincpert, however, the Lombards were more or less completely Catholicised. Under Liutprand, the Catholicism became tangible, as the king sought to justify his title rex totius Italiae by uniting the south of the peninsula with the north and bringing together his Italo-Roman and Germanic subjects into one Catholic state.

====Beneventan Christianity====
The Rule of Saint Benedict in Beneventan (i.e. Lombard) script

The Duchy and eventually Principality of Benevento in southern Italy developed a unique Christian rite in the 7th and 8th centuries. The Beneventan rite is more closely related to the liturgy of the Ambrosian rite than to the Roman rite. The Beneventan rite has not survived in its complete form, although most of the principal feasts and several feasts of local significance are extant. The Beneventan rite appears to have been less complete, less systematic, and more liturgically flexible than the Roman rite.

Characteristic of this rite was the Beneventan chant, a Lombard-influenced chant that bore similarities to the Ambrosian chant of Lombard Milan. The Beneventan chant is largely defined by its role in the liturgy of the Beneventan rite; many Beneventan chants were assigned multiple roles when inserted into Gregorian chantbooks, appearing variously as antiphons, offertories, and communions, for example. It was eventually supplanted by the Gregorian chant in the 11th century.

The chief centre of the Beneventan chant was Montecassino, one of the first and greatest abbeys of Western monasticism. Gisulf II of Benevento had donated a large swathe of land to Montecassino in 744, and that became the basis for an important state, the Terra Sancti Benedicti, which was a subject only to Rome. The Cassinese influence on Christianity in southern Italy was immense. Montecassino was also the starting point for another characteristic of Beneventan monasticism, the use of the distinct Beneventan script, a clear, angular scrip derived from the Roman cursive as used by the Lombards.

===Art and architecture===
During their nomadic phase, the Lombards primarily created art that was easily carried with them, like arms and jewellery. Though relatively little of this has survived, it bears resemblance to the similar endeavours of other Germanic tribes of northern and central Europe from the same era.

The first major modifications to the Germanic style of the Lombards came in Pannonia and especially in Italy, under the influence of local, Byzantine, and Christian styles. The conversions from nomadism and paganism to settlement and Christianity also opened up new arenas of artistic expression, such as architecture (especially churches) and its accompanying decorative arts (such as frescoes).

File:Langobard Shield Boss 7th Century.jpg|Lombard shield bossnorthern Italy, 7th century, Metropolitan Museum of Art
File:Langobardic - Fibula - Walters 542440.jpg|Lombard S-shaped fibula
File:Arte longobarda, da sutri, bicchiere a forma di corno, fine VI-inizio VII sec.JPG|A glass drinking horn from Castel Trosino
File:Langobardic - Shroud Cross - Walters 571773.jpg|Lombard Goldblattkreuz
File:Cividale fibula1.jpg|Lombard fibulae
File:Cividale Ratchis1.JPG|Altar of Ratchis

====Architecture====

The Basilic autariana in Fara Gera d'Adda

Few Lombard buildings have survived. Most have been lost, rebuilt, or renovated at some point, so they preserve little of their original Lombard structure. Lombard architecture was well-studied in the 20th century, and the four-volume Lombard Architecture (1919) by Arthur Kingsley Porter is a "monument of illustrated history."

The small Oratorio di Santa Maria in Valle in Cividale del Friuli is probably one of the oldest preserved examples of Lombard architecture, as Cividale was the first Lombard city in Italy. Parts of Lombard constructions have been preserved in Pavia (San Pietro in Ciel d'Oro, crypts of Sant'Eusebio and San Giovanni Domnarum) and Monza (cathedral). The Basilic autariana in Fara Gera d'Adda near Bergamo and the church of San Salvatore in Brescia also have Lombard elements. All these buildings are in northern Italy (Langobardia major), but by far the best-preserved Lombard structure is in southern Italy (Langobardia minor). The Church of Santa Sofia in Benevento was erected in 760 by Duke Arechis II, and it preserves Lombard frescoes on the walls and even Lombard capitals on the columns.

Lombard architecture flourished under the impulse provided by the Catholic monarchs like Theodelinda, Liutprand, and Desiderius to the foundation of monasteries to further their political control. Bobbio Abbey was founded during this time.

Some of the late Lombard structures of the 9th and 10th centuries have been found to contain elements of style associated with Romanesque architecture and have been so dubbed "first Romanesque". These edifices are considered, along with some similar buildings in southern France and Catalonia, to mark a transitory phase between the Pre-Romanesque and full-fledged Romanesque.

==See also==

*Longobards in Italy, Places of Power (568-774 A.D.)
*Barbarian invasions
*List of ancient Germanic peoples

==References==

;Notes

;Bibliography
* Cosmographer of Ravenna
* Historia langobardorum codicis Gothani
* Historia Langobardorum
* Origo gentis Langobardorum
* Bluhme, Friedrich. Gens Langobardorum
* Bruckner, Wilhelm. Die Sprache der Langobarden
* 
* 
* Frhlich, Harmann. Studien zur langobardischen Thronfolge - Zur Herkunft der Langobarden - Quellen und Forschungen aus italienischen Archiven und Bibliotheken (QFIAB)
* Giess, Hildegard. "The Sculpture of the Cloister of Santa Sofia in Benevento",The Art Bulletin, Vol. 41, No. 3. (September 1959), pp 249&ndash;256.
* Grimm. Deutsche Mythologie
* Gwatkin, H. M., Whitney, J. P. (ed) - The Cambridge Medieval History: Volume IIThe Rise of the Saracens and the Foundations of the Western Empire. Cambridge University Press, 1926.
* Hallenbeck, Jan T. "Pavia and Rome: The Lombard Monarchy and the Papacy in the Eighth Century" Transactions of the American Philosophical Society New Series, 72.4 (1982), pp. 1186.
* Hammerstein-Loxten, Freiherren von. Bardengau
* Hartmann, Ludo Moritz. Geschichte Italiens im Mittelalter II Vol.
* Hodgkin, Thomas. Italy and her Invaders. Clarendon Press
* Menghin, Wilifred. Die Langobarden / Geschichte und Archologie. Theiss
* Oman, Charles. The Dark Ages 476-918. London, 1914.
* Pohl, Walter and Erhart, Peter. Die Langobarden / Herrschaft und Identitt
* Priester, Karin. Geschichte der Langobarden / Gesellschaft - Kultur - Altagsleben. Theiss
* 
* Santosuosso, Antonio. Barbarians, Marauders, and Infidels: The Ways of Medieval Warfare. 2004. ISBN 0-8133-9153-9
* Schmidt, Dr. Ludwig. lteste Geschichte der Langobarden
* Tacitus. Annals
* Tacitus. Germania
* Wegewitz, Willi. Das Langobardische brandgrberfeld von Putensen, Kreise Harburg
* .
* Wiese, Rbert Die aelteste Geschichte der Langobarden
* Zeuss, Kaspar. Die Deutschen und die Nachbarstmme

 



[[Limit]]

A limit can be:
* Limit (mathematics):
** Limit of a function
** Limit of a sequence
** One-sided limit
** Limit superior and limit inferior
** Limit of a net
** Limit point
** Limit (category theory)
** Direct limit and Inverse limit
* A constraint (mathematical, physical, economical, legal, etc.) in the form of an inequality, such as:
** Chandrasekhar limit
** GreisenZatsepinKuzmin limit
** Budget constraint
** Speed limit
** Age of consent
* An extreme value or boundary, such as:
** The high-frequency limit of the hearing range
** A limit order is a type of order to buy a security at no more (or sell at no less) than a specific price on an exchange.
* Other uses, such as:
** The Limit, a 1980s band
** Limit (music), a way to characterize harmony
** Limits (BDSM) are activities that a partner feels strongly about, and to which special attention must be paid.
** limits.h, the header of a general purpose standard library of the C programming language
** Els Lmits, a village in the municipality of La Jonquera, Catalonia (Spain)
** Limit, a manga by Keiko Suenobu

==See also==
* Limited (disambiguation)
* Limitless (disambiguation)
* Unlimited (disambiguation)



[[Loki]]

 Loki, from an 18th-century Icelandic manuscript
In Norse mythology, Loki, Loptr, or Hverungr is a god or jtunn (or both). Loki is the son of Frbauti and Laufey, and the brother of Helblindi and Bleistr. By the jtunn Angrboa, Loki is the father of Hel, the wolf Fenrir, and the world serpent Jrmungandr. By his wife Sigyn, Loki is the father of Narfi and/or Nari. By the stallion Svailfari, Loki is the mother&mdash;giving birth in the form of a mare&mdash;to the eight-legged horse Sleipnir. In addition, Loki is referred to as the father of Vli in the Prose Edda.

Loki's relation with the gods varies by source. Loki sometimes assists the gods and sometimes causes problems for them. Loki is a shape shifter and in separate incidents he appears in the form of a salmon, mare, seal, a fly, and possibly an elderly woman. Loki's positive relations with the gods end with his role in engineering the death of the god Baldr. Loki is eventually bound by the gods with the entrails of one of his sons.

In both the Poetic Edda and the Prose Edda, the goddess Skai is responsible for placing a serpent above him while he is bound. The serpent drips venom from above him that Sigyn collects into a bowl; however, she must empty the bowl when it is full, and the venom that drips in the meantime causes Loki to writhe in pain, thereby causing earthquakes. With the onset of Ragnark, Loki is foretold to slip free from his bonds and to fight against the gods among the forces of the jtnar, at which time he will encounter the god Heimdallr and the two will slay each other.

Loki is referred to in the Poetic Edda, compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources; the Prose Edda and Heimskringla, written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson; the Norwegian Rune Poems, in the poetry of skalds, and in Scandinavian folklore. Loki may be depicted on the Snaptun Stone, the Kirkby Stephen Stone, and the Gosforth Cross. Loki's origins and role in Norse mythology, which some scholars have described as that of a trickster god, have been much debated by scholars.

==Names==
The etymology of the name Loki has yet to be solved. It may be related to Old Norse luka, meaning "close" (potentially pointing to Loki's role at Ragnark). Simek (2007:195). 

In various poems from the Poetic Edda (stanza 2 of Lokasenna, stanza 41 of Hyndlulj, and stanza 26 of Fjlsvinnsml), and sections of the Prose Edda (chapter 32 of Gylfaginning, stanza 8 of Haustlng, and stanza 1 of rsdrpa) Loki is alternately referred to as Loptr, which is generally considered derived from Old Norse lopt meaning "air", and therefore points to an association with the air. Simek (2007:197). 

The name Hverungr (Old Norse '?roarer') is also used in reference to Loki, occurring in names for Hel (such as in Ynglingatal; hverungs mr) and in reference to Fenrir (as in Vluspa). Simek (2007:166). 

==Attestations==
Loki and Sigyn (1863) by Mrten Eskil Winge

===Poetic Edda===
In the Poetic Edda, Loki appears (or is referenced) in the poems Vlusp, Lokasenna, rymskvia, Reginsml, Baldrs draumar, and Hyndlulj.

====Vlusp====
In stanza 35 of the Poetic Edda poem Vlusp, a vlva tells Odin that, among many other things, she sees Sigyn sitting very unhappily with her bound husband, Loki, under a "grove of hot springs". Larrington (1998:8). In stanza 51, during the events of Ragnark, Loki appears free from his bonds and is referred to as the "brother of Bleistr" (here transcribed as Byleist):

:A ship journeys from the east, Muspell's people are coming,
:over the waves, and Loki steers
:There are the monstrous brood with all the raveners,
:The brother of Byleist is in company with them. Larrington (1998:10). 

In stanza 54, after consuming Odin and being killed by Odin's son Varr, Fenrir is described as "Loki's kinsman". Larrington (1998:11). 

====Lokasenna====
Loki taunts Bragi (1908) by W. G. Collingwood
A depiction of Lokasenna (1895) by Lorenz Frlich
The poem Lokasenna (Old Norse "Loki's Quarrel") centers around Loki flyting with other gods; Loki puts forth two stanzas of insults while the receiving figure responds with a single stanza, and then another figure chimes in. The poem begins with a prose introduction detailing that gir, a figure associated with the sea, is hosting a feast in his hall for a number of the gods and elves. There, the gods praise gir's servers Fimafeng and Eldir. Loki "could not bear to hear that," and kills the servant Fimafeng. In response, the gods grab their shields, shrieking at Loki, and chase him out of the hall and to the woods. The gods then return to the hall, and continue drinking. Larrington (1998:8485). 

;Entrance and rejection
Loki comes out of the woods, and meets Eldir outside of the hall. Loki greets Eldir (and the poem itself begins) with a demand that Eldir tell him what the gods are discussing over their ale inside the hall. Eldir responds that they discuss their "weapons and their prowess in war" and yet no one there has anything friendly to say about Loki. Loki says that he will go into the feast, and that, before the end of the feast, he will induce quarrelling among the gods, and "mix their mead with malice." Eldir responds that "if shouting and fighting you pour out on" to the gods, "they'll wipe it off on you." Loki then enters the hall, and everyone there falls silent upon noticing him. Larrington (1998:85). 

;Re-entrance and insults
Breaking the silence, Loki says that, thirsty, he had come to these halls from a long way away to ask the gods for a drink of "the famous mead." Calling the gods arrogant, Loki asks why they are unable to speak, and demands that they assign him a seat and a place for him at the feast, or tell him to leave. The skaldic god Bragi is the first to respond to Loki by telling him that Loki will not have a seat and place assigned to him by the gods at the feast, for the gods know what men they should invite. Larrington (1998:86). Loki does not respond to Bragi directly, but instead directs his attention to Odin, and states:

:Do you remember, Odin, when in bygone days
:we mixed our blood together?
:You said you would never drink ale
:unless it were brought to both of us. 

Odin then asks his silent son Varr to sit up, so that Loki (here referred to as the "wolf's father") may sit at the feast, and so that he may not speak words of blame to the gods in gir's hall. Varr stands and pours a drink for Loki. Prior to drinking, Loki declaims a toast to the gods, with a specific exception for Bragi. Bragi responds that he will give a horse, sword, and ring from his possessions so that he does not repay the gods "with hatred." Loki responds that Bragi will always be short of all of these things, accusing him of being "wary of war" and "shy of shooting." Bragi responds that, were they outside of gir's hall, Bragi would be holding Loki's head as a reward for his lies. Loki replies that Bragi is brave when seated, calling him a "bench-ornament," and that Bragi would run away when troubled by an angry, spirited man. Larrington (1998:87). 

The goddess Iunn interrupts, asking Bragi, as a service to his relatives and adopted relatives, not to say words of blame to Loki in gir's hall. Loki tells Iunn to be silent, calling her the most "man-crazed" of all women, and saying that she placed her washed, bright arms around her brother's slayer. Iunn says that she won't say words of blame in gir's hall, and affirms that she quietened Bragi, who was made talkative by beer, and that she doesn't want the two of them to fight. The goddess Gefjun asks why the two gods must fight, saying that Loki knows that he is joking, and that "all living things love him." Loki responds to Gefjun by stating that Gefjun's heart was once seduced by a "white boy" who gave her a jewel, and who Gefjun laid her thigh over. Larrington (1998:8788). 

Odin says that Loki must be insane to make Gefjun his enemy, as her wisdom about the fates of men may equal Odin's own. Loki says that Odin does a poor job in handing out honor in war to men, and that he's often given victory to the faint-hearted. Odin responds that even if this is true, Loki (in a story otherwise unattested) once spent eight winters beneath the earth as a woman milking cows, and during this time bore children. Odin declares this perverse. Loki counters that Odin once practiced seir on the island of Samsey (now Sams, Denmark), and, appearing as a wizard, traveled among mankind, which Loki condemns as perverse. Larrington (1998:8889). 

Frigg, a major goddess and Odin's wife, says that what Loki and Odin did in the ancient past should not be spoken of in front of others, and that ancient matters should always remain hidden. Loki brings up that Frigg is the daughter of Fjrgyn, a personification of the earth, and that she had once taken Odin's brothers Vili and V into her embrace. Frigg responds that if there was a boy like her now-deceased son Baldr in the hall, Loki would not be able to escape from the wrath of the gods. Loki reminds Frigg that he is responsible for the death of her son Baldr. Larrington (1998:89). 

The goddess Freyja declares that Loki must be mad, stating that Frigg knows all fate, yet she does not speak it. Loki claims each of the gods and elves that are present have been Freyja's lover. Freyja replies that Loki is lying, that he just wants to "yelp about wicked things" that gods and goddesses are furious with him, and that he will go home thwarted. In response, Loki calls Freyja a malicious witch, and claims that Freyja was once astride her brother Freyr, when all of the other laughing gods surprised her, Freyja then farted. This scenario is otherwise unattested. Njrr (Freyja and Freyr's father) says that it is harmless for a woman to have a lover or "someone else" beside her husband, and that what is surprising is a "pervert god coming here who has borne children." Larrington (1998:8990). 

Loki tells Njrr to be silent, recalling Njrr's status as once having been a hostage from the Vanir to the sir during the sir-Vanir War, that the "daughters of Hymir" once used Njrr "as a pisspot," urinating in his mouth (an otherwise unattested comment). Njrr responds that this was his reward when he was sent as a hostage to the sir, and that he fathered his son (Freyr), whom no one hates, and is considered a prince of the sir. Loki tells Njrr to maintain his moderation, and that he won't keep it secret any longer that Njrr fathered this son with his sister (unnamed), although one would expect him to be worse than he turned out. Larrington (1998:9091). 

The god Tyr defends Freyr, to which Loki replies that Tyr should be silent, for Tyr cannot "deal straight with people," and points out that it was Loki's son, the wolf Fenrir, who tore Tyr's hand off. (According to the prose introduction to the poem Tyr is now one-handed from having his arm bitten off by Loki's son Fenrir while Fenrir was bound.) Tyr responds that while he may have lost a hand, Loki has lost the wolf, and trouble has come to them both. Further, that Fenrir must now wait in shackles until the onset of Ragnark. Loki tells Tyr to be silent a second time, and states that Tyr's wife (otherwise unattested) had a son by Loki, and that Tyr never received any compensation for this "injury," further calling him a "wretch." Larrington (1998:91). 

Freyr himself interrupts at this point, and says that he sees a wolf lying before a river mouth, and that, unless Loki is immediately silent, like the wolf, Loki shall also be bound until Ragnark. Loki retorts that Freyr purchased his consort Gerr with gold, having given away his sword, which he will lack at Ragnark. Byggvir (referred to in the prose introduction to the poem as a servant of Freyr) says that if he had as noble a lineage and as an honorable a seat as Freyr, he would grind down Loki, and make all of his limbs lame. Loki refers to Byggvir in terms of a dog, and says that Byggvir is always found at Freyr's ears, or twittering beneath a grindstone. Byggvir says that he's proud to be here by all the gods and men, and that he's said to be speedy. Loki tells him to be silent, that Byggvir does not know how to apportion food among men, and that he hides among the straw and dais when men go to battle. Larrington (1998:9192). 

The god Heimdallr says that Loki is drunk and witless, and asks Loki why he won't stop speaking. Loki tells Heimdallr to be silent, that he was fated a "hateful life," that Heimdallr must always have a muddy back, and serve as watchman of the gods. The goddess Skai says that while Loki now appears light-hearted and "playing" with his "tail-wagging," he will soon be bound with his ice-cold son's guts on a sharp rock by the gods. Loki says that, even if this is his fate, that he was "first and foremost" with the other gods at the killing of Skai's father, jazi. Skai says that, with these events in mind, "baneful advice" will always come from her "sanctuaries and plains" to Loki. Loki says that Skai was once gentler in speech to him (referring to himself as the "son of Laufey") when Skai once invited him to her bed (an event that is unattested elsewhere), and that such events must be mentioned if they are to recall "shameful deeds." Larrington (1998:9193). 

Sif, wife of Thor, goes forth and pours Loki a glass of mead into a crystal cup in a prose narrative. Continuing the poem, Sif welcomes Loki and invites him to take a crystal cup filled with ancient mead, and says that among the children of the sir, she is singularly blameless. Loki "takes the horn," drinks it, and says that she would be, if it were so, and states that Sif had a lover beside Thor, namely, Loki himself (an event that is otherwise unattested). Beyla (referred to in the prose introduction to the poem as a servant of Freyr) says that all of the mountains are shaking, that she thinks Thor must be on his way home, and when Thor arrives he will bring peace to those that quarrel there. Loki tells Beyla to be silent, that she is "much imbued with malice," that no worse female has ever been among the "sir's children," and calling her a bad "serving-wench." Larrington (1998:94). 

;The arrival of Thor and the bondage of Loki
Loki threatens the sir with fire (1895) by Lorenz Frlich
"The Punishment of Loki" by Louis Huard (1813-1874)
Thor arrives, and tells Loki to be silent, referring to him as an "evil creature," stating that with his hammer Mjllnir he will silence Loki by hammering his head from his shoulders. Acknowledging that Thor has arrived, Loki asks Thor why he is raging, and says that Thor won't be so bold to fight against the wolf when he swallows Odin at Ragnark. Thor again tells Loki to be silent, and threatens him with Mjllnir, adding that he will throw Loki "up on the roads to the east," and thereafter no one will be able to see Loki. Loki states that Thor should never brag of his journeys to the east, claiming that there Thor crouched cowering in the thumb of a glove, mockingly referring to him as a "hero," and adding that such behaviour was unlike Thor. Thor responds by telling Loki to be silent, threatening him with Mjllnir, and adding that every one of Loki's bones will be broken with it. Loki says he intends to live for a long while yet despite Thor's threats, and taunts Thor about an encounter Thor once had with the Skrmir (tgara-Loki in disguise). Thor again commands Loki to be silent, threatens Loki with Mjllnir, and says he will send Loki to Hel, below the gates of Ngrind. Larrington (1998:9495). 

In response to Thor, Loki says that he "spoke before the sir," and "before the sons of the sir" what his "spirit urged" him to say, yet before Thor alone he will leave, as he knows that Thor does strike. Loki ends the poetic verses of Lokasenna with a final stanza:

:Ale you brewed, gir, and you will never again hold a feast;
:all your possessions which are here inside
:may flame play over them,
:and may your back be burnt! Larrington (1998:95). 

Following this final stanza a prose section details that after Loki left the hall, he disguised himself as a salmon and hid in the waterfall of Franangrsfors, where the sir caught him. The narrative continues that Loki was bound with the entrails of his son Nari, and his son Narfi changed into a wolf. Skai fastened a venomous snake over Loki's face, and from it poison dripped. Sigyn, Loki's wife, sat with him holding a basin beneath the dripping venom, yet when the basin became full, she carried the poison away; and during this time the poison dripped on to Loki, causing him to writhe with such violence that all of the earth shook from the force, resulting in what are now known as earthquakes. Larrington (1998:9596). 

====rymskvia====
Loki's flight to Jtunheim (1908) by W. G. Collingwood
Ah, what a lovely maid it is! (1902) by Elmer Boyd Smith.
In the poem rymskvia, Thor wakes and finds that his powerful hammer, Mjllnir, is missing. Thor turns to Loki first, and tells him that nobody knows that the hammer has been stolen. The two then go to the court of the goddess Freyja, and Thor asks her if he may borrow her feather cloak so that he may attempt to find Mjllnir. Freyja agrees, saying she'd lend it even if it were made of silver and gold, and Loki flies off, the feather cloak whistling. Larrington (1998:97). 

In Jtunheimr, the jtunn rymr sits on a burial mound, plaiting golden collars for his female dogs, and trimming the manes of his horses. rymr sees Loki, and asks what could be amiss among the sir and the Elves; why is Loki alone in the Jtunheimr? Loki responds that he has bad news for both the elves and the sir - that Thor's hammer, Mjllnir, is gone. rymr says that he has hidden Mjllnir eight leagues beneath the earth, from which it will be retrieved, if Freyja is brought to him as his wife. Loki flies off, the feather cloak whistling, away from Jtunheimr and back to the court of the gods. Larrington (1998:9798). 

Thor asks Loki if his efforts were successful, and that Loki should tell him while he's still in the air as "tales often escape a sitting man, and the man lying down often barks out lies." Loki states that it was indeed an effort, and also a success, for he has discovered that rymr has the hammer, but that it cannot be retrieved unless Freyja is brought to rymr as his wife. The two return to Freyja, and tell her to dress herself in a bridal head dress, as they will drive her to Jtunheimr. Freyja, indignant and angry, goes into a rage, causing all of the halls of the sir to tremble in her anger, and her necklace, the famed Brsingamen, falls from her. Freyja pointedly refuses. Larrington (1998:98). 

As a result, the gods and goddesses meet and hold a thing to discuss and debate the matter. At the thing, the god Heimdallr puts forth the suggestion that, in place of Freyja, Thor should be dressed as the bride, complete with jewels, women's clothing down to his knees, a bridal head-dress, and the necklace Brsingamen. Thor rejects the idea, and Loki (here described as "son of Laufey") interjects that this will be the only way to get back Mjllnir, and points out that without Mjllnir, the jtnar will be able to invade and settle in Asgard. The gods dress Thor as a bride, and Loki states that he will go with Thor as his maid, and that the two shall drive to Jtunheimr together. Larrington (1998:99). 

After riding together in Thor's goat-driven chariot, the two, disguised, arrive in Jtunheimr. rymr commands the jtnar in his hall to spread straw on the benches, for Freyja has arrived to be his wife. rymr recounts his treasured animals and objects, stating that Freyja was all that he was missing in his wealth. Larrington (1998:100). 

Early in the evening, the disguised Loki and Thor meet in the with the rymr and the assembled jtnar. Thor eats and drinks ferociously, consuming entire animals and three casks of mead. rymr finds the behaviour at odds with his impression of Freyja, and Loki, sitting before rymr and appearing as a "very shrewd maid", makes the excuse that "Freyja's" behaviour is due to her having not consumed anything for eight entire days before arriving due to her eagerness to arrive. rymr then lifts "Freyja's" veil and wants to kiss "her" until catching the terrifying eyes staring back at him, seemingly burning with fire. Loki states that this is because "Freyja" had not slept for eight nights in her eagerness. 

The "wretched sister" of the jtnar appears, asks for a bridal gift from "Freyja", and the jtnar bring out Mjllnir to "sanctify the bride", to lay it on her lap, and marry the two by "the hand" of the goddess Vr. Thor laughs internally when he sees the hammer, takes hold of it, strikes rymr, beats all of the jtnar, and kills the "older sister" of the jtnar. Larrington (1998:101). 

====Reginsml====
Loki appears in both prose and the first six stanzas of the poem Reginsml. The prose introduction to Reginsml details that, while the hero Sigurd was being fostered by Regin, son of Hreidmar, Regin tells him that once the gods Odin, Hnir, and Loki went to Andvara-falls, which contained many fish. Regin, a dwarf, had two brothers; Andvari, who gained food by spending time in the Andvara-falls in the form of a pike, and tr, who would often go to the Andvara-falls in the form of an otter. Larrington (1999:151). 

While the three gods are at the falls, tr (in the form of an otter) catches a salmon and eats it on a river bank, his eyes shut, when Loki hits and kills him with a stone. The gods think that this is great, and flay the skin from the otter to make a bag. That night, the three gods stay with Hreidmar (the father of Regin, Andvari, and the now-dead tr) and show him their catches, including the skin of the otter. Upon seeing the skin, Regin and Hreidmar "seized them and made them ransom their lives" in exchange for filling the otterskin bag the gods had made with gold and covering the exterior of the bag with red gold. 

Loki is sent to retrieve the gold, and Loki goes to the goddess Rn, borrows her net, and then goes back to the Andvara-falls. At the falls, Loki spreads his net before Andvari (who is in the form of a pike), which Andvari jumps into. The stanzas of the poem then begin: Loki mocks Andvari, and tells him that he can save his head by telling Loki where his gold is. Andvari gives some background information about himself, including that he was cursed by a "norn of misfortune" in his "early days". Loki responds by asking Andvari "what requital" does mankind get if "they wound each other with words". Andvari responds that lying men receive a "terrible requital": having to wade in the river Vadgelmir, and that their suffering will be long. Larrington (1999:151152). 

Loki looks over the gold that Andvari possesses, and after Andvari hands over all of his gold, Andvari holds on to but a single ring; the ring Andvarinaut, which Loki also takes. Andvari, now in the form of a dwarf, goes into a rock, and tells Loki that the gold will result in the death of two brothers, will cause strife between eight princes, and will be useless to everyone. Larrington (1999:152). 

Loki returns, and the three gods give Hreidmar the money from the gold hoard and flatten out the otter skin, stretch out its legs, and heap gold atop it, covering it. Hreidmar looks it over, and notices a single hair that has not been covered. Hreidmar demands that it be covered as well. Odin puts forth the ring Andvarinaut, covering the single hair. 

Loki states that they have now handed over the gold, and that gold is cursed as Andvari is, and that it will be the death of Hreidmar and Regin both. Hreidmar responds that if he had known this before, he would have taken their lives, yet that he believes those are not yet born whom the curse is intended for, and that he doesn't believe him. Further, with the hoard, he will have red gold for the rest of his life. Hreidmar tells them to leave, and the poem continues without further mention of Loki. Larrington (1999:152153). 

====Baldrs draumar====
In Baldr draumar, Odin has awoken a deceased vlva in Hel, and questions her repeatedly about his son Baldr's bad dreams. Loki is mentioned in stanza 14, the final stanza of the poem, where the vlva tells Odin to ride home, to be proud of himself, and that no one else will come visit until "Loki is loose, escaped from his bonds" and the onset of Ragnark. Larrington (1998:245). 

====Hyndlulj====
Loki consumes a roasted heart in a painting (1911) by John Bauer
Loki is referenced in two stanzas in Vlusp hin skamma, found within the poem Hyndlulj. The first stanza notes that Loki produced "the wolf" with the jtunn Angrboa, that Loki himself gave birth to the horse Sleipnir by the stallion Svailfari, and that Loki (referred to as the "brother of Bleistr") thirdly gave birth to "the worst of all marvels". This stanza is followed by:

:Loki ate some of the heart, the thought-stone of a woman,
:roasted on a linden-wood fire, he found it half-cooked;
:Lopt was impregnated by a wicked woman,
:from whom every ogress on earth is descended. Larrington (1998:258). 

In the second of the two stanzas, Loki is referred to as Lopt. Loki's consumption of a woman's heart is otherwise unattested. Larrington (1998:296). 

====Fjlsvinnsml====
In the poem Fjlsvinnsml, a stanza mentions Loki (as Lopt) in association with runes. In the poem, Fjlsvir describes to the hero Svipdagr that Sinmara keeps the weapon Lvateinn within a chest, locked with nine strong locks (due to significant translation differences, two translations of the stanza are provided here):

 :Fjolsvith spake: :\"Lvatein is there, that Lopt with runes :Once made by the doors of death; :In Lgjarn's chest by Sinmora lies it, :And nine locks fasten it firm.\" Bellows (2004:245). :Fiolsvith. :Hvatein the twig is named, and Lopt plucked it, :down by the gate of Death. :In an iron chest it lies with Sinmra, :and is with nine strong locks secured. Thorpe (1907:9697). 

===Prose Edda===

====Gylfaginning====
The Prose Edda book Gylfaginning tells various myths featuring Loki, including Loki's role in the birth of the horse Sleipnir and Loki's contest with Logi, fire personified.

;High's introduction
Loki first appears in the Prose Edda in chapter 20 of the book Gylfaginning, where he is referred to as the "s called Loki" while the enthroned figure of Third explains to "Gangleri" (King Gylfi in disguise) the goddess Frigg's prophetic abilities while citing a stanza of Lokasenna. Faulkes (1995:21). 
"The children of Loki" (1920) by Willy Pogany
Loki is more formally introduced by High in chapter 34, where he is "reckoned among the sir", and High states that Loki is called by some "the sir's calumniator", "originator of deceits", and "the disgrace of all gods and men". High says that Loki's alternative name is Lopt, that he is the son of the male jtunn Farbauti, his mother is "Laufey or Nl", and his brothers are Helblindi and Bleistr. High describes Loki as "pleasing and handsome" in appearance, malicious in character, "very capricious in behaviour", and as possessing "to a greater degree than others" learned cunning, and "tricks for every purpose", often getting the sir into trouble, and then getting them out of it with his trickery. Loki's wife is named Sigyn, and they have a son named "Nari or Narfi". Otherwise, Loki had three children with the female jtunn Angrboa from Jtunheimr; the wolf Fenrir, the serpent Jrmungandr, and the female being Hel. The gods realized that these three children were being raised in Jtunheimr, and expected trouble from them partially due to the nature of Angrboa, but worse yet Loki. Faulkes (1995:2627). In chapter 35, Gangleri comments that Loki produced a "pretty terrible"yet importantfamily. Faulkes (1995:29). 

;Loki, Svailfari, and Sleipnir
In chapter 42, High tells a story set "right at the beginning of the gods' settlement, when the gods at established Midgard and built Val-Hall." The story is about an unnamed builder who has offered to build a fortification for the gods that will keep out invaders in exchange for the goddess Freyja, the sun, and the moon. After some debate, the gods agree to these conditions, but place a number of restrictions on the builder, including that he must complete the work within three seasons without the help of any man. The builder makes a single request; that he may have help from his stallion Svailfari, and due to Loki's influence, this is allowed. The stallion Svailfari performs twice the deeds of strength as the builder, and hauls enormous rocksto the surprise of the gods. The builder, with Svailfari, makes fast progress on the wall, and three days before the deadline of summer, the builder is nearly at the entrance to the fortification. The gods convene, and figure out who is responsible, resulting in a unanimous agreement that, along with most trouble, Loki is to blame (here referred to as Loki Laufeyjarsonhis surname derived from his mother's name, Laufey). Faulkes (1995:35). 

Loki and Svailfari (1909) by Dorothy Hardy
The gods declare that Loki deserves a horrible death if he cannot find a scheme that will cause the builder to forfeit his payment, and threaten to attack him. Loki, afraid, swears oaths that he will devise a scheme to cause the builder to forfeit the payment, whatever it may cost himself. That night, the builder drives out to fetch stone with his stallion Svailfari, and out from a wood runs a mare. The mare neighs at Svailfari, and "realizing what kind of horse it was," Svailfari becomes frantic, neighs, tears apart his tackle, and runs towards the mare. The mare runs to the wood, Svailfari follows, and the builder chases after. The two horses run around all night, causing the building to be halted and the builder is then unable to regain the previous momentum of his work. Faulkes (1995:36). 

The builder goes into a rage, and when the sir realize that the builder is a hrimthurs, they disregard their previous oaths with the builder, and call for Thor. Thor arrives, and subsequently kills the builder by smashing the builder's skull into shards with the hammer Mjllnir. However, Loki "had such dealings" with Svailfari that "somewhat later" Loki gives birth to a gray foal with eight legs; the horse Sleipnir"the best horse among gods and men." 

;Loki, tgara-Loki, and Logi
In chapter 44, Third reluctantly relates a tale where Thor and Loki are riding in Thor's chariot, which is pulled by his two goats. Loki and Thor stop at the house of a peasant farmer, and there they are given lodging for a night. Thor slaughters his goats, prepares them, puts them in a pot, and Loki and Thor sit down for their evening meal. Thor invites the peasant family who own the farm to share with him the meal he has prepared. Afterward, the peasant child jlfi sucks the bone marrow from one of the goat bones, and when Thor goes to resurrect the goats, he finds one of the goats to be lame. In their terror, the family atones to Thor by giving Thor their son jlfi and their daughter Rskva. Faulkes (1995:37-38). 
I am the giant Skrymir by Elmer Boyd Smith
Minus the goats, Thor, Loki, and the two children continue east until they arrive at a vast forest in Jtunheimr. They continue through the woods until dark. The four seek shelter for the night. They encounter an immense building. Finding shelter in a side room, they experience earthquakes through the night. The earthquakes cause all four but Thor, who grips his hammer in preparation of defense, to be fearful. The building turns out to be the huge glove of Skrymir, who has been snoring throughout the night, causing what seemed to be earthquakes. All four sleep beneath an oak tree near Skrymir in fear. Faulkes (1995:38-40). 

Thor wakes up in the middle of the night, and a series of events occur where Thor twice attempts to kill the sleeping Skrmir with his hammer. Skrmir awakes after each attempt, only to say that he detected an acorn falling on his head or that he wonders if bits of tree from the branches above have fallen on top of him. The second attempt awakes Skrmir. Skrmir gives them advice; if they are going to be cocky at the keep of tgarr it would be better for them to turn back now, for tgara-Loki's men there won't put up with it. Skrmir throws his knapsack onto his back and abruptly goes into the forest. High comments that "there is no report that the sir expressed hope for a happy reunion". Faulkes (1995:40). 

The four travelers continue their journey until midday. They find themselves facing a massive castle in an open area. The castle is so tall that they must bend their heads back to their spines to see above it. At the entrance to the castle is a shut gate, and Thor finds that he cannot open it. Struggling, all four squeeze through the bars of the gate, and continue to a large hall. Inside the great hall are two benches, where many generally large people sit on two benches. The four see tgara-Loki, the king of the castle, sitting. Faulkes (1995:4041). 

tgara-Loki says that no visitors are allowed to stay unless they can perform a feat. Loki, standing in the rear of the party, is the first to speak, claiming that he can eat faster than anyone. tgara-Loki comments that this would be a feat indeed, and calls for a being by the name of Logi to come from the benches. A trencher is fetched, placed on the floor of the hall, and filled with meat. Loki and Logi sit down on opposing sides. The two eat as quickly as they can and meet at the midpoint of the trencher. Loki consumed all of the meat off of the bones on his side, yet Logi had not only consumed his meat, but also the bones and the trencher itself. It was evident to all that Loki had lost. In turn, jlfi races against a figure by the name of Hugi three times and thrice loses. Faulkes (1995:41-42). 

Thor agrees to compete in a drinking contest but after three immense gulps fails. Thor agrees to lift a large, gray cat in the hall but finds that it arches his back no matter what he does, and that he can only raise a single paw. Thor demands to fight someone in the hall, but the inhabitants say doing so would be demeaning, considering Thor's weakness. tgara-Loki then calls for his nurse Elli, an old woman. The two wrestle but the harder Thor struggles the more difficult the battle becomes. Thor is finally brought down to a single knee. tgara-Loki says to Thor that fighting anyone else would be pointless. Now late at night, tgara-Loki shows the group to their rooms and they are treated with hospitality. Faulkes (1995:4244). 

The next morning the group gets dressed and prepares to leave the keep. tgara-Loki appears, has his servants prepare a table, and they all merrily eat and drink. As they leave, tgara-Loki asks Thor how he thought he fared in the contests. Thor says that he is unable to say he did well, noting that he is particularly annoyed that tgara-Loki will now speak negatively about him. tgara-Loki points out that the group has left his keep and says that he hopes that they never return to it, for if he had an inkling of what he was dealing with he would never have allowed the group to enter in the first place. tgara-Loki reveals that all was not what it seemed to the group. tgara-Loki was in fact the immense Skrmir, and that if the three blows Thor attempted to land had hit their mark, the first would have killed Skrmir. In reality, Thor's blows were so powerful that they had resulted in three square valleys. Faulkes (1995:4445). 

The contests, too, were an illusion. tgara-Loki reveals that Loki had actually competed against wildfire itself (Logi, Old Norse "flame"), jlfi had raced against thought (Hugi, Old Norse "thought"), Thor's drinking horn had actually reached to the ocean and with his drinks he lowered the ocean level (resulting in tides). The cat that Thor attempted to lift was in actuality the world serpent, Jrmungandr, and everyone was terrified when Thor was able to lift the paw of this "cat", for Thor had actually held the great serpent up to the sky. The old woman Thor wrestled was in fact old age (Elli, Old Norse "old age"), and there is no one that old age cannot bring down. tgara-Loki tells Thor that it would be better for "both sides" if they did not meet again. Upon hearing this, Thor takes hold of his hammer and swings it at tgara-Loki but he is gone and so is his castle. Only a wide landscape remains. Faulkes (1995:4546). 

===Norwegian rune poem===
The Bjarkan rune
Loki is mentioned in stanza 13 of the Norwegian rune poem in connection with the Younger Futhark Bjarkan rune:

 Old Norse: :Bjarkan er laufgrnster lma; ::Loki bar flra tma. Dickins (1915:26). :Modern English: :Birch has the greenest leaves of any shrub; ::Loki was fortunate in his deceit. Dickins (1915:27). 

According to Bruce Dickins, the reference to 'Loki's deceit' in the poem "is doubtless to Loki's responsibility for Balder's death." 

==Archaeological record==

===Snaptun Stone===
The Snaptun Stone may feature a depiction of Loki
In 1950, a semi-circular flat stone featuring a depiction of a mustachioed face was discovered on a beach near Snaptun, Denmark. Made of soapstone that originated in Norway or Sweden, the depiction was carved around the year 1000 CE and features a face with a curled mustache and scarred lips. The figure is identified as Loki due to the lips, considered a reference to a tale recorded in Skldskaparml where sons of Ivaldi stitch up Loki's lips. Madsen (1990:180). 

The stone is identified as a hearth stone; the nozzle of the bellows would be inserted into the hole in the front of the stone, and the air produced by the bellows pushed flame through the top hole, all the while the bellows were protected from the heat and flame. The stone may point to a connection between Loki and smithing and flames. According to Hans Jrgen Madsen, the Snaptun Stone is "the most beautifully made hearth-stone that is known." The stone is housed and on display at the Moesgrd Museum near Aarhus, Denmark. 

===Kirkby Stephen Stone and Gosforth Cross===
Loki Bound (motive from the Gosforth Cross) (1908) by W. G. Collingwood
A fragmentary late 10th century cross located in St Stephen's Church, Kirkby Stephen, Cumbria, England features a bound figure with horns and a beard. This figure is sometimes theorized as depicting the bound Loki. Orchard (1997:105). Discovered in 1870, the stone consists of yellowish-white sandstone, and now sits at the front of the Kirkby Stephen church. A depiction of a similarly horned and round-shouldered figure was discovered in Gainford, County Durham and is now housed in the Durham Cathedral Library. Calverley (1899:218). 

The mid-11th century Gosforth Cross has been interpreted as featuring various figures from Norse mythology and, like the Kirkby Stephen Stone, is also located in Cumbria. The bottom portion of the west side of the cross features a depiction of a long-haired female, kneeling figure holding an object above another prostrate, bound figure. Above and to their left is a knotted serpent. This has been interpreted as Sigyn soothing the bound Loki. Orchard (1997:13). 

File:Kirkby Stephen Stone by Petersen.jpg|The bound figure on the Kirkby Stephen Stone
File:Gosforth Cross Loki and Sigyn.jpg|Detail from the Gosforth Cross

==Folklore==
The notion of Loki survived into the modern period in the folklore of Scandinavia. In Denmark, Loki appeared as Lokke. In Jutland, the phrases "Lokke slr sin havre" ("Lokke is reaping his oats") and "Lokkemand driver sine geder" ("Lokkemand drives his goats") are thereby recorded in the beginning of the 20th century, the latter with the variation of simply "Lokke". In Zealand the name "Lokke lejemand" ("Lokke the Playing Man") was used. In his study of Loki's appearance in Scandinavian folklore in the modern period, Danish folklorist Axel Olrik cites numerous examples of natural phenomena explained by way of Lokke in popular folk tradition, including rising heat. An example from 1841 reads as follows:

:The expressions: "Lokke (Lokki) sr havre i dag" (Lokke (Lokki) sows oats today), or: "Lokke driver i dag med sine geder" (Lokke herds his goats today), are used in several regions of Jutland, for example in Medelsom shire, the diocese of Viborg etc. ... and stand for the sight in the springtime, when the sunshine generates vapour from the ground, which can be seen as fluttering or shimmering air in the horizon of the flat landscape, similar to the hot steam over a kettle or a burning fire

And in Thy, from the same source: "... when you look at the horizon in clear weather and sunshine, and the air seems to move in shimmering waves, or like a sheet of water which seems to rise and sink in waves." Olrik further cites several different types of plants named after Loki. Olrik detects three major themes in folklore attestations; Lokke appeared as an "air phenomenon", connected with the "home fire", and as a "teasing creature of the night". Olrik (1909). 

Loka Tttur or Lokka Tttur (Faroese "taleor ttrof Loki") is a Faroese ballad dating to the late Middle Ages that features the gods Loki, Odin, and Hnir helping a farmer and a boy escape the wraith of a bet-winning jtunn. The tale notably features Loki as a benevolent god in this story, although his slyness is in evidence as usual. Hirschfeld (1889:3031). 

==Theories==
Loki's origins and role in Norse mythology have been much debated by scholars. In 1835, Jacob Grimm was first to produce a major theory about Loki, in which he advanced the notion of Loki as a "god of fire". In 1889, Sophus Bugge theorized Loki to be variant of Lucifer of Christian mythology, an element of Bugge's larger effort to find a basis of Christianity in Norse mythology. After World War II, four scholarly theories dominated. The first of the four theories is that of Folke Strm, who in 1956 concluded that Loki is a hypostasis of the god Odin. In 1959, Jan de Vries theorized that Loki is a typical example of a trickster figure. In 1961, by way of excluding all non-Scandinavian mythological parallels in her analysis, Anna Birgitta Rooth concluded that Loki was originally a spider. Anne Holtsmark, writing in 1962, concluded that no conclusion could be made about Loki. Von Schnurbein (2000:112-113). 

Regarding scholarship on Loki, scholar Gabriel Turville-Petre comments (1964) that "more ink has been spilled on Loki than on any other figure in Norse myth. This, in itself, is enough to show how little scholars agree, and how far we are from understanding him." Turville-Petre (1964:324). 

In her review of scholarly discourse involving Loki, scholar Stefanie von Schnurbein (2000) comments that "Loki, the outsider in the Northern Germanic pantheon, confounds not only his fellow deities and chronicler Snorri Sturluson to the Prose Edda but has occasioned as much quarrel among his interpreters. Hardly a monography, article, or encyclopedic entry does not begin with the reference to Loki as a staggeringly complex, confusing, and ambivalent figure who has been the catalyst of countless unresolved scholarly controversies and has elicited more problems than solutions". Von Schnurbein (2000:109). 

==Popular culture==
Loki has been depicted in or is referenced in a variety of media in modern popular culture. During the 19th century, Loki was depicted in a variety of manners, sometimes strongly at odds. According to Stefan Arvidssen, "the conception of Loki varied during the nineteenth century. Sometimes he was presented as a dark-haired Semitic fifth columnist among the Nordic Aesir, but sometimes he was described as a Nordic Prometheus, a heroic bearer of culture". Arvidsson (2006:154). Famously, Loki appears in Richard Wagner's opera cycle Ring of the Nibelung as Loge (a play on Old Norse loge "fire"). He is depicted as an ally of the gods (specifically Wotan's assistant rather than Donner's), although he generally dislikes them and thinks of them as greedy, as they refuse to return the Rhine Gold to its rightful owners. In the conclusion of the first opera Das Rheingold he reveals his hope to turn into fire and destroy Valhalla, and in the final opera Gtterdmmerung Valhalla is set alight, destroying the Gods. Winder McConnell, Werner Wunderlich, Frank Gentry, Ulrich Mueller. 2013. The Nibelungen Tradition: An Encyclopedia Routledge. Entries "Loge" & "Loki" 

Loki appears as a Marvel Comics supervillain of the same name where he consistently comes into conflict with the superhero Thor, in the Marvel universe his adopted brother and archenemy This version of Loki is played by Tom Hiddleston in the movies Thor (2011), The Avengers (2012) and (2013). This is, by far, the most popular modern version of Loki.

Loki reappeared in, among other works, in the 1975 fantasy novel Eight Days of Luke by Diana Wynne Jones. He is also a central character in Neil Gaiman's novel American Gods. and an important character in a few arcs of Gaiman's comic The Sandman. He also appears in Joanne Harris' books Runemarks (2007), http://joanne-harris.co.uk/v3site/books/runemarks/ Runelight(2011) http://joanne-harris.co.uk/v3site/books/runelight/index.html and "the Gospel of Loki" http://joanne-harris.co.uk/v3site/books/loki/index.html 

Loki appeared in the movie Son of the Mask, 2005. Alan Cumming stars as the god of mischief, Loki, whom Odin has ordered to find the Mask.
 Son of the Mask 

Loki also appears in the online arena combat game, Smite by HiRez Studios, along with other Norse, Hindu, Mayan, Greek, Egyptian and Chinese Deities. In Smite, http://www2.hirezstudios.com/smite/nav/game-info/gods/god-info?god=1797 players can choose to be Loki who is labeled fighting style is assassin.

==Notes==

==References==

* Arvidsson, Stefan (2006). Aryan Idols: Indo-European Mythology as Ideology and Science. University of Chicago Press.
* Bellows, Henry Adams (1936). The Poetic Edda: Translated from the Icelandic with an Introduction and Notes. Princeton University Press. American Scandinavian Foundation.
* Calverley, William Slater (1899). Notes on the Early Sculptured Cross: Shrines in Monuments in the Present Diocese of Carlisle. T. Wilson.
* Dickins, Bruce (1915). Runic and Heroic Poems of the Old Teutonic Peoples. Cambridge University Press.
* Faulkes, Anthony (Trans.) (1995). Edda. Everyman. ISBN 0-460-87616-3
* Larrington, Carolyne (Trans.) (1999). The Poetic Edda. Oxford World's Classics. ISBN 0-19-283946-2
* Lindow, John (2001). Norse Mythology: A Guide to the Gods, Heroes, Rituals, and Beliefs. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-515382-0
* Madsen, Hans Jrgen (1990). "The God Loki from Snaptun" as collected in Oldtidens Ansigt: Faces of the Past. Det kongelige Nordiske Oldskriftselskab. ISBN 87-7468-274-1
* Hirschfeld, Max (1889). Untersuchungen zur Lokasenna, Acta Germanica 1.1, Berlin: Mayer & Mller. 
* Olrik, Axel (1909) translated by Eli, Anker. "Loki in Younger Tradition" as published in Srtryk af Danske Studier.
* Orchard, Andy (1997). Dictionary of Norse Myth and Legend. Cassell. ISBN 0-304-34520-2
* Von Schnurbein, Stefanie (2000). "The Function of Loki in Snorri Sturluson's "Edda"" as published in History of Religions, vol. 40, no. 2 (Nov., 2000), pp. 109124. University of Chicago Press.
* Simek, Rudolf (2007) translated by Angela Hall. Dictionary of Northern Mythology. D.S. Brewer. ISBN 0-85991-513-1
* Thorpe, Benjamin (Trans.) (1907). The Elder Edda of Saemund Sigfusson. Norrna Society.
* Turville-Petre, E. O. G. (1964). Myth and Religion of the North: The Religion of Ancient Scandinavia. Holt, Rinehart and Winston.

== External links ==



[[Lisp (programming language)]]

Lisp (historically, LISP) is a family of computer programming languages with a long history and a distinctive, fully parenthesized Polish prefix notation. 
 
Originally specified in 1958, Lisp is the second-oldest high-level programming language in widespread use today; only Fortran is older (by one year). Like Fortran, Lisp has changed a great deal since its early days, and a number of dialects have existed over its history. Today, the most widely known general-purpose Lisp dialects are Common Lisp and Scheme.

Lisp was originally created as a practical mathematical notation for computer programs, influenced by the notation of Alonzo Church's lambda calculus. It quickly became the favored programming language for artificial intelligence (AI) research. As one of the earliest programming languages, Lisp pioneered many ideas in computer science, including tree data structures, automatic storage management, dynamic typing, conditionals, higher-order functions, recursion, and the self-hosting compiler. 

The name LISP derives from "LISt Processing". Linked lists are one of Lisp language's major data structures, and Lisp source code is itself made up of lists. As a result, Lisp programs can manipulate source code as a data structure, giving rise to the macro systems that allow programmers to create new syntax or new domain-specific languages embedded in Lisp.

The interchangeability of code and data also gives Lisp its instantly recognizable syntax. All program code is written as s-expressions, or parenthesized lists. A function call or syntactic form is written as a list with the function or operator's name first, and the arguments following; for instance, a function f that takes three arguments might be called using .

==History==

Lisp was invented by John McCarthy in 1958 while he was at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). McCarthy published its design in a paper in Communications of the ACM in 1960, entitled "Recursive Functions of Symbolic Expressions and Their Computation by Machine, Part I" ("Part II" was never published). He showed that with a few simple operators and a notation for functions, one can build a Turing-complete language for algorithms.

Information Processing Language was the first AI language, from 1955 or 1956, and already included many of the concepts, such as list-processing and recursion, which came to be used in Lisp.

McCarthy's original notation used bracketed "M-expressions" that would be translated into S-expressions. As an example, the M-expression is equivalent to the S-expression . Once Lisp was implemented, programmers rapidly chose to use S-expressions, and M-expressions were abandoned. M-expressions surfaced again with short-lived attempts of MLISP by Horace Enea and CGOL by Vaughan Pratt.

Lisp was first implemented by Steve Russell on an IBM 704 computer. Russell had read McCarthy's paper, and realized (to McCarthy's surprise) that the Lisp eval function could be implemented in machine code. According to what reported by Paul Graham in Hackers & Painters, p. 185, McCarthy said: "Steve Russell said, look, why don't I program this eval..., and I said to him, ho, ho, you're confusing theory with practice, this eval is intended for reading, not for computing. But he went ahead and did it. That is, he compiled the eval in my paper into IBM 704 machine code, fixing bug, and then advertised this as a Lisp interpreter, which it certainly was. So at that point Lisp had essentially the form that it has today..." The result was a working Lisp interpreter which could be used to run Lisp programs, or more properly, 'evaluate Lisp expressions.'

Two assembly language macros for the IBM 704 became the primitive operations for decomposing lists: and cdr|] (Contents of the Address part of Register number) and and cdr|] (Contents of the Decrement part of Register number). From the context, it is clear that the term "Register" is used here to mean "Memory Register", nowadays called "Memory Location". Lisp dialects still use and ( and ) for the operations that return the first item in a list and the rest of the list respectively.

The first complete Lisp compiler, written in Lisp, was implemented in 1962 by Tim Hart and Mike Levin at MIT. This compiler introduced the Lisp model of incremental compilation, in which compiled and interpreted functions can intermix freely. The language used in Hart and Levin's memo is much closer to modern Lisp style than McCarthy's earlier code.

Lisp was a difficult system to implement with the compiler techniques and stock hardware of the 1970s. Garbage collection routines, developed by then-MIT graduate student Daniel Edwards, made it practical to run Lisp on general-purpose computing systems, but efficiency was still a problem. This led to the creation of Lisp machines: dedicated hardware for running Lisp environments and programs. Advances in both computer hardware and compiler technology soon made Lisp machines obsolete.

During the 1980s and 1990s, a great effort was made to unify the work on new Lisp dialects (mostly successors to Maclisp like ZetaLisp and NIL (New Implementation of Lisp)) into a single language. The new language, Common Lisp, was somewhat compatible with the dialects it replaced (the book Common Lisp the Language notes the compatibility of various constructs). In 1994, ANSI published the Common Lisp standard, "ANSI X3.226-1994 Information Technology Programming Language Common Lisp."

Preset = TimeHorizontal_AutoPlaceBars_UnitYear
ImageSize = width:1024
PlotArea = right:256

Define $bold = fontsize:L shift:(10,-4)

Colors =
 id:offWhite value:rgb(0.97,0.97,0.97)
 id:paleGray value:rgb(0.86,0.86,0.86)
 id:darkGray value:gray(0.6)

BackgroundColors = canvas:offWhite

Period = from:1958 till:2013
ScaleMajor = unit:year increment:5 start:1958 gridcolor:paleGray

BarData=
 barset:Dialects

PlotData=

# set defaults
 width:15 fontsize:M textcolor:black align:left anchor:from shift:(0,-2) color:darkGray
 barset:Dialects

 from:1958 till:1965 text:"Lisp 1.5"
 from:1965 till:1985 text:"Maclisp"
 from:1970 till:1995 text:"ZetaLisp"
 from:1970 till:1980 text:"NIL"
 from:1970 till:1990 text:"Interlisp"
 from:1984 till:2013 text:"Common Lisp"
 from:1975 till:2013 text:"Scheme"
 from:1986 till:2013 text:"ISLISP"
 from:2007 till:2013 text:"Clojure"

===Connection to artificial intelligence===
Since its inception, Lisp was closely connected with the artificial intelligence research community, especially on PDP-10 The 36-bit word size of the PDP-6/PDP-10 was influenced by the usefulness of having two Lisp 18-bit pointers in a single word. systems. Lisp was used as the implementation of the programming language Micro Planner which was used in the famous AI system SHRDLU. In the 1970s, as AI research spawned commercial offshoots, the performance of existing Lisp systems became a growing issue.

===Genealogy and variants===
Over its fifty-year history, Lisp has spawned many variations on the core theme of an S-expression language. Moreover, each given dialect may have several implementationsfor instance, there are more than a dozen implementations of Common Lisp.

Differences between dialects may be quite visiblefor instance, Common Lisp uses the keyword defun to name a function, but Scheme uses define. Common Lisp: (defun f (x) x)Scheme: (define f (lambda (x) x)) or (define (f x) x) Within a dialect that is standardized, however, conforming implementations support the same core language, but with different extensions and libraries.

====Historically significant dialects====
A Lisp machine in the MIT Museum
4.3 BSD from the University of Wisconsin, displaying the man page for Franz Lisp

*LISP 1 Accessed May 11, 2010.  First implementation.
*LISP 1.5  First widely distributed version, developed by McCarthy and others at MIT. So named because it contained several improvements on the original "LISP 1" interpreter, but was not a major restructuring as the planned LISP 2 would be.
*Stanford LISP 1.6  This was a successor to LISP 1.5 developed at the Stanford AI Lab, and widely distributed to PDP-10 systems running the TOPS-10 operating system. It was rendered obsolete by Maclisp and InterLisp.
*MACLISP  developed for MIT's Project MAC (no relation to Apple's Macintosh, nor to McCarthy), direct descendant of LISP 1.5. It ran on the PDP-10 and Multics systems. (MACLISP would later come to be called Maclisp, and is often referred to as MacLisp.)
*InterLisp  developed at BBN Technologies for PDP-10 systems running the Tenex operating system, later adopted as a "West coast" Lisp for the Xerox Lisp machines as InterLisp-D. A small version called "InterLISP 65" was published for Atari's 6502-based computer line. For quite some time Maclisp and InterLisp were strong competitors.
*Franz Lisp  originally a Berkeley project; later developed by Franz Inc. The name is a humorous deformation of the name "Franz Liszt", and does not refer to Allegro Common Lisp, the dialect of Common Lisp sold by Franz Inc., in more recent years.
*XLISP, which AutoLISP was based on.
*Standard Lisp and Portable Standard Lisp were widely used and ported, especially with the Computer Algebra System REDUCE.
*ZetaLisp, also known as Lisp Machine Lisp  used on the Lisp machines, direct descendant of Maclisp. ZetaLisp had big influence on Common Lisp.
*LeLisp is a French Lisp dialect. One of the first Interface Builders was written in LeLisp.
*Common Lisp (1984), as described by Common Lisp the Language  a consolidation of several divergent attempts (ZetaLisp, Spice Lisp, NIL, and S-1 Lisp) to create successor dialects to Maclisp, with substantive influences from the Scheme dialect as well. This version of Common Lisp was available for wide-ranging platforms and was accepted by many as a de facto standard until the publication of ANSI Common Lisp (ANSI X3.226-1994).
*Dylan was in its first version a mix of Scheme with the Common Lisp Object System.
*EuLisp  attempt to develop a new efficient and cleaned-up Lisp.
*ISLISP  attempt to develop a new efficient and cleaned-up Lisp. Standardized as ISO/IEC 13816:1997 and later revised as ISO/IEC 13816:2007: Information technology  Programming languages, their environments and system software interfaces  Programming language ISLISP.
*IEEE Scheme  IEEE standard, 11781990 (R1995)
*ANSI Common Lisp  an American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standard for Common Lisp, created by subcommittee X3J13, chartered to begin with Common Lisp: The Language as a base document and to work through a public consensus process to find solutions to shared issues of portability of programs and compatibility of Common Lisp implementations. Although formally an ANSI standard, the implementation, sale, use, and influence of ANSI Common Lisp has been and continues to be seen worldwide.
*ACL2 or "A Computational Logic for Applicative Common Lisp", an applicative (side-effect free) variant of Common LISP. ACL2 is both a programming language in which you can model computer systems and a tool to help proving properties of those models.
*Clojure, a modern dialect of Lisp which compiles to the Java virtual machine and handles concurrency very well.

===2000-present===
After having declined somewhat in the 1990s, Lisp has recently experienced a resurgence of interest. Most new activity is focused around open source implementations of Common Lisp, and includes the development of new portable libraries and applications. A new print edition of Practical Common Lisp by Peter Seibel, a tutorial for new Lisp programmers, was published in 2005. 

Many new Lisp programmers were inspired by writers such as Paul Graham and Eric S. Raymond to pursue a language others considered antiquated. New Lisp programmers often describe the language as an eye-opening experience and claim to be substantially more productive than in other languages. This increase in awareness may be contrasted to the "AI winter" and Lisp's brief gain in the mid-1990s. 

Dan Weinreb lists in his survey of Common Lisp implementations eleven actively maintained Common Lisp implementations. Scieneer Common Lisp is a new commercial implementation forked from CMUCL with a first release in 2002.

The open source community has created new supporting infrastructure: CLiki is a wiki that collects Common Lisp related information, the Common Lisp directory lists resources, #lisp is a popular IRC channel (with support by a Lisp-written Bot), lisppaste supports the sharing and commenting of code snippets, Planet Lisp collects the contents of various Lisp-related blogs, on LispForum users discuss Lisp topics, Lispjobs is a service for announcing job offers and there is a weekly news service, Weekly Lisp News. Common-lisp.net is a hosting site for open source Common Lisp projects.

50 years of Lisp (19582008) has been celebrated at LISP50@OOPSLA. There are regular local user meetings in Boston, Vancouver, and Hamburg. Other events include the European Common Lisp Meeting, the European Lisp Symposium and an International Lisp Conference.

The Scheme community actively maintains over twenty implementations. Several significant new implementations (Chicken, Gambit, Gauche, Ikarus, Larceny, Ypsilon) have been developed in the last few years. The Revised5 Report on the Algorithmic Language Scheme Documents: Standards: R5RS. schemers.org (2012-01-11). Retrieved on 2013-07-17. standard of Scheme was widely accepted in the Scheme community. The Scheme Requests for Implementation process has created a lot of quasi standard libraries and extensions for Scheme. User communities of individual Scheme implementations continue to grow. A new language standardization process was started in 2003 and led to the R6RS Scheme standard in 2007. Academic use of Scheme for teaching computer science seems to have declined somewhat. Some universities, such as MIT, are no longer using Scheme in their computer science introductory courses. 

There are several new dialects of Lisp: Arc, Nu, Clojure, Liskell, LFE (Lisp Flavored Erlang), and Shen.

==Major dialects==
The two major dialects of Lisp used for general-purpose programming today are Common Lisp and Scheme. These languages represent significantly different design choices.

Common Lisp is a successor to MacLisp. The primary influences were Lisp Machine Lisp, MacLisp, NIL, S-1 Lisp, Spice Lisp, and Scheme. Chapter 1.1.2, History, ANSI CL Standard It has many of the features of Lisp Machine Lisp (a large Lisp dialect used to program Lisp Machines), but was designed to be efficiently implementable on any personal computer or workstation. Common Lisp has a large language standard including many built-in data types, functions, macros and other language elements, as well as an object system (Common Lisp Object System or shorter CLOS). Common Lisp also borrowed certain features from Scheme such as lexical scoping and lexical closures.

Scheme (designed earlier) is a more minimalist design, with a much smaller set of standard features but with certain implementation features (such as tail-call optimization and full continuations) not necessarily found in Common Lisp.

Scheme is a statically scoped and properly tail-recursive dialect of the Lisp programming language invented by Guy Lewis Steele Jr. and Gerald Jay Sussman. It was designed to have exceptionally clear and simple semantics and few different ways to form expressions. A wide variety of programming paradigms, including imperative, functional, and message passing styles, find convenient expression in Scheme. Scheme continues to evolve with a series of standards (Revisedn Report on the Algorithmic Language Scheme) and a series of Scheme Requests for Implementation.

Clojure is a recent dialect of Lisp that principally targets the Java Virtual Machine, as well as the CLR, the Python VM, the Ruby VM YARV, and compiling to JavaScript. It is designed to be a pragmatic general-purpose language. Clojure draws considerable influences from Haskell and places a very strong emphasis on immutability. An In-Depth Look at Clojure Collections, Retrieved 2012-06-24 Clojure is a compiled language, as it compiles directly to JVM bytecode, yet remains completely dynamic. Every feature supported by Clojure is supported at runtime. Clojure provides access to Java frameworks and libraries, with optional type hints and type inference, so that calls to Java can avoid reflection and enable fast primitive operations.

In addition, Lisp dialects are used as scripting languages in a number of applications, with the most well-known being Emacs Lisp in the Emacs editor, AutoLisp and later Visual Lisp in AutoCAD, Nyquist in Audacity. The potential small size of a useful Scheme interpreter makes it particularly popular for embedded scripting. Examples include SIOD and TinyScheme, both of which have been successfully embedded in the GIMP image processor under the generic name "Script-fu". Script-fu In GIMP 2.4, Retrieved 2009-10-29 LIBREP, a Lisp interpreter by John Harper originally based on the Emacs Lisp language, has been embedded in the Sawfish window manager. librep at Sawfish Wikia, retrieved 2009-10-29 

==Language innovations==
Lisp was the first homoiconic programming language: the primary representation of program code is the same type of list structure that is also used for the main data structures. As a result, Lisp functions can be manipulated, altered or even created within a Lisp program without extensive parsing or manipulation of binary machine code. This is generally considered one of the primary advantages of the language with regard to its expressive power, and makes the language amenable to metacircular evaluation.

Conditional branching using an if-then-else syntax (now taken for granted as an essential element of any programming language) was invented by McCarthy for use in Lisp, where it saw its first appearance in a more general form (the cond structure). It was inherited by ALGOL, which popularized it. 

Lisp deeply influenced Alan Kay, the leader of the research on Smalltalk, and then in turn Lisp was influenced by Smalltalk, by adopting object-oriented programming features (classes, instances, etc.) in the late 1970s. The Flavours object system (later CLOS) introduced multiple inheritance.

Lisp introduced the concept of automatic garbage collection, in which the system walks the heap looking for unused memory. Most of the modern sophisticated garbage collection algorithms such as generational garbage collection were developed for Lisp. 

Edsger W. Dijkstra in his 1972 Turing Award lecture said,
:"With a few very basic principles at its foundation, it has shown a remarkable stability. Besides that, LISP has been the carrier for a considerable number of in a sense our most sophisticated computer applications. LISP has jokingly been described as the most intelligent way to misuse a computer. I think that description a great compliment because it transmits the full flavour of liberation: it has assisted a number of our most gifted fellow humans in thinking previously impossible thoughts." (ACM Turing Award lecture). 

Largely because of its resource requirements with respect to early computing hardware (including early microprocessors), Lisp did not become as popular outside of the AI community as Fortran and the ALGOL-descended C language. Because of its suitability to complex and dynamic applications, Lisp is currently enjoying some resurgence of popular interest.

==Syntax and semantics==
:Note: This article's examples are written in Common Lisp (though most are also valid in Scheme).

===Symbolic expressions (S-expressions)===
Lisp is an expression-oriented language. Unlike most other languages, no distinction is made between "expressions" and "statements"; all code and data are written as expressions. When an expression is evaluated, it produces a value (in Common Lisp, possibly multiple values), which then can be embedded into other expressions. Each value can be any data type.

McCarthy's 1958 paper introduced two types of syntax: S-expressions (Symbolic expressions, also called "sexps"), which mirror the internal representation of code and data; and M-expressions (Meta Expressions), which express functions of S-expressions. M-expressions never found favor, and almost all Lisps today use S-expressions to manipulate both code and data.

The use of parentheses is Lisp's most immediately obvious difference from other programming language families. As a result, students have long given Lisp nicknames such as Lost In Stupid Parentheses, or Lots of Irritating Superfluous Parentheses. However, the S-expression syntax is also responsible for much of Lisp's power: the syntax is extremely regular, which facilitates manipulation by computer. However, the syntax of Lisp is not limited to traditional parentheses notation. It can be extended to include alternative notations. XMLisp, for instance, is a Common Lisp extension that employs the metaobject-protocol to integrate S-expressions with the Extensible Markup Language (XML).

The reliance on expressions gives the language great flexibility. Because Lisp functions are themselves written as lists, they can be processed exactly like data. This allows easy writing of programs which manipulate other programs (metaprogramming). Many Lisp dialects exploit this feature using macro systems, which enables extension of the language almost without limit.

===Lists===
A Lisp list is written with its elements separated by whitespace, and surrounded by parentheses. For example, is a list whose elements are three atoms: the values , , and [[foo|]]. These values are implicitly typed: they are respectively two integers and a Lisp-specific data type called a "symbolic atom", and do not have to be declared as such.

The empty list is also represented as the special atom . This is the only entity in Lisp which is both an atom and a list.

Expressions are written as lists, using prefix notation. The first element in the list is the name of a form, i.e., a function, operator, macro, or "special operator" (see below). The remainder of the list are the arguments. For example, the function returns its arguments as a list, so the expression

 (list '1 '2 'foo)

evaluates to the list . The "quote" before the arguments in the preceding example is a "special operator" which prevents the quoted arguments from being evaluated (not strictly necessary for the numbers, since 1 evaluates to 1, etc.). Any unquoted expressions are recursively evaluated before the enclosing expression is evaluated. For example,

 (list 1 2 (list 3 4))

evaluates to the list . Note that the third argument is a list; lists can be nested.

===Operators===
Arithmetic operators are treated similarly. The expression

 (+ 1 2 3 4)

evaluates to 10. The equivalent under infix notation would be "".

Lisp has no notion of operators as implemented in Algol-derived languages. Arithmetic operators in Lisp are variadic functions (or n-ary), able to take any number of arguments. A C-style '++' increment operator is sometimes implemented under the name 1+ giving syntax 

 (1+ 1)

,evaluating to 2

"Special operators" (sometimes called "special forms") provide Lisp's control structure. For example, the special operator takes three arguments. If the first argument is non-nil, it evaluates to the second argument; otherwise, it evaluates to the third argument. Thus, the expression

 (if nil
 (list 1 2 "foo")
 (list 3 4 "bar"))

evaluates to . Of course, this would be more useful if a non-trivial expression had been substituted in place of .

===Lambda expressions and function definition===
Another special operator, , is used to bind variables to values which are then evaluated within an expression. This operator is also used to create functions: the arguments to are a list of arguments, and the expression or expressions to which the function evaluates (the returned value is the value of the last expression that is evaluated). The expression

 (lambda (arg) (+ arg 1))

evaluates to a function that, when applied, takes one argument, binds it to and returns the number one greater than that argument. Lambda expressions are treated no differently from named functions; they are invoked the same way. Therefore, the expression

 ((lambda (arg) (+ arg 1)) 5)

evaluates to .

Named functions are created by storing a lambda expression in a symbol using the defun macro.

 (defun foo (a b c d) (+ a b c d))

 defines a new function named in the global environment. It is a shorthand for the expression:

 (place-in-function-definition-slot-of-symbol 'f #'(lambda (a) b...))

===Atoms===
In the original LISP there were two fundamental data types: atoms and lists. A list was a finite ordered sequence of elements, where each element is in itself either an atom or a list, and an atom was a number or a symbol. A symbol was essentially a unique named item, written as an alphanumeric string in source code, and used either as a variable name or as a data item in symbolic processing. For example, the list contains three elements: the symbol FOO, the list , and the number 2.

The essential difference between atoms and lists was that atoms were immutable and unique. Two atoms that appeared in different places in source code but were written in exactly the same way represented the same object, whereas each list was a separate object that could be altered independently of other lists and could be distinguished from other lists by comparison operators.

As more data types were introduced in later Lisp dialects, and programming styles evolved, the concept of an atom lost importance. Many dialects still retained the predicate atom for legacy compatibility, defining it true for any object which is not a cons.

===Conses and lists===

Box-and-pointer diagram for the list (42 69 613)
A Lisp list is a singly linked list. Each cell of this list is called a cons (in Scheme, a pair), and is composed of two pointers, called the car and cdr. These are respectively equivalent to the and fields discussed in the article linked list.

Of the many data structures that can be built out of cons cells, one of the most basic is called a proper list. A proper list is either the special (empty list) symbol, or a cons in which the points to a datum (which may be another cons structure, such as a list), and the points to another proper list.

If a given cons is taken to be the head of a linked list, then its car points to the first element of the list, and its cdr points to the rest of the list. For this reason, the and functions are also called and when referring to conses which are part of a linked list (rather than, say, a tree).

Thus, a Lisp list is not an atomic object, as an instance of a container class in C++ or Java would be. A list is nothing more than an aggregate of linked conses. A variable which refers to a given list is simply a pointer to the first cons in the list. Traversal of a list can be done by "cdring down" the list; that is, taking successive cdrs to visit each cons of the list; or by using any of a number of higher-order functions to map a function over a list.

Because conses and lists are so universal in Lisp systems, it is a common misconception that they are Lisp's only data structures. In fact, all but the most simplistic Lisps have other data structures  such as vectors (arrays), hash tables, structures, and so forth.

====S-expressions represent lists====
Parenthesized S-expressions represent linked list structures. There are several ways to represent the same list as an S-expression. A cons can be written in dotted-pair notation as , where is the car and the cdr. A longer proper list might be written in dotted-pair notation. This is conventionally abbreviated as in list notation. An improper list NB: a so-called "dotted list" is only one kind of "improper list". The other kind is the "circular list" where the cons cells form a loop. Typically this is represented using #n=(...) to represent the target cons cell that will have multiple references, and #n# is used to refer to this cons. For instance, (#1=(a b) . #1#) would normally be printed as ((a b) a b) (without circular structure printing enabled), but makes the reuse of the cons cell clear. #1=(a . #1#) cannot normally be printed as it is circular, the CDR of the cons cell defined by #1= is itself. may be written in a combination of the two  as for the list of three conses whose last cdr is (i.e., the list in fully specified form).

====List-processing procedures====
Lisp provides many built-in procedures for accessing and controlling lists. Lists can be created directly with the procedure, which takes any number of arguments, and returns the list of these arguments.

 (list 1 2 'a 3)
 ;Output: (1 2 a 3)

 (list 1 '(2 3) 4)
 ;Output: (1 (2 3) 4)

Because of the way that lists are constructed from cons pairs, the procedure can be used to add an element to the front of a list. Note that the procedure is asymmetric in how it handles list arguments, because of how lists are constructed.

 (cons 1 '(2 3))
 ;Output: (1 2 3)

 (cons '(1 2) '(3 4))
 ;Output: ((1 2) 3 4)

The procedure appends two (or more) lists to one another. Because Lisp lists are linked lists, appending two lists has asymptotic time complexity 

 (append '(1 2) '(3 4))
 ;Output: (1 2 3 4)

 (append '(1 2 3) '() '(a) '(5 6))
 ;Output: (1 2 3 a 5 6)

====Shared structure====
Lisp lists, being simple linked lists, can share structure with one another. That is to say, two lists can have the same tail, or final sequence of conses. For instance, after the execution of the following Common Lisp code:

(setf foo (list 'a 'b 'c))
(setf bar (cons 'x (cdr foo)))

the lists and are and respectively. However, the tail is the same structure in both lists. It is not a copy; the cons cells pointing to and are in the same memory locations for both lists.

Sharing structure rather than copying can give a dramatic performance improvement. However, this technique can interact in undesired ways with functions that alter lists passed to them as arguments. Altering one list, such as by replacing the with a , will affect the other:

 (setf (third foo) 'goose)

This changes to , but thereby also changes to  a possibly unexpected result. This can be a source of bugs, and functions which alter their arguments are documented as destructive for this very reason.

Aficionados of functional programming avoid destructive functions. In the Scheme dialect, which favors the functional style, the names of destructive functions are marked with a cautionary exclamation point, or "bang"such as (read set car bang), which replaces the car of a cons. In the Common Lisp dialect, destructive functions are commonplace; the equivalent of is named for "replace car." This function is rarely seen however as Common Lisp includes a special facility, , to make it easier to define and use destructive functions. A frequent style in Common Lisp is to write code functionally (without destructive calls) when prototyping, then to add destructive calls as an optimization where it is safe to do so.

===Self-evaluating forms and quoting===
Lisp evaluates expressions which are entered by the user. Symbols and lists evaluate to some other (usually, simpler) expression  for instance, a symbol evaluates to the value of the variable it names; evaluates to . However, most other forms evaluate to themselves: if you enter into Lisp, it returns .

Any expression can also be marked to prevent it from being evaluated (as is necessary for symbols and lists). This is the role of the special operator, or its abbreviation (a single quotation mark). For instance, usually if you enter the symbol you will get back the value of the corresponding variable (or an error, if there is no such variable). If you wish to refer to the literal symbol, you enter or, usually, .

Both Common Lisp and Scheme also support the backquote operator (known as quasiquote in Scheme), entered with the character (grave accent). This is almost the same as the plain quote, except it allows expressions to be evaluated and their values interpolated into a quoted list with the comma unquote and comma-at splice operators. If the variable has the value then evaluates to , while evaluates to . The backquote is most frequently used in defining macro expansions. Quasiquotation in Lisp, Alan Bawden 

Self-evaluating forms and quoted forms are Lisp's equivalent of literals. It may be possible to modify the values of (mutable) literals in program code. For instance, if a function returns a quoted form, and the code that calls the function modifies the form, this may alter the behavior of the function on subsequent iterations.

(defun should-be-constant ()
 '(one two three))

(let ((stuff (should-be-constant)))
 (setf (third stuff) 'bizarre)) ; bad!

(should-be-constant) ; returns (one two bizarre)

Modifying a quoted form like this is generally considered bad style, and is defined by ANSI Common Lisp as erroneous (resulting in "undefined" behavior in compiled files, because the file-compiler can coalesce similar constants, put them in write-protected memory, etc.).

Lisp's formalization of quotation has been noted by Douglas Hofstadter (in Gdel, Escher, Bach) and others as an example of the philosophical idea of self-reference.

===Scope and closure===
The modern Lisp family splits over the use of dynamic or static (aka lexical) scope. Clojure, Common Lisp and Scheme make use of static scoping by default, while Newlisp, Picolisp and the embedded languages in Emacs and AutoCAD use dynamic scoping.

===List structure of program code; exploitation by macros and compilers===
A fundamental distinction between Lisp and other languages is that in Lisp, the textual representation of a program is simply a human-readable description of the same internal data structures (linked lists, symbols, number, characters, etc.) as would be used by the underlying Lisp system.

Lisp uses this to implement a very powerful macro system. Like other macro languages such as C, a macro returns code that can then be compiled. However, unlike C macros, the macros are Lisp functions and so can exploit the full power of Lisp.

Further, because Lisp code has the same structure as lists, macros can be built with any of the list-processing functions in the language. In short, anything that Lisp can do to a data structure, Lisp macros can do to code. In contrast, in most other languages, the parser's output is purely internal to the language implementation and cannot be manipulated by the programmer.

This feature makes it easy to develop efficient languages within languages. For example, the Common Lisp Object System can be implemented cleanly as a language extension using macros. This means that if an application requires a different inheritance mechanism, it can use a different object system. This is in stark contrast to most other languages; for example, Java does not support multiple inheritance and there is no reasonable way to add it.

In simplistic Lisp implementations, this list structure is directly interpreted to run the program; a function is literally a piece of list structure which is traversed by the interpreter in executing it. However, most substantial Lisp systems also include a compiler. The compiler translates list structure into machine code or bytecode for execution. This code can run as fast as code compiled in conventional languages such as C.

Macros expand before the compilation step, and thus offer some interesting options. If a program needs a precomputed table, then a macro might create the table at compile time, so the compiler need only output the table and need not call code to create the table at run time. Some Lisp implementations even have a mechanism, eval-when, that allows code to be present during compile time (when a macro would need it), but not present in the emitted module. Time of Evaluation - Common Lisp Extensions. Gnu.org. Retrieved on 2013-07-17. 

===Evaluation and the readevalprint loop===
Lisp languages are frequently used with an interactive command line, which may be combined with an integrated development environment. The user types in expressions at the command line, or directs the IDE to transmit them to the Lisp system. Lisp reads the entered expressions, evaluates them, and prints the result. For this reason, the Lisp command line is called a "readevalprint loop", or REPL.

The basic operation of the REPL is as follows. This is a simplistic description which omits many elements of a real Lisp, such as quoting and macros.

The function accepts textual S-expressions as input, and parses them into an internal data structure. For instance, if you type the text at the prompt, translates this into a linked list with three elements: the symbol , the number 1, and the number 2. It so happens that this list is also a valid piece of Lisp code; that is, it can be evaluated. This is because the car of the list names a functionthe addition operation.

Note that a will be read as a single symbol. will be read as the number one hundred and twenty-three. will be read as the string "123".

The function evaluates the data, returning zero or more other Lisp data as a result. Evaluation does not have to mean interpretation; some Lisp systems compile every expression to native machine code. It is simple, however, to describe evaluation as interpretation: To evaluate a list whose car names a function, first evaluates each of the arguments given in its cdr, then applies the function to the arguments. In this case, the function is addition, and applying it to the argument list yields the answer . This is the result of the evaluation.

The symbol evaluates to the value of the symbol foo. Data like the string "123" evaluates to the same string. The list evaluates to the list (1 2 3).

It is the job of the function to represent output to the user. For a simple result such as this is trivial. An expression which evaluated to a piece of list structure would require that traverse the list and print it out as an S-expression.

To implement a Lisp REPL, it is necessary only to implement these three functions and an infinite-loop function. (Naturally, the implementation of will be complicated, since it must also implement all special operators like or .) This done, a basic REPL itself is but a single line of code: .

The Lisp REPL typically also provides input editing, an input history, error handling and an interface to the debugger.

Lisp is usually evaluated eagerly. In Common Lisp, arguments are evaluated in applicative order ('leftmost innermost'), while in Scheme order of arguments is undefined, leaving room for optimization by a compiler.

===Control structures===
Lisp originally had very few control structures, but many more were added during the language's evolution. (Lisp's original conditional operator, , is the precursor to later structures.)

Programmers in the Scheme dialect often express loops using tail recursion. Scheme's commonality in academic computer science has led some students to believe that tail recursion is the only, or the most common, way to write iterations in Lisp, but this is incorrect. All frequently seen Lisp dialects have imperative-style iteration constructs, from Scheme's loop to Common Lisp's complex expressions. Moreover, the key issue that makes this an objective rather than subjective matter is that Scheme makes specific requirements for the handling of tail calls, and consequently the reason that the use of tail recursion is generally encouraged for Scheme is that the practice is expressly supported by the language definition itself. By contrast, ANSI Common Lisp does not require 3.2.2.3 Semantic Constraints in Common Lisp HyperSpec the optimization commonly referred to as tail call elimination. Consequently, the fact that tail recursive style as a casual replacement for the use of more traditional iteration constructs (such as , or ) is discouraged 4.3. Control Abstraction (Recursion vs. Iteration) in Tutorial on Good Lisp Programming Style by Pitman and Norvig, August, 1993. in Common Lisp is not just a matter of stylistic preference, but potentially one of efficiency (since an apparent tail call in Common Lisp may not compile as a simple jump) and program correctness (since tail recursion may increase stack use in Common Lisp, risking stack overflow).

Some Lisp control structures are special operators, equivalent to other languages' syntactic keywords. Expressions using these operators have the same surface appearance as function calls, but differ in that the arguments are not necessarily evaluatedor, in the case of an iteration expression, may be evaluated more than once.

In contrast to most other major programming languages, Lisp allows the programmer to implement control structures using the language itself. Several control structures are implemented as Lisp macros, and can even be macro-expanded by the programmer who wants to know how they work.

Both Common Lisp and Scheme have operators for non-local control flow. The differences in these operators are some of the deepest differences between the two dialects. Scheme supports re-entrant continuations using the procedure, which allows a program to save (and later restore) a particular place in execution. Common Lisp does not support re-entrant continuations, but does support several ways of handling escape continuations.

Frequently, the same algorithm can be expressed in Lisp in either an imperative or a functional style. As noted above, Scheme tends to favor the functional style, using tail recursion and continuations to express control flow. However, imperative style is still quite possible. The style preferred by many Common Lisp programmers may seem more familiar to programmers used to structured languages such as C, while that preferred by Schemers more closely resembles pure-functional languages such as Haskell.

Because of Lisp's early heritage in list processing, it has a wide array of higher-order functions relating to iteration over sequences. In many cases where an explicit loop would be needed in other languages (like a loop in C) in Lisp the same task can be accomplished with a higher-order function. (The same is true of many functional programming languages.)

A good example is a function which in Scheme is called and in Common Lisp is called . Given a function and one or more lists, applies the function successively to the lists' elements in order, collecting the results in a new list:

 (mapcar #'+ '(1 2 3 4 5) '(10 20 30 40 50))

This applies the function to each corresponding pair of list elements, yielding the result .

==Examples==
Here are examples of Common Lisp code.

The basic "Hello world" program:

 (print "Hello world")

Lisp syntax lends itself naturally to recursion. Mathematical problems such as the enumeration of recursively defined sets are simple to express in this notation.

Evaluate a number's factorial:

 (defun factorial (n)
 (if (<= n 1)
 1
 (* n (factorial (- n 1)))))

An alternative implementation, often faster than the previous version if the Lisp system has tail recursion optimization:

 (defun factorial (n &optional (acc 1))
 (if (<= n 1)
 acc
 (factorial (- n 1) (* acc n))))

Contrast with an iterative version which uses Common Lisp's macro:

 (defun factorial (n)
 (loop for i from 1 to n
 for fac = 1 then (* fac i)
 finally (return fac)))

The following function reverses a list. (Lisp's built-in reverse function does the same thing.)

(defun -reverse (list)
 (let ((return-value '()))
 (dolist (e list) (push e return-value))
 return-value))

==Object systems==
Various object systems and models have been built on top of, alongside, or into Lisp, including:
*The Common Lisp Object System, CLOS, is an integral part of ANSI Common Lisp. CLOS descended from New Flavors and CommonLOOPS. ANSI Common Lisp was the first standardized object-oriented programming language (1994, ANSI X3J13).
*ObjectLisp pg 17 of Bobrow 1986 or Object Lisp, used by Lisp Machines Incorporated and early versions of Macintosh Common Lisp
*LOOPS (Lisp Object-Oriented Programming System) and the later CommonLOOPS
*Flavors, built at MIT, and its descendant New Flavors (developed by Symbolics).
*KR (short for Knowledge Representation), a constraints-based object system developed to aid the writing of Garnet, a GUI library for Common Lisp.
*KEE used an object system called UNITS and integrated it with an inference engine Veitch, p 108, 1988 and a truth maintenance system (ATMS).

==See also==
*Fexpr
*Maxima
*mod_lisp
*P convention
*Prolog

==References==

==Further reading==

*
*
*
*
*My Lisp Experiences and the Development of GNU Emacs, transcript of Richard Stallman's speech, 28 October 2002, at the International Lisp Conference
*
*
*

==External links==

;History
*History of Lisp  John McCarthy's history of 12 February 1979
*Lisp History  Herbert Stoyan's history compiled from the documents (acknowledged by McCarthy as more complete than his own, see: McCarthy's history links)
*History of LISP at the Computer History Museum

;Associations and meetings
*Association of Lisp Users
*European Common Lisp Meeting
*European Lisp Symposium
*International Lisp Conference

; Books and tutorials
*Casting SPELs in Lisp, a comic-book style introductory tutorial
*On Lisp, a free book by Paul Graham
*Practical Common Lisp, freeware edition by Peter Seibel
* Lisp for the web
* Land of Lisp
* Let over Lambda

; Interviews
*Oral history interview with John McCarthy at Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis. McCarthy discusses his role in the development of time-sharing at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He also describes his work in artificial intelligence (AI) funded by the Advanced Research Projects Agency, including logic-based AI (LISP) and robotics.
*Interview with Richard P. Gabriel (Podcast)

;Resources
*CLiki: the common lisp wiki
*Common Lisp directory
*Lisp FAQ Index
*lisppaste
*Planet Lisp
*Weekly Lisp News
*



[[List of logarithmic identities]]

In mathematics, there are several logarithmic identities.

== Algebraic identities or laws ==

=== Trivial identities ===

 because , given that b>0 
 because 

Note that logb(0) is undefined because there is no number x such that b'x = 0. In fact, there is a vertical asymptote on the graph of logb(x) at x = 0.

=== Canceling exponentials ===
Logarithms and exponentials (antilogarithms) with the same base cancel each other. This is true because logarithms and exponentials are inverse operations (just like multiplication and division or addition and subtraction).

: 

: 

Both of the above are derived from the following two equations that define a logarithm:-

: 

Substituting c in the left equation gives blogb(x) = x, and substituting x in the right gives logb(bc) = c. Finally, replace c by x.

=== Using simpler operations ===
Logarithms can be used to make calculations easier. For example, two numbers can be multiplied just by using a logarithm table and adding. The first three operations below assume x = bc, and/or y = bd so that logb(x) = c and logb(y) = d. Derivations also use the log definitions x = blogb(x) and x = logb(bx).

 because 
 because 
 because 
 because 
 because 
 because 

Where , , and are positive real numbers and . Both and are real numbers.

The laws result from canceling exponentials and appropriate law of indices. Starting with the first law:

The law for powers exploits another of the laws of indices:

The law relating to quotients then follows:

Similarly, the root law is derived by rewriting the root as a reciprocal power:

=== Changing the base ===
:

This identity is useful to evaluate logarithms on calculators. For instance, most calculators have buttons for ln and for log10, but not for log2. To find log2(3), one could calculate log10(3) / log10(2) (or ln(3)/ln(2), which yields the same result).

==== Proof ====

:Let .

:Then .

:Take on both sides: 

:Simplify and solve for : 

:

:Since , then 

This formula has several consequences:

:

:

:

:

:

where is any permutation of the subscripts 1, ..., n. For example

:

=== Summation/subtraction ===
The following summation/subtraction rule is especially useful in probability theory when one is dealing with a sum of log-probabilities:
:

:

which gives the special cases:

:

:

Note that in practice and have to be switched on the right hand side of the equations if . Also note that the subtraction identity is not defined if since the logarithm of zero is not defined.

More generally:
:

where .

=== Exponents ===
A useful identity involving exponents:
:

== Calculus identities ==

=== Limits ===
:

:

:

:

:

:

The last limit is often summarized as "logarithms grow more slowly than any power or root of x".

=== Derivatives of logarithmic functions ===
:
:
Where , , and .

=== Integral definition ===
:

=== Integrals of logarithmic functions ===
: 

To remember higher integrals, it's convenient to define:
:
Where is the nth Harmonic number.

:
:
:
:

Then,
:
:

== Approximating large numbers ==

The identities of logarithms can be used to approximate large numbers. Note that logb(a) + logb(c) = logb(ac), where a, b, and c are arbitrary constants. Suppose that one wants to approximate the 44th Mersenne prime, 232,582,657 &minus; 1. To get the base-10 logarithm, we would multiply 32,582,657 by log10(2), getting 9,808,357.09543 = 9,808,357 + 0.09543. We can then get 109,808,357 &times; 100.09543  1.25 &times; 109,808,357.

Similarly, factorials can be approximated by summing the logarithms of the terms.

== Complex logarithm identities ==

The complex logarithm is the complex number analogue of the logarithm function. No single valued function on the complex plane can satisfy the normal rules for logarithms. However a multivalued function can be defined which satisfies most of the identities. It is usual to consider this as a function defined on a Riemann surface. A single valued version called the principal value of the logarithm can be defined which is discontinuous on the negative x axis and equals the multivalued version on a single branch cut.

=== Definitions ===

The convention will be used here that a capital first letter is used for the principal value of functions and the lower case version refers to the multivalued function. The single valued version of definitions and identities is always given first followed by a separate section for the multiple valued versions.

:ln(r) is the standard natural logarithm of the real number r.
:Log(z) is the principal value of the complex logarithm function and has imaginary part in the range (-, ].
:Arg(z) is the principal value of the arg function, its value is restricted to (-, ]. It can be computed using Arg(x+iy)= atan2(y, x).

:
:

The multiple valued version of log(z) is a set but it is easier to write it without braces and using it in formulas follows obvious rules.

:log(z) is the set of complex numbers v which satisfy ev = z
:arg(z) is the set of possible values of the arg function applied to z.

When k is any integer:

:
:
:

=== Constants ===

Principal value forms:

:
:

Multiple value forms, for any k an integer:

:
:

=== Summation ===

Principal value forms:

:
:

Multiple value forms:

:
:

=== Powers ===

A complex power of a complex number can have many possible values.

Principal value form:

:

:

Multiple value forms:

:

Where k1, k2 are any integers:

:
:

== See also ==
* List of trigonometric identities
* Exponential function

== References ==

== External links ==
* 
* Logarithm in Mathwords



[[Lost city]]

Ruins of Ciudad Perdida, a city built by the Tayrona in the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta, Colombia
Lost city is a term that can be used to a human settlement that which fell into terminal decline, became extensively or completely uninhabited. The location of many of these cities had been forgotten, but some have been rediscovered and studied extensively by scientists. Recently abandoned cities or cities whose location was never in question might be referred to as ruins or ghost towns. The search for such lost cities by European explorers and adventurers in the Americas, Africa and in Southeast Asia from the 15th century onwards eventually led to the development of archaeology. History of Archaeology 

Lost cities generally fall into two broad categories: those where no knowledge of the city existed until the time of its rediscovery, and those where location has been lost but knowledge of its existence has been retained in myths, legends, or historical records.

==How cities are lost==

Cities may become lost for a variety of reasons including natural disasters, economic or social upheaval, or war.

The Incan capital city of Vilcabamba was destroyed and depopulated during the Spanish conquest of Peru in 1572. The Spanish did not rebuild the city and the location went unrecorded and was forgotten until it was rediscovered through a detailed examination of period letters and documents.

Troy was a city located in northwest Anatolia in what is now Turkey. It is best known for being the focus of the Trojan War described in the Greek Epic Cycle and especially in the Iliad, one of the two epic poems attributed to Homer. Repeatedly destroyed and rebuilt, the city slowly declined and was abandoned in the Byzantine era. Buried by time, the city was consigned to the realm of legend until the location was first excavated in the 1860s.

Other settlements are lost with few or no clues to their decline. Malden Island, in the central Pacific, was deserted when first visited by Europeans in 1825, but the unsuspected presence of ruined temples and the remains of other structures found on the island indicate that a population of Polynesians had lived there for perhaps several generations some centuries earlier. Prolonged drought seems the most likely explanation for their demise and the remote nature of the island meant few visitors.

==Rediscovery==

With the development of archaeology and the application of modern techniques, many previously lost cities have been rediscovered.

Machu Picchu is a pre-Columbian Inca site situated on a mountain ridge above the Urubamba Valley in Peru. Often referred to as the "Lost City of the Incas", it is perhaps the most familiar icon of the Inca World. Machu Picchu was built around 1450, at the height of the Inca Empire. It was abandoned just over 100 years later, in 1572, as a belated result of the Spanish Conquest. It is possible that most of its inhabitants died from smallpox introduced by travelers before the Spanish conquistadors arrived in the area. In 1911, Melchor Arteaga led the explorer Hiram Bingham to Machu Picchu, which had been largely forgotten by everybody except the small number of people living in the immediate valley.

Helike was an ancient Greek city that sank at night in the winter of 373 BCE. The city was located in Achaea, Northern Peloponnesos, two kilometres (12 stadia) from the Corinthian Gulf. The city was thought to be legend until 2001, when it was rediscovered in the Helike Delta. In 1988, the Greek archaeologist Dora Katsonopoulou launched the Helike Project to locate the site of the lost city. In 1994 in collaboration with the University of Patras, a magnetometer survey was carried out in the midplain of the delta, which revealed the outlines of a buried building. In 1995 this target was excavated (now known as the Klonis site) and a large Roman building with standing walls was brought to light. The city was rediscovered in 2001 buried in an ancient lagoon.

==Legends==

Some cities which are considered lost are (or may be) places of legend.

*Arthurian Camelot
*Kitezh, Russia - Legendary underwater city which supposedly may be seen in good weather.
*Lyonesse
*Ys - Legendary city on the western coast of France.
*The Seven Cities of Gold
*Shambhala
*El Dorado
*Atlantis
*Vineta  Legendary city somewhere at the Baltic coast of Germany or Poland.
*Ciudad de los Cesares - City of the Caesars, A legendary city in Patagonia, never found. Also variously known as City of the Patagonia, Wandering City, Trapalanda or Trapananda, Lin Lin or Eleln.
*Paititi  A legendary city and refuge in the rainforests where Peru, Bolivia and Brazil meet. Ancient "Lost City" Discovered in Peru, Official Claims 
*Otuken - legendary capital city of Gokturks in Turkic mythology.
*Ai - important city in the Hebrew Bible.
*Sodom and Gomorrah
*Iram of the Pillars  this may refer to a lost Arabian city in the Empty Quarter but sources also identify it as a tribe or an area mentioned in the Quran. 
*Lost City of Z - A city allegedly located in the jungles of the Mato Grosso region of Brazil, was said to have been seen by the British explorer Col. Percy Harrison Fawcett sometime prior to World War I. Lost cities of the Amazon revealed, msnbc.com 
*Aztln- the ancestral homeland in Aztec mythology

Others, such as Troy and Bjarmaland, having once been considered legendary, are now known to have existed.

==Lost cities by continent==

===Africa===
Rediscovered
*Akhetaten, Egypt  Capital during the reign of 18th Dynasty pharaoh Akhenaten. Later abandoned and almost totally destroyed. Modern day el Amarna.
*Canopus, Egypt  Located on the now-dry Canopic branch of the Nile, east of Alexandria.
*Tanis, Egypt  Capital during the 21st and 22nd Dynasties, in the Delta region.
*Memphis, Egypt  Administrative capital of ancient Egypt. Little remains. Now a UNESCO World Heritage site.
*Avaris, capital city of the Hyksos in the Nile Delta.
*Leptis Magna  Roman city located in present day Libya. It was the birthplace of Emperor Septimius Severus, who lavished an extensive public works programme on the city, including diverting the course of a nearby river. The river later returned to its original course, burying much of the city in silt and sand. Now a UNESCO World Heritage site.
*Dougga, Tunisia  Roman city located in present day Tunisia. Now a UNESCO World Heritage site.
*Carthage  Initially a Phoenician city, destroyed and then rebuilt by Rome. Later served as the capital of the Vandal Kingdom of North Africa, before being destroyed by the Arabs after its capture in 697 CE. Now a UNESCO World Heritage site.
*Great Zimbabwe Built between the 11th and the 14th century, this city is the namesake of modern day Zimbabwe. Now a UNESCO World Heritage site.
*Aoudaghost, Mauritania Wealthy Berber city in medieval Ghana.
*Timgad, Algeria - Roman city founded by the emperor Trajan around 100 CE, covered by the sand at 7th century. Now a UNESCO World Heritage site.
*Pi-Ramesses, Egypt  Imperial city of Rameses the Great, now thought to exist beneath Quantir

Uncertain or Disputed
*Nabta Playaoldest city in Africa.
*Lost City of the Kalahari - possibly invented

Undiscovered
*Itjtawy, Egypt  Capital during the 12th Dynasty. Exact location still unknown, but it is believed to lie near the modern town of el-Lisht.
*Thinis, Egypt  Undiscovered city and centre of the Thinite Confederacy, the leader of which, Menes, united Upper and Lower Egypt and was the first pharaoh.

===Asia===

====Far East Asia====
Rediscovered
*Xanadu  China Now a UNESCO World Heritage site.

Uncertain or Disputed
*Yamatai  Japan

====Southeast Asia====
Rediscovered
*Sukhothai - Now a UNESCO World Heritage site.
*Ayutthaya - Now a UNESCO World Heritage site.
*Angkor and surroundings. Metropolis: Angkor, the world's first mega-city - Now a UNESCO World Heritage site.
*Mahendraparvata
*Kota Gelanggi - Malaysia (Malay Archipelago)

Undiscovered
*Gangga Negara - Malaysia (Malay Archipelago)

Status Unknown
*Kembayat Negara  Champa/Vietnam/Cambodia

====South Asia====

=====India=====
Rediscovered
*Dholavira - Located in Gujarat, India. Indus Valley Civilization city
*Vijayanagar  Located in Karnataka, India. Now a UNESCO World Heritage site.
*Poompuhar  Located in Tamil Nadu, South India
*Lothal  Located in Gujarat, India - early city of the Indus Valley Civilization
*Kalibangan  Located in Rajasthan, India - early city of the Indus Valley Civilization
*Surkotada  Located in Gujarat, India - early city of the Indus Valley Civilization
*Dwarka  ancient seat of Krishna, hero of the Mahabharata. Now largely excavated. Off the coast of the Indian state of Gujarat
*Pattadakal  Located in Karnataka, South India. Now a UNESCO World Heritage site.
*Vasai-Located in India, former capital (1533-1740) of the Northern Provinces of Portuguese India

Undiscovered
*Muziris  Located near Cranganore, Kerala, southern India

=====Pakistan=====
Rediscovered
*Mohenjo-Daro  Located in Pakistan Sindh  early city of the Indus Valley Civilization, the city was one of the early urban settlements in the world. Now a UNESCO World Heritage site.
*Harappa  Located in Punjab, Pakistan - early city of the Indus Valley Civilization
*Taxila  Located in Pakistan's Punjab province
*Mehrgarh  Located in Pakistan's Baluchistan province Indus Valley Civilization city
*Kot Diji  Located in Pakistan's Sindh province Indus Valley Civilization city

=====Sri Lanka=====
Rediscovered
*Anuradhapura  Now a UNESCO World Heritage site.
*Sigiriya  Now a UNESCO World Heritage site.

====Central Asia====
Rediscovered
*Niya  Located in the Taklamakan Desert, on the ancient Silk Road route.
*Loulan  Located in the Taklamakan Desert, on the ancient Silk Road route.
*Subashi  Located in the Taklamakan Desert, on the ancient Silk Road route. Lost Cities of the Silk Road 
*Otrar  City located along the Silk Road, important in the history of Central Asia.
*Karakorum  Capital of Genghis Khan.
*Old Urgench  capitol of Khwarezm. Now a UNESCO World Heritage site.
*Mangazeya, Siberia
*Sarai - Capital of the Golden Horde

Undiscovered
*Abaskun  Medieval Caspian Sea trading port
*Atil, Tmutarakan, Sarai Berke  Capitals of the steppe peoples.
*Balanjar - Earlier Khazar capital
*Turquoise Mountain - Capital of Afghanistan, destroyed 1220

====Western Asia/Middle East====
Rediscovered
*Ani  Medieval Armenian capital, located in Turkish side of Armenia-Turkey border.
*Antioch - Ancient Greek city, important stronghold in time of Crusades.
*Babylon
*atalhyk  A Neolithic and Chalcolithic settlement, located near the modern city of Konya, Turkey.
*Choqa Zanbil
*Ctesiphon
*Gobekli Tepe
*Kourion, Cyprus
*Hattusa  Capital of the Hittite Empire. Located near the modern village of Boazky in north-central Turkey.
*Kish
*Lagash
*Mada'in Saleh (and capitol Petra) - Now a UNESCO World Heritage site.
*Nineveh
*Persepolis
*Samaria
*Troy
*Ur

Undiscovered
*Akkad
*Dilmun

Status Unknown
*Narbata - Hebrew : . Jewish city in The Great Revolt.

===South America===

====Inca cities====
Rediscovered
*Machu Picchu  Possibly Pachacuti's Family Palace. Now a UNESCO World Heritage site.
*Vilcabamba  Currently known as Espiritu pampa.
*Choquequirao - Considered to be the last bastion of Incan resistance against the Spaniards and refuge of Manco Inca Yupanqui.

====Other====
Rediscovered
*Chan Chan  Chimu. Located near Trujillo, in present day Peru. Now a UNESCO World Heritage site.
*Tiahuanaco  pre-Inca. Located in present day Bolivia. Now a UNESCO World Heritage site.
*Cahuachi  Nazca, in present day Peru.
*Caral  An important center of the Norte Chico civilization, in present day Peru. Now a UNESCO World Heritage site.
*Kuelap - A massive ruined city still covered in jungle that was the capital of the Chachapoyas culture in Northern Peru. Amazon jungle gives up lost city of the 'Cloud People', News.com.au 
*Teyuna (Ciudad Perdida) located in present day Colombia

Status Unknown
*Santa Maria de la Antigua del Darien  First city in the mainland of the American continent, in the Darin region between Colombia and Panama. Founded by Vasco Nuez de Balboa in 1510.

===North America===

====Caribbean====
Rediscovered
*Port Royal, Jamaica  Destroyed by earthquake in 1692.

====Mexico and Central America====

=====Maya cities=====
incomplete list  for further information, see Maya civilization

Rediscovered
*Chichen Itza  This ancient place of pilgrimage is still the most visited Maya ruin. Now a UNESCO World Heritage site.
*Copn  In modern Honduras. Now a UNESCO World Heritage site.
*Calakmul  One of two "superpowers" in the classic Maya period. Now a UNESCO World Heritage site.
*Coba
*Naachtun  Rediscovered in 1922, it remains one of the most remote and least visited Maya sites. Located 44 km south-south-east of Calakmul, and 65 km north of Tikal, it is believed to have had strategic importance to, and been vulnerable to military attacks by, both neighbours. Its ancient name was identified in the mid-1990s as Masuul.
*Palenque  in the Mexican state of Chiapas, known for its beautiful art and architecture. Now a UNESCO World Heritage site.
*Tikal  One of two "superpowers" in the classic Maya period. Now a UNESCO World Heritage site.
*Tulum - Mayan coastal city.

=====Aztec Cities=====
Rediscovered
*Teotihuacan  Pre-Aztec Mexico. Teotihuacan, The Metropolitan Museum of Art Now a UNESCO World Heritage site.

=====Olmec cities=====
Rediscovered
*La Venta  In the present day Mexican state of Tabasco.
*San Lorenzo Tenochtitln  In the present day Mexican state of Veracruz.

=====Other=====
Rediscovered
*Hueyatlaco - Oldest city in Mexico.
*Izapa  Chief city of the Izapa civilization, whose territory extended from the Gulf Coast across to the Pacific Coast of Chiapas, in present day Mexico, and Guatemala.
*Guayabo  It is believed that the site was inhabited from 1500 BCE to 1400 CE, and had at its peak a population of around 10,000.

====United States====
Rediscovered
*The cities of the Ancestral Pueblo (or Anasazi) culture, located in the Four Corners region of the Southwest United States  The best known are located at Chaco Canyon and Mesa Verde.
*Cahokia  Located near present-day St. Louis, Missouri. At its height Cahokia is believed to have had a population of between 40,000 and 80,000 people, making it amongst the largest pre-Columbian cities of the Americas. It is known chiefly for its huge pyramidal mounds of compacted earth. Now a UNESCO World Heritage site.
*Bethel Indian Town, New Jersey - Lenape settlement which has disappeared as the Lenape migrated west.
*Pueblo Grande de Nevada a complex of villages, located near Overton, Nevada
*Roanoke Colony

====Canada====
Rediscovered
*L'Anse aux Meadows  Viking settlement founded around 1000. Now a UNESCO World Heritage site.
*Lost Villages - The Lost Villages are ten communities (Aultsville, Dickinson's Landing, Farran's Point, Maple Grove, Mille Roches, Moulinette, Santa Cruz, Sheek's Island, Wales, Woodlands) in the Canadian province of Ontario, in the former townships of Cornwall and Osnabruck (now South Stormont) near Cornwall, which were permanently submerged by the creation of the St. Lawrence Seaway in 1958.

===Europe===

====Bosnia and Herzegovina====
*Daorson - the capital of ancient Hellenic community in present-day Bosnia and Herzegovina.

====Bulgaria====
*Perperikon in Bulgaria - The megalith complex had been laid in ruins and re-erected many times in history - from the Bronze Age until Middle Ages.
*Seuthopolis, Bulgaria - an ancient Thracian city, discovered and excavated in 1948. It was founded by king Seuthes III around 325 BC. Its ruins are now located at the bottom of the Koprinka Reservoir near the city of Kazanlak.

====Denmark====
*Niedam near Rungholt

====Finland====
*Telj, Finland

====Germany====
*Damasia  Sank into the Ammersee, Germany.
*Hedeby, Germany
*Rungholt  Wadden Sea in Germany, sunken during the "grote Mandraenke", a storm surge in the North Sea on January 16, 1362

====Greece====
*Akrotiri  On the island of Thera, Greece.
*Chryse Island in the Aegean, reputed site of an ancient temple still visible on the sea floor.
*Helike, Greece on the Peloponese  Sunk by an earthquake in the 4th century BC and rediscovered in the 1990s.
*Mycenae, Greece

====Hungary====
*Avar Ring, Hungary - Central stronghold of the Avars, it is believed to have been in the wide plain between the Danube and the Tisza. Charlemagne and the Avars 

====Italy====
*Luni, Italy
*Paestum - Greek and Roman city south of Naples, abandoned due to climate change. Three famous Greek temples.
*Pompeii, Herculaneum and Stabia in Italy - buried by the eruption of Vesuvius in 79 AD and rediscovered in the 18th century
*Sybaris, Italy - Ancient Greek colonial city of unsurpassed wealth utterly destroyed by its arch-rival Crotona in 510 BC.

====Netherlands====
*Dorestad, Netherlands
*Reimerswaal, Netherlands - flooded in the 16th century.
*Saeftinghe, Netherlands - prosperous city lost to the sea in 1584.

====Norway====
*Kaupang - In Viksfjord near Larvik, Norway. Largest trading city around the Oslo Fjord during the Viking age. As sea levels retreated (the shoreline is 7m lower today than in 1000) the city was no longer accessible from the ocean and was abandoned.

====Poland====
*Biskupin, Poland

====Romania====
*Sarmizegetusa Regia, Romania - The capital city of Dacia.
*Vicina, a port on the Danube, near the Delta.

====Serbia====
*Stari Ras, Serbia - one of the first capitals of the medieval Serbian state of Raka, abandoned in the 13th 

====Slovakia====
*Myia Hrka (near Spisk tvrtok), Slovakia - 3500 years old town (rediscovered in the 20th century) and archaeological site, complex is called also Slovak Mycenae.

====Spain====
*Amaya  mentioned by Barro, it was either the capital or one of the most important cities of the Cantabri. Probably located in what nowadays is called "Amaya Peak" in Burgos, northern Spain.
*Cypsela, drowned Ibero-Greek settlement in the Catalan shore, Spain. Mentioned by Greek, Roman and Medieval chroniclers.
*Reccopolis, Spain - One of the capital cities founded in Hispania by the Visigoths. the site was incrementally abandoned in the 10th century.
*Tartessos, Spain- A harbor city or an economical complex of small harbors and trade routes set on the mouth of the Guadalquivir river, in modern Andalusia, Spain. Tartessos is believed to be either the seat of an independent kingdom or a community of palacial cities devoted to exporting the mineral resources of the Hispanic mainland to the sea, to meet the Phoenician and Greek traders. Its destruction is still a matter of debate among historians, and one modern tendency tends to believe that Tartessos was never a city, but a culture complex.

====Sweden====
*Birka, Sweden
*Ny Varberg, Sweden
*Uppkra, Sweden

====United Kingdom====
*Calleva Atrebatum, Silchester, England - Large Romano-British walled city 10 mi south of present day Reading, Berkshire. Just the walls remain and a street pattern can be discerned from the air.
*Dunwich, England  Lost to coastal erosion.
*Evonium, Scotland - purported coronation site and capital of 40 kings
*Hampton-on-Sea, England  A drowned and abandoned village in what is now the Hampton area of Herne Bay, Kent.
*Nant Gwrtheyrn former village on the North Welsh coast, abandoned after its quarry closed. Now regenerated as a language centre.
*Old Sarum, England  population moved to nearby Salisbury although the owners of the archaeological site retained the right to elect a Member of Parliament to represent Old Sarum until the 19th century (see William Pitt).
*Roxburgh, Scotland - abandoned in the 15th century
*Selsey, England - mostly abandoned to coastal erosion after 1043.
*Skara Brae, Orkney, Scotland - Neolithic settlement buried under sediment. Uncovered by a winter storm in 1850.
*Trellech, Wales
*Winchelsea, East Sussex - Old Winchelsea, Important Channel port, pop 4000+, abandoned after 1287 inundation and coastal erosion. Modern Winchelsea, 2 mi inland, was built to replace it as a planned town by Edward I of England

====Ukraine====
*Bolokhiv, Ukraine abandoned in the 13th century.

====Unknown====
*Acerrae Vatriae  a town of the Sarranates mentioned by Pliny the elder as having been situated in an unknown location in Umbria.

==See also==
*Ghost town
*Lost lands
*Lost World (disambiguation)
*Mythical continents
*Mythical place
*Ruins

==References==

 

[[Louis Agassiz]]

Louis Agassiz (, in English), May 28, 1807  December 14, 1873, was a Swiss-born and European-trained biologist and geologist recognized as an innovative and prodigious scholar of Earth's natural history, with later American writings that have received scrutiny because of particular racial themes. Agassiz grew up in Switzerland, and studied and received Doctor of Philosophy and medical degrees at Erlangen and Munich, respectively. After further studies with Cuvier and von Humboldt in Paris, Agassiz proceeded with research leading to his appointment as professor of natural history at University of Neuchtel. After a visiting Harvard University mid-career, he emigrated to the U.S. in 1847 and became a professor of zoology and geology at Harvard, and to head its Lawrence Scientific School and found its Museum of Comparative Zoology. Agassiz made extensive contributions to ichthyological classification (including of extinct species) and to the study of geological history (including to the founding of glaciology), and has become broadly known through student descriptions a thorough regimen of observational data gathering and analysis. The legacy of his prodigious institutional and scientific contributions to zoology, geology, and related areasincluding many multivolume research series running to thousands of pageshas had recent competition from evidence of his resistance to theories of Darwinian evolution, and extensive later writings on polygenism.

==Early life==

Louis Agassiz was born in Mtier (now part of Haut-Vully) in the canton of Fribourg, Switzerland. Educated first at home, then spending four years of secondary school in Bienne, he completed his elementary studies in Lausanne. Having adopted medicine as his profession, he studied successively at the universities of Zrich, Heidelberg and Munich; while there he extended his knowledge of natural history, especially of botany. In 1829 he received the degree of Doctor of Philosophy at Erlangen, and in 1830 that of doctor of medicine at Munich. Moving to Paris he fell under the tutelage of Alexander von Humboldt and Georges Cuvier, who launched him on his careers of geology and zoology respectively. Previously he had not paid special attention to the study of ichthyology, but it soon became the focus of his life's work.

==Work==

Agassiz in 1870

In 18191820, Johann Baptist von Spix and Carl Friedrich Philipp von Martius were engaged in an expedition to Brazil, and on their return to Europe, amongst other collections of natural objects they brought home an important set of the fresh water fish of Brazil, and especially of the Amazon River. Spix, who died in 1826, did not live long enough to work out the history of these fish, and Agassiz (though fresh out of school) was selected by Martius for this purpose. He at once threw himself into the work with an enthusiasm which characterized him to the end of his busy life. The task of describing the Brazilian fish was completed and published in 1829. This was followed by research into the history of the fish found in Lake Neuchtel. Enlarging his plans, in 1830 he issued a prospectus of a History of the Freshwater Fish of Central Europe. It was only in 1839, however, that the first part of this publication appeared, and it was completed in 1842.

In 1832 he was appointed professor of natural history in the University of Neuchtel. The fossil fish there soon attracted his attention. The fossil-rich stones furnished by the slates of Glarus and the limestones of Monte Bolca were known at the time, but very little had been accomplished in the way of scientific study of them. Agassiz, as early as 1829, planned the publication of the work which, more than any other, laid the foundation of his worldwide fame. Five volumes of his Recherches sur les poissons fossiles ("Research on Fossil Fish") appeared at intervals from 1833 to 1843. They were magnificently illustrated, chiefly by Joseph Dinkel. In gathering materials for this work Agassiz visited the principal museums in Europe, and meeting Cuvier in Paris, he received much encouragement and assistance from him. They had known him for seven years at the time.

Agassiz found that his palaeontological labors made necessary a new basis of ichthyological classification. The fossils rarely exhibited any traces of the soft tissues of fish. They consisted chiefly of the teeth, scales and fins, even the bones being perfectly preserved in comparatively few instances. He therefore adopted a classification which divided fish into four groups: Ganoids, Placoids, Cycloids and Ctenoids, based on the nature of the scales and other dermal appendages. While Agassiz did much to place the subject on a scientific basis, this classification has been superseded by later work.

As Agassiz's descriptive work proceeded, it became obvious that it would over-tax his resources unless financial assistance could be found. The British Association came to his aid, and the Earl of Ellesmerethen Lord Francis Egertongave him yet more efficient help. The 1,290 original drawings made for the work were purchased by the Earl, and presented by him to the Geological Society of London. In 1836 the Wollaston Medal was awarded to Agassiz by the council of that society for his work on fossil ichthyology; and in 1838 he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Society. Meanwhile invertebrate animals engaged his attention. In 1837 he issued the "Prodrome" of a monograph on the recent and fossil Echinodermata, the first part of which appeared in 1838; in 183940 he published two quarto volumes on the fossil Echinoderms of Switzerland; and in 184045 he issued his Etudes critiques sur les mollusques fossiles ("Critical Studies on Fossil Mollusks").

Before his first visit to England in 1834, the labours of Hugh Miller and other geologists brought to light the remarkable fish of the Old Red Sandstone of the northeast of Scotland. The strange forms of the Pterichthys, the Coccosteus and other genera were then made known to geologists for the first time. They were of intense interest to Agassiz, and formed the subject of a special monograph by him published in 184445: Monographie des poissons fossiles du Vieux Gres Rouge, ou Systeme Devonien (Old Red Sandstone) des Iles Britanniques et de Russie ("Monograph on Fossil Fish of the Old Red Sandstone, or Devonian System of the British Isles and of Russia"). In the early stages of his career in Neuchatel, Agassiz also made a name for himself as a man who could run a scientific department well. Under his care, the University of Neuchtel soon became a leading institution for scientific inquiry.

Louis Agassiz
He was the only person to name a species after Mary Anning during her lifetime. She was a paleontologist who was known around the world for important finds, but because of her gender, usually omitted from formal recognition for her work. In the early 1840s he named two fossil fish species after herAcrodus anningiae, and Belenostomus anningiaeand another after her friend, Elizabeth Philpot. Agassiz was grateful for the help the women had given him in examining fossil fish specimens during his visit to Lyme Regis in 1834. 

==Ice age==
In 1837 Agassiz was the first to scientifically propose that the Earth had been subject to a past ice age. E.P. Evans: "The Authorship of the Glacial Theory", North American review Volume 145, Issue 368, July 1887. Accessed on February 25, 2008. In the same year, he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. Prior to this proposal, Goethe, de Saussure, Venetz, Jean de Charpentier, Karl Friedrich Schimper and others had made the glaciers of the Alps the subjects of special study, and Goethe, Charpentier as well as Schimper had even arrived at the conclusion that the erratic blocks of alpine rocks scattered over the slopes and summits of the Jura Mountains had been moved there by glaciers. The question having attracted the attention of Agassiz, he not only discussed it with Charpentier and Schimper and made successive journeys to the alpine regions in company with them, but he had a hut constructed upon one of the Aar Glaciers, which for a time he made his home, in order to investigate the structure and movements of the ice.

These labours resulted, in 1840, in the publication of his work in two volumes entitled Etudes sur les glaciers ("Studies on Glaciers"). Louis Agassiz: tudes sur les glaciers, Neuchtel 1840. Digital book on Wikisource. Accessed on February 25, 2008. In it he discussed the movements of the glaciers, their moraines, their influence in grooving and rounding the rocks over which they travelled, and in producing the striations and roches moutonnees seen in Alpine-style landscapes. He not only accepted Charpentier's and Schimper's idea that some of the alpine glaciers had extended across the wide plains and valleys drained by the Aar and the Rhne, but he went still farther. He concluded that, in the relatively recent past, Switzerland had been another Greenland; that instead of a few glaciers stretching across the areas referred to, one vast sheet of ice, originating in the higher Alps, had extended over the entire valley of northwestern Switzerland until it reached the southern slopes of the Jura, which, though they checked and deflected its further extension, did not prevent the ice from reaching in many places the summit of the range. The publication of this work gave a fresh impetus to the study of glacial phenomena in all parts of the world.

Thus familiarized with the phenomena associated with the movements of recent glaciers, Agassiz was prepared for a discovery which he made in 1840, in conjunction with William Buckland. The two visited the mountains of Scotland together, and found in different locations clear evidence of ancient glacial action. The discovery was announced to the Geological Society of London in successive communications. The mountainous districts of England, Wales, and Ireland were also considered to constitute centres for the dispersion of glacial debris; and Agassiz remarked "that great sheets of ice, resembling those now existing in Greenland, once covered all the countries in which unstratified gravel (boulder drift) is found; that this gravel was in general produced by the trituration of the sheets of ice upon the subjacent surface, etc."
The man-sized iron auger used by Agassiz to drill up to 7.5 metres deep into the Unteraar Glacier to take its temperature.

==United States==
In 18421846 he issued his Nomenclator Zoologicus, a classified list, with references, of all names employed in zoology for genera and groups  a work of great labour and research. With the aid of a grant of money from the King of Prussia, Agassiz crossed the Atlantic in the autumn of 1846 with the twin purposes of investigating the natural history and geology of North America and delivering a course of 12 lectures on The Plan of Creation as shown in the Animal Kingdom, Smith, p. 52. by invitation from J. A. Lowell, at the Lowell Institute in Boston, Massachusetts. The financial offers presented to him in the United States induced him to settle there, where he remained to the end of his life. He was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1846. 

His engagement for the Lowell Institute lectures precipitated the establishment of the Lawrence Scientific School at Harvard University in 1847 with him as its head. Smith (1898), pp. 3941. Harvard appointed him professor of zoology and geology, and he founded the Museum of Comparative Zoology there in 1859 serving as the museum's first director until his death in 1873. During his tenure at Harvard, he was, among many other things, an early student of the effect of the last Ice Age on North America.

He continued his lectures for the Lowell Institute. In succeeding years, he gave series of lectures on Ichthyology (184748 season), "Comparative Embryology" (184849), "Functions of Life in Lower Animals" (185051), "Natural History" (185354), "Methods of Study in Natural History" (186162), "Glaciers and the Ice Period" (186465), "Brazil" (186667) and "Deep Sea Dredging" (186970). Smith (1898), pp. 5266. In 1850 he married an American college teacher, Elizabeth Cabot Cary, who later wrote introductory books about natural history and, after his death, a lengthy biography of her husband.

Agassiz served as a non-resident lecturer at Cornell University while also being on faculty at Harvard. A History of Cornell by Morris Bishop (1962), p. 83. In 1852 he accepted a medical professorship of comparative anatomy at Charlestown, Massachusetts, but he resigned in two years. From this time his scientific studies dropped off, but he was a profound influence on the American branches of his two fields, teaching decades worth of future prominent scientists, including Alpheus Hyatt, David Starr Jordan, Joel Asaph Allen, Joseph Le Conte, Ernest Ingersoll, William James, Nathaniel Shaler, Samuel Hubbard Scudder, Alpheus Packard, and his son Alexander Emanuel Agassiz, among others. He had a profound impact on the paleontologist Charles Doolittle Walcott. In return his name appears attached to several species, as well as here and there throughout the American landscape, notably Lake Agassiz, the Pleistocene precursor to Lake Winnipeg and the Red River, and Mount Agassiz, a bastion of the Palisade Crest, the largest glaciated region of California's Sierra Nevada.

During this time he grew in fame even in the public consciousness, becoming one of the best-known scientists in the world. By 1857 he was so well-loved that his friend Henry Wadsworth Longfellow wrote "The fiftieth birthday of Agassiz" in his honor. His own writing continued with four (of a planned ten) volumes of Natural History of the United States which were published from 1857 to 1862. During this time he also published a catalog of papers in his field, Bibliographia Zoologiae et Geologiae, in four volumes between 1848 and 1854.

Stricken by ill health in the 1860s, he resolved to return to the field for relaxation and to resume his studies of Brazilian fish. In April 1865 he led a party to Brazil. Returning home in August 1866, an account of this expedition, entitled A Journey in Brazil, was published in 1868. In December 1871 he made a second eight month excursion, known as the Hassler expedition under the command of Commander Philip Carrigan Johnson (brother of Eastman Johnson), visiting South America on its southern Atlantic and Pacific seaboards. The ship explored the Magellan Strait, which drew the praise of Charles Darwin.

Elizabeth Aggasiz wrote, at the Strait: '.....the Hassler pursued her course, past a seemingly endless panorama of mountains and forests rising into the pale regions of snow and ice, where lay glaciers in which every rift and crevasse, as well as the many cascades flowing down to join the waters beneath, could be counted as she steamed by them.... These were weeks of exquisite delight to Agassiz. The vessel often skirted the shore so closely that its geology could be studied from the deck.'

==Legacy==
Louis Agassiz
From his first marriage to Cecilie Bruan, Agassiz had two daughters in addition to son Alexander. 
In 1863, Agassiz's daughter Ida married Henry Lee Higginson, later to be founder of the Boston Symphony Orchestra and benefactor to Harvard University and other schools.
On November 30, 1860, Agassiz's daughter Pauline was married to Quincy Adams Shaw (18251908), a wealthy Boston merchant and later benefactor to the Boston Museum of Fine Arts. 

In the last years of his life, Agassiz worked to establish a permanent school where zoological science could be pursued amid the living subjects of its study. In 1873, a private philanthropist (John Anderson) gave Agassiz the island of Penikese, in Buzzards Bay, Massachusetts (south of New Bedford), and presented him with $50,000 to permanently endow it as a practical school of natural science, especially devoted to the study of marine zoology. The John Anderson school collapsed soon after Agassiz's death, but is considered a precursor of the Woods Hole Marine Biological Laboratory, which is nearby.

Within his lifetime, Agassiz had developed a reputation for a particularly demanding teaching style. He would allegedly "lock a student up in a room full of turtle-shells, or lobster-shells, or oyster-shells, without a book or a word to help him, and not let him out till he had discovered all the truths which the objects contained." James, William. "Louis Agassiz, Words Spoken..... at the Reception of the American Society of Naturalists..... 30 1896. Pg 9-10. Cambridge, 1897. Quoted in Cooper 1917, pg 61-2. Two of Agassiz's most prominent students detailed their personal experiences under his tutelage, Samuel Hubbard Scudder in a short magazine article for Every Saturday Scudder, Samuel H. "Look at your fish", originally published in Every Saturday, April 4, 1874, 16, 369-370; reprinted in Erlandson, David A. et al. Doing Naturalistic Inquiry: A Guide to Methods, Sage Publications, 1993, pg. 1-4 and Nathaniel Southgate Shaler in his Autobiography. These and other recollections were collected and published by Lane Cooper in 1917, which Ezra Pound was to draw on for his anecdote of Agassiz and the sunfish. 

Agassiz is remembered today for his theories on ice ages, and for his resistance to Charles Darwin's theories on evolution, which he kept up his entire life. He died in Cambridge, Massachusetts in 1873 and was buried at Mount Auburn Cemetery, joined later by his wife. His monument is a boulder selected from the moraine of the glacier of the Aar near the site of the old Htel des Neuchtelois, not far from the spot where his hut once stood; and the pine-trees that shelter his grave were sent from his old home in Switzerland.

The Cambridge elementary school north of Harvard University was named in his honor and the surrounding neighborhood became known as "Agassiz" as a result. The school's name was changed to the Maria L. Baldwin School on May 21, 2002, due to concerns about Agassiz's racism, and to honor Maria Louise Baldwin the African-American principal of the school who served from 1889 until 1922. http://www.peaceworkmagazine.org/pwork/0204/020420.htm http://www.thecrimson.com/article/2002/5/22/committee-renames-local-agassiz-school-the/ The neighborhood, however, continues to be known as Agassiz. . cambridgema.gov 

An ancient glacial lake that formed in the Great Lakes region of North America, Lake Agassiz, is named after him, as are Mount Agassiz in California's Palisades, Mount Agassiz, in the Uinta Mountains, Agassiz Peak in Arizona and in his native Switzerland, the Agassizhorn in the Bernese Alps. Agassiz Glacier and Agassiz Creek in Glacier National Park and Mount Agassiz in Bethlehem, New Hampshire in the White Mountains also bear his name. A crater on Mars and a promontorium on the Moon are also named in his honour. A headland situated in Palmer Land, Antarctica is named in his honor, Cape Agassiz. A main-belt asteroid named 2267 Agassiz is also named in association with Louis Agassiz. In addition, several animal species are so named, including Apistogramma agassizi Steindachner, 1875 (Agassiz's dwarf cichlid); Isocapnia agassizi Ricker, 1943 (a stonefly); Publius agassizi (Kaup), 1871 (a passalid beetle); Xylocrius agassizi (LeConte), 1861 (a longhorn beetle); Exoprosopa agassizi Loew, 1869 (a bee fly); and the most well-known, Gopherus agassizii Cooper, 1863 (the desert tortoise).

In 2005 the EGU Division on Cryospheric Sciences established the Louis Agassiz Medal, awarded to individuals in recognition of their outstanding scientific contribution to the study of the cryosphere on Earth or elsewhere in the solar system. He took part in a monthly gathering called the Saturday Club at the Omni Parker House, a meeting of Boston writers and intellectuals. He was therefore mentioned in a stanza of the Oliver Wendell Holmes, Sr. poem, "At the Saturday Club," where the author dreams he sees some of his friends who are no longer:

There, at the table's further end I see
In his old place our Poet's vis--vis,
The great PROFESSOR, strong, broad-shouldered, square,
In life's rich noontide, joyous, debonair.
His social hour no leaden care alloys,
His laugh rings loud and mirthful as a boy's,--
That lusty laugh the Puritan forgot,--
What ear has heard it and remembers not?
How often, halting at some wide crevasse
Amid the windings of his Alpine pass,
High up the cliffs, the climbing mountaineer,
Listening the far-off avalanche to hear,
Silent, and leaning on his steel-shod staff,
Has heard that cheery voice, that ringing laugh,
From the rude cabin whose nomadic walls
Creep with the moving glacier as it crawls!

How does vast Nature lead her living train
In ordered sequence through that spacious brain,
As in the primal hour when Adam named
The new-born tribes that young creation claimed!--
How will her realm be darkened, losing thee,
Her darling, whom we call our AGASSIZ!

==Polygenism==

After Agassiz came to the United States he became a prolific writer the area of polygenism, the idea that races came from separate origins (specifically separate creations), that they could be classified on the basis of specific climatic zones (as animals and plants could generally be), and that they were accordingly endowed with unequal attributes, Edward Lurie, "Louis Agassiz and the Races of Man," Isis 45, no. 3 (1954): 227242. ideas now included under the rubric of scientific racism.

According to Harvard and University of Colorado historians of science Nadine Weidman and John Jackson, Agassiz was never a supporter of slavery, and claimed his views on polygenism had nothing to do with politics. John P. Jackson, Nadine M. Weidman "Race, Racism, and science: social impact and interaction, Rutgers University Press, 2005, p. 51 Agassiz was influenced by philosophical idealism and the scientific work of Georges Cuvier. According to Agassiz, genera and species were ideas in the mind of God; their existence in Gods mind prior to their physical creation meant that God could create humans as one species yet in several distinct and geographically separate acts of creation. Per Church historian Paul M. Blowers, Agassiz believed there is one species of humans but many different creations of races. Paul M. Blowers, 2008, "Entering 'This Sublime And Blessed Amphitheatre': Contemplation of Nature and Interpretation of the Bible in the Patristic Period, In "Nature and Scripture in the Abrahamic Religions: Up to 1700", 2 vols (Scott Mandelbrote & Jitse Meer, Eds.), book DOI: 10.1163/ej.9789004171916.i-782, book ISBN 9789047425236), pp. 147-176, esp. 159-164 and 151-154, chapter DOI: 10.1163/ej.9789004171916.i-782.34, chapter ISBN 9789047425236), see , accessed 8 June 2014. 

Agassiz was a creationist who believed nature had order because God has created it directly, and Agassiz viewed his career in science as a search for ideas in the mind of the creator expressed in creation. Agassiz denied that migration and adaptation could account for the geographical age or any of the past. Adaptation takes time; in an example, Agassiz questioned how plants or animals could migrate through regions they were not equipped to handle. According to Agassiz the conditions in which particular creatures live are the conditions necessary to their maintenance, and what among organized beings is essential to their temporal existence must be at least one of the conditions under which they were created. 

After the 1906 San Francisco earthquake toppled Agassiz's statue from the faade of Stanford's zoology building, Stanford President David Starr Jordan wrote that "SomebodyDr. Angell, perhapsremarked that 'Agassiz was great in the abstract but not in the concrete. 

In his work he noted similarities of distribution of like species in different geological eras, a phenomenon clearly not the result of migration. Agassiz questioned how fish of the same species live in lakes well separated with no joining waterway, Agassiz concluded they were created at both locations. According to Agassiz the intelligent adaptation of creatures to their environments testified to an intelligent plan. According to historian Paul Blowers, the conclusions of his studies led him to believe that whichever region each animal was found in, was created there animals are naturally autochthones wherever they are found; after further research he later extended this idea to humans, which became to be known as his theory of polygenism. 

According to Agassizs theory of polygenism animals, plants and humans were all created in special provinces each having distinct populations of species created in and for that province. Agassiz claimed plants, animals and humans did not originate in pairs but were created in large numbers. According to Agassiz, the different races were created in different provinces, each race was indigenous to the province it was created in, he cited evidence from Egyptian monuments to prove that fixity of racial types had existed for at least five millennia. According to Agassizs theory of polygenism all species are fixed, including all the races of humans and species do not evolve into other species. The provinces that the different races were created in included Western American Temperate (the indigenous peoples west of the Rockies), Eastern American Temperate (east of the Rockies), Tropical Asiatic (south of the Himalayas), Temperate Asiatic (east of the Urals and north of the Himalayas), South American Temperate (South America), New Holland (Australia), Arctic (Alaska and Arctic Canada). Cape of Good Hope (South Africa), and American Tropical (Central America and the West Indies).

Agassiz like other polygenists believed the Book of Genesis recounted the origin of the white race only and that the animals and plants in the Bible refer only to those species proximate and familiar to Adam and Eve. Agassiz, Josiah Clark Nott, and other polygenists such as George Gliddon, believed that the original Hebrew form of the name Adam came from a Biblical Hebrew consonantal root referring to redness, so that the name can be interpreted to mean "to show red in the face" or "blusher"; since only light skinned people can blush, then the biblical Adam must be the Caucasian race. Agassiz believed that the writers of the Bible only knew of local events, for example Noah's flood was a local event only known to the regions that were populated by ancient Hebrews, Agassiz claimed the writers of the Bible did not know about any events other than what was going on in their own region and their intermediate neighbors. 

Per Blowers, Agassiz also opposed monogenism and evolution, he claimed that the theory of evolution reduced the wisdom of God to an impersonal materialism. Per Blowers, Agassiz held species, by their natures and geographical distribution, to be direct expressions of the intelligence and will of God, not the results of blind chance, and that believed evolution was an insult to the wisdom and will of God. Agassizs polygenism theory was accepted by a number of scientists. For example, Nathaniel Shaler studied under Agassiz at Harvard, and was also an adherent to polygenism. Cohen, Nancy, The reconstruction of American liberalism, 18651914, UNC Press Books, 2002, p. 77 

In recent years, critics have cited Agassiz's polygenic theories and argued that his views otherwise tarnish his scientific record, a particular emphasis since the appearance of essays by Stephen Jay Gould, a Harvard taxonomist, and Alexander Agassiz Professor of Zoology and Professor of Geology, and Curator of Invertebrate Paleontology at the institution's Museum of Comparative Zoology. Gould, writing on aspects of the history of polygenism, asserted that Agassiz's and, relatedly, Morton's observations sprang from racist biases, in Agassiz's case, from his initial revulsion on encountering African-Americans on moving to the United States. Stephen Jay Gould, "Flaws in a Victorian Veil," Chapter 16 in The Panda's Thumb. However, Gould's essays have received substantial recent criticism for its own limits or bias in research and analysis (e.g., in the Morton case), J.E. Lewis, D. DeGusta, M.R. Meyer, J.M. Monge, A.E. Mann& R.L. Holloway (2011) The Mismeasure of Science: Stephen Jay Gould versus Samuel George Morton on Skulls and Bias. PLoS Biol 9(6): e1001071. doi:10.1371/ journal.pbio.1001071, see , accessed 8 June 2014. and other historians parse the historic matters and come to other than Gould's harsh conclusions. Blowers notes that though Agassiz was a proponent of polygenism, he rejected racism and supported the notion of a spiritualized human unity: Agassiz argued that human polygenism did not undermine the spiritual commonality of all people though each race was physically diverse, and that physical descent was irrelevant to the spiritual descent of humanity. Fundamentally, he reports that Agassiz believed God had made all men equal:
Those intellectual and moral qualities which are so eminently developed in civilized society, but which equally exist in the natural dispositions of all human races, constituting the higher unity among men, making them all equal before God. 

The accusation of racism has occasionally prompted the renaming of landmarks, schoolhouses, and other institutions which bear the name of Agassiz (which abound in Massachusetts). Opinions on these events are often mixed, given his extensive scientific legacy in other areas. See for instance: Author needed, 2001, "Political Correctness Run Amok: School Students Dishonor a Genius of Science", Journal of Blacks in Higher Education, no. 32 (Summer 2001): 7475. On September 9, 2007 the Swiss government acknowledged the "racist thinking" of Agassiz but declined to rename the Agassizhorn summit. 

==Works==
* "'Recherches sur les poissons fossiles (18331843)
* History of the Freshwater Fishes of Central Europe (18391842)
* Etudes sur les glaciers (1840)
* Etudes critiques sur les mollusques fossiles (18401845)
* Nomenclator Zoologicus (18421846)
* Monographie des poissons fossiles du Vieux Gres Rouge, ou Systeme Devonien (Old Red Sandstone) des Iles Britanniques et de Russie (18441845)
* Bibliographia Zoologiae et Geologiae (1848)
* (with AA Gould) Principles of Zoology for the use of Schools and Colleges (Boston, 1848)
* Lake Superior: Its Physical Character, Vegetation and Animals, compared with those of other and similar regions (Boston: Gould, Kendall and Lincoln, 1850)
* Contributions to the Natural History of the United States of America (Boston: Little, Brown, and Co., 18571862)
* Geological Sketches (Boston: Ticknor & Fields, 1866)
* A Journey in Brazil (1868)
* De l'espce et de la classification en zoologie on classification (Trans. Felix Vogeli. Paris: Bailire, 1869)
* Geological Sketches (Second Series) (Boston: J.R. Osgood, 1876)
* Essay on Classification, by Louis Agassiz (1962, Cambridge)

==See also==

*Agassiz Rock, Edinburgh : during a visit to Edinburgh in 1840, Aggassiz explained the striations on this rock's surface as due to glaciation.
*List of geologists

==References==

==Literature==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* Numbers, Ronald L., The Creationists: From Scientific Creationism to Intelligent Design, 2nd ed., 2006.
*
*Smith, Harriet Knight, The history of the Lowell Institute, Boston: Lamson, Wolffe and Co., 1898.
*

==External links==

*
* 
* 
* Pictures and texts of Excursions et sjours dans les glaciers et les hautes rgions des Alpes and of Nouvelles tudes et expriences sur les glaciers actuels by Louis Agassiz can be found in the database VIATIMAGES.
* "Geographical Distribution of Animals", by Louis Agassiz (1850)
* Runner of the Mountain Tops: The Life of Louis Agassiz, by Mabel Louise Robinson (1939)  free download at manybooks.net
* Thayer Expedition to Brazil, 18651866 (Agassiz went to Brazil to find glacial boulders and to refute Darwin. Dom Pedro II gave his support for Agassiz's expedition on the Amazon River.)
* 
* Louis Agassiz Correspondence, Houghton Library, Harvard University
* 
* digital version of Volume 3 "RECHERCHES SUR LES POISSONS FOSSILES"
* Illustrations from 'Monographies d'chinodermes vivans et fossiles'
* View works by Louis Agassiz online at the Biodiversity Heritage Library.
*National Academy of Sciences Biographical Memoir



[[Li Bai]]

Li Bai (701 762), also known as Li Po, was a Chinese poet acclaimed from his own day to the present as a genius and romantic figure who took traditional poetic forms to new heights. He and his friend Du Fu (712770) were the two most prominent figures in the flourishing of Chinese poetry in the mid-Tang Dynasty that is often called the "Golden Age of China".

Around a thousand poems attributed to him are extant, thirty-four in the canonical 18th-century anthology Three Hundred Tang Poems. The poems were models for celebrating the pleasures of friendship, the depth of nature, solitude, and the joys of drinking wine. Among the most famous are "Waking from Drunkenness on a Spring Day", "The Hard Road to Shu", and "Quiet Night Thought", which appears frequently in school texts in China today. Legend holds that Li drowned when he reached from his boat to grasp the moons reflection in the river.

==Name variants==

Names 
 Chinese: 
 Pinyin: Li Bai or Li Bo 
 Zi (): Taibai (Tai-pai; ) 
 Hao (): Qinglian Jushi (Ching-lien Chu-shih; ) 
 aka: Shixian (Shih-hsien; ) The Poet Xian 

Li () is the family name, or surname; however, he has been known by various names. His given name is written with a Chinese character (), which is romanized variously as Po, Bo, Bai, Pai, and other variants. Even in Hanyu Pinyin there is ambiguity, as Bi is the common variant and B the literary variant. His courtesy name was Taibai (Tai-pai; ), literally "Great White," literally meaning Venus (in the Chinese of the time: later the term "Gold Star" replaced "Great White" as the planetary name). Thus, combining the family name with the courtesy name, his name appears in variants such as Li Taibo, Li Taibai, Li Tai-po, and others Obata, v ). Less commonly in English, he also may be known by the pseudonym (hao), Qnglin Jsh (Ching-lien Chu-shih; ), meaning Householder of the Azure Lotus, or the nicknames Poet Transcendent (), Wine Immortal (), Banished Transcendent (), Poet-Knight-errant (, or "Poet-Hero"). In works in which the English transliteration is derived through Japanese, his name may be given as Ri Haku or Ri Taihaku. All of these name variants, and more, with or without hyphenation, have been historically attested to. He generally referred to himself as "".

==Life==
The two "Books of Tang", The Old Book of Tang and The New Book of Tang remain the primary sources of bibliographical material on Li Bai. Obata, Part III Other sources include internal evidence from poems by or about Li Bai, and certain other sources.

===Background and birth===
The year of Li Bai's birth is generally considered to be 701. He was born somewhere in Central Asia. Beckwith, 127 Apparently, his family had originally dwelt in what is now southeastern Gansu, and later moved to Jiangyou, near modern Chengdu in Sichuan province, when he was perhaps five years old. Two accounts given by contemporaries Li Yangbing (a family relative) and Fan Chuanzheng stated that his family was originally from what is now southeastern Gansu. Li's ancestry is traditionally traced back to Li Gao, the founder of the state /of Western Liang. Obata, 8 Evidence suggests that during the Sui Dynasty, his ancestors, then commoners, most likely as the result of some act of crime, were forced into a form of exile from their original home in what is now Gansu to some location further west. Wu, 57-58 During their exile, the Li family lived in Suiye (Suyab, now an archeological site in present-day Kyrgyzstan) and perhaps also in Tiaozhi (), a state centered near modern Ghazni, Afghanistan. Elling Eide, "On Li Po", Perspectives on the T'ang (New Haven, London: Yale University Press, 1973), 388. These areas were on the ancient Silk Road, and the Li family were likely merchants. Eide (1973), 389. 

While Li Bai's mother was pregnant with him, she had a dream of a great white star falling from heaven. This seems to have contributed to the idea of his being a banished immortal (one of his nicknames). Wu, 59 That the Great White Star was synonymous with Venus helps to explain his courtesy name, "Tai Bai".

===Early years===
In 705, when Li Bai was four years old, his father secretly moved his family to Sichuan, near Chengdu, where he spent his childhood. Wu, 58 There is currently a monument commemorating this in Zhongba Town, Jiangyou, Sichuan province.

The young Bai read extensively, including Confucian classics such as The Classic of Poetry (Shijing) and the Classic of History (Shujing), as well as various astrological and metaphysical materials which the Confucians tended to eschew. He also engaged in other activities, such as taming wild birds and sword play. Apparently, he became accomplished in the martial arts; this autobiographical quote by Li Bai helps to illustrate the wild life that he led in the Sichuan of his youth:

Before he was twenty years of age, Li had fought and killed several men, apparently for reasons of chivalry, in accordance with the knight-errant tradition (youxia). 

In 720, he was interviewed by Governor Su Ting, who considered him a genius. Though he expressed the wish to become an official, he never took the civil service examination.

===On the way to Chang'an===
The China of Li Bai and Du Fu
In his mid-twenties, about 725, Li Bai left Sichuan, sailing down the Yangzi River, through Dongting Lake, to Nanjing, beginning his days of wandering. He then went back up-river, to Yunmeng, in what is now Hubei, where his marriage to the granddaughter of a retired Prime Minister, Xu Yushi, seems to have formed but a brief interlude. Wu, 58-59 During the first year of his trip, he met celebrities and gave away much of his wealth to needy friends.

In 730, Li Bai stayed in the Zhongnan Mountain near the capital Chang'an (Xi'an), and tried but failed to secure a position. He sailed down the Yellow River, stopped by Luoyang, and visited Taiyuan before going home.

In 735, Li Bai was in Shanxi, where he intervened in a court martial against Guo Ziyi, who was later, after becoming one of the top Tang generals, to repay the favour, during the An Shi disturbances. 

By perhaps 740, he had moved to Shandong. It was in Shandong, at this time, that he became one of the group known as the "Six Idlers of the Bamboo Brook", an informal group dedicated to literature and wine. 

He wandered about the area of Zhejiang and Jiangsu, eventually making friends with a famous Daoist priest, Wu Yun. 

In 742, Wu Yun was summoned by the Emperor to attend the imperial court, where his praise of Li Bai was great. 

===At Chang'an===
Emperor Minghuang, seated upon a terrace, observing Li Bai write poetry while also being assisted with having his boots off, according to a Ming dynasty illustration.
Wu Yun's praise of Li Bai led the Emperor Xuanzong (born Li Longji and also known as Emperor Minghuang) to summon Li to the court in Chang'an. Li's personality fascinated the aristocrats and common people alike, including another Taoist (and poet) He Zhizhang who bestowed upon him the nickname "the Transcendent dismissed from the Heaven", or "Immortal Exiled from Heaven". Indeed, after an initial audience, where he was questioned upon his political views, the Emperor was so impressed that he held a big banquet in his honor. At this banquet the Emperor was said to show his favor, even to the extent of personally seasoning his soup for him. Obata, 201 

Emperor Xuanzong found employment for him as a translator, as Li Bai knew at least one non-Chinese language. Ming Huang eventually gave him a post at the Hanlin Academy, which served to provide scholarly expertise and poetry for the Emperor.

When the emperor ordered Li Bai to the palace, he was often drunk, but quite capable of performing on the spot.

Li Bai wrote several poems about the Emperor's beautiful and beloved Yang Guifei, the favorite royal consort. Wu, 60 A story, probably apocryphal, circulates about Li Bai during this period.
Once, while drunk, Li Bai had gotten his boots muddy, and Gao Lishi, the most politically powerful eunuch in the palace, was asked to assist in the removal of these, in front of the emperor. Gao took offense at being asked to perform this menial service, and later managed to persuade Yang Guifei to take offense at Li's poems concerning her. At the persuasion of Yang Guifei and Gao Lishi, Xuanzong reluctantly, but politely, and with large gifts of gold and silver, sent Li Bai away from the royal court. Wu, 61 

===More wandering===
After leaving the court, Li Bai formally became a Taoist, making a home in Shandong, but wandering here and there for the next ten some years, writing poems. 

He met Du Fu in the autumn of 744, and again the following year. These were the only occasions on which they met. A dozen of Du Fu's poems to or about Li Bai survive, while only one from Li Bai to Du Fu remains.

===War and exile===
Riders on Horseback, Northern Qi Dynasty, the general area of the rebel heartland, although of an earlier date.
At the end of 756, the An Lushan disorders burst across the land. The Emperor eventually fled to Sichuan; then, later, during the confusion, the Crown Prince opportunely declared himself the head of government. As the An Shi disturbances continued, Li Bai became an adviser to one of Ming Huang's sons, who was far from the top of the primogeniture list, yet nevertheless apparently made his own bid for the imperial power. Upon the defeat of the Prince's forces, Li Bai escaped, but was later captured, imprisoned in Jiujiang, and sentenced to death. The famous and powerful army General Guo Ziyi intervened: now promoted to general, this was the very person whom Li Bai had saved from court martial a couple of decades previously. Upon General Guo Ziyi's offering to exchange his official rank for Li Bai's life, Li Bai's death sentence was commuted to exile: he was consigned to Yelang. Yelang (in Yunnan) was then in the remote extreme of the empire. Towards the destination of Yelang, Li Bai headed with little sign of hurry, stopping for prolonged social visits, and writing poetry along the way, leaving detailed descriptions of his journey for posterity. Notice of an imperial pardon recalling Li Bai reached him before he even got close to Yelang. 

===Return and wandering===
When Li received the news of his imperial reprieve he then returned down the river to Jiangxi, passing on the way through Baidicheng, still engaging in the pleasures of food, wine, good company, and writing poetry: his poem "Departing from Baidi in the Morning" records this stage of his travels. Although Li did not cease his wandering lifestyle, he then generally confined his travels to Nanjing and the two Anhui cities of Xuancheng and Li Yang (in modern Zhao County). Eventually, in 762, Li's relative Li Yangbing became magistrate of Dangtu, and Li Bai went to stay with him there. In the meantime, Suzong and Xuanzong both died within a short period of time, and China had a new emperor.

===Death===
The new emperor Daizong named Li Bai the Registrar of the Left Commandant's office in 762. However, by the time that the imperial edict arrived in Dangtu, Anhui, Li Bai was already dead.

There is a long and sometimes fanciful tradition regarding his death, from uncertain sources, that Li Bai drowned after falling from his boat when he tried to embrace the reflection of the moon in the Yangtze River, something later believed by Herbert Giles. However, the actual cause appears to have been natural enough, although perhaps related to his hard-living lifestyle. Nevertheless, the legend that Li Bai died trying to embrace the reflection of the moon has entered Chinese culture. 

There is a memorial to Li Bai, just west of Ma'anshan.

===Calligraphy===
The only surviving calligraphy in Li Bai's own handwriting, titled Shangyangtai (Going Up To Sun Terrace), located at the Palace Museum in Beijing, China. 
Li Bai was also a skilled calligrapher, though there is only one surviving piece of his work in his own handwriting that exists today. The piece is titled Shangyangtai (Going Up To Sun Terrace), a 38.1  long scroll; the calligraphy is housed in the Palace Museum in Beijing, China. 

===Surviving texts and editing===
Even Li Bai and Du Fu, the two most famous and most comprehensively edited Tang poets, were affected by the destruction of the imperial Tang libraries and the loss of many private collections in the periods of turmoil. Although many of Li Bai's poems have survived, even more were lost and there is difficulty regarding variant texts. One of the earliest endeavors at editing Li Bai's work was by his relative Li Yangbing, the magistrate of Dangtu, with whom he stayed in his final years and to whom he entrusted his manuscripts. However, the most reliable texts are not necessarily in the earliest editions. Song dynasty scholars produced various editions of his poetry, but it was not until the Qing dynasty that such collections as the Quan Tangshi (Complete Tang Poems) made the most comprehensive studies of the then surviving texts. Paul Kroll, Poetry of the Tang Dynasty, in Victor H. Mair, ed., The Columbia History of Chinese Literature. (New York: Columbia University Press, 2001). ISBN 0231109849), pp. 278-282, section "The Sources and Their Limitations" describes this history. 

==Themes==
Critics have focused on Li Bai's strong sense of the continuity of poetic tradition, his glorification of alcoholic beverages (and, indeed, frank celebration of drunkenness), his use of persona, the fantastic extremes of some of his imagery, his mastery of formal poetic rules  and his ability to combine all of these with a seemingly effortless virtuosity in order to produce inimitable poetry.

===Poetic tradition===
Li Bai had a strong sense of himself as being part of a poetic tradition. The "genius" of Li Bai, says one recent account, "lies at once in his total command of the literary tradition before him and his ingenuity in bending (without breaking) it to discover a uniquely personal idiom...." Paul Kroll, Poetry of the Tang Dynasty, in Victor H. Mair, ed., The Columbia History of Chinese Literature. (New York: Columbia University Press, 2001; ISBN 0231109849), p. 296. Burton Watson, comparing him to Du Fu, says Li's poetry, "is essentially backward-looking, that it represents more a revival and fulfillment of past promises and glory than a foray into the future." Watson, 141 Watson adds, as evidence, that of all the poems attributed to Li Bai, about one sixth are in the form of yuefu, or, in other words, reworked lyrics from traditional folk ballads. Watson, 141-142 As further evidence, Watson cites the existence of a fifty-nine poem collection by Li Bai entitled Gu Feng, or In the Old Manner, which is, in part, tribute to the poetry of the Han and Wei dynasties. Watson, 142 His admiration for certain particular poets is also shown through specific allusions, for example to Qu Yuan or Tao Yuanming, and occasionally by name, for example Du Fu.

A more general appreciation for history, is shown on the part of Li Bai in his poems of the huaigu genre, Watson, 145 or meditations on the past, wherein following "one of the perennial themes of Chinese poetry," "the poet contemplates the ruins of past glory." Watson, 88 

===Rapt with wine===
Chinese rice wine
John C. H. Wu observed that "while some may have drunk more wine than Li , no-one has written more poems about wine." Wu, 66 Classical Chinese poets were often associated with drinking wine, and Li Bai was part of the group of Chinese scholars in Chang'an his fellow poet Du Fu called the "Eight Immortals of the Wine Cup." Chinese generally did not find the moderate use of alcohol to be immoral or unhealthy. James J.Y Liu comments that zui in poetry does not mean quite the same thing as drunk, intoxicated, or inebriated, but rather means being mentally carried away from ones normal preoccupations..." Liu translates zui as "rapt with wine. James J. Y. Liu. The Art of Chinese Poetry. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962; ISBN 0226486869), p. 59. The Eight Immortals, however, drank to an unusual degree, though they still were viewed as pleasant eccentrics. William Hung. Tu Fu: China's Greatest Poet. (Cambridge,: Harvard University Press, 1952), p 22. Burton Watson concluded that "early all Chinese poets celebrate the joys of wine, but none so tirelessly and with such a note of genuine conviction as Li ." Watson, 143 

One of Li Bai's most famous poems is Waking From Drunkenness on a Spring Day (. Arthur Waley): Waley, Arthur (1919). Waking From Drunkenness on a Spring Day translated it as follows:

:Waking From Drunkenness on a Spring Day ()

: Life in the world is but a big dream;
: I will not spoil it by any labour or care.
: so saying, I was drunk all the day,
: lying helpless at the porch in front of my door.

: when I awoke, I blinked at the garden-lawn;
: a lonely bird was singing amid the flowers.
: I asked myself, had the day been wet or fine?
: the Spring wind was telling the mango-bird.

: moved by its song I soon began to sigh,
: and, as wine was there, I filled my own cup.
: wildly singing I waited for the moon to rise;
: when my song was over, all my senses had gone.

===Fantastic imagery===
An important characteristic of Li Bai's poetry "is the fantasy and note of childlike wonder and playfulness that pervade so much of it." Burton Watson attributes this to a fascination with the daoshi, Taoist recluses who practiced alchemy and austerities in the mountains, in the aim of becoming xian, or immortal beings. There is a strong element of Taoism in his works, both in the sentiments they express and in their spontaneous tone, and "many of his poems deal with mountains, often descriptions of ascents that midway modulate into journeys of the imagination, passing from actual mountain scenery to visions of nature deities, immortals, and 'jade maidens' of Taoist lore." Watson sees this as another affirmation of Li Bai's affinity with the past, and a continuity with the traditions of the Chuci and the early fu. Watson finds this "element of fantasy" to be behind Li Bai's use of hyperbole and the "playful personifications" of mountains and celestial objects. 

===Nostalgia===
The critic James J.Y. Liu notes Chinese poets seem to be perpetually bewailing their exile and longing to return home. This may seem sentimental to Western readers, but one should remember the vastness of China, the difficulties of communication... the sharp contrast between the highly cultured life in the main cities and the harsh conditions in the remoter regions of the country, and the importance of family.... It is hardly surprising, he concludes, that nostalgia should have become a "constant, and hence conventional, theme in Chinese poetry." James J. Y. Liu. The Art of Chinese Poetry. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962; ISBN 0226486869) p. 55. 

Liu gives as a prime example Li's poem "A Quiet Night Thought" (also translated as "Contemplating Moonlight"), which is often learned by schoolchildren in China. In a mere 20 words, the poem uses the vivid moonlight and frost imagery to convey the feeling of homesickness. There are several editions of the poem. This is translated from a 17th-century Kangxi edition moonlight poem. 
 
:A Quiet Night Thought

:Moonlight before my bed
:Perhaps frost on the ground.
:Lift my head and see the moon
:Lower my head and pine for home.

===Use of persona===
Li Bai also wrote a number of poems from various viewpoints, including the personae of women. For example, he wrote several poems in the Zi Ye, or "Lady Midnight" style, as well as Han folk-ballad style poems.

===Technical virtuosity===
Li Bai is well known for the technical virtuosity of his poetry and the mastery of his verses. In terms of poetic form, "critics generally agree that Li produced no significant innovations....In theme and content also, his poetry is notable less for the new elements it introduces than for the skill with which he brightens the old ones." 

Burton Watson comments on Li Bai's famous poem, which he translates "Bring the Wine": "...like so much of Li 's work, it has a grace and effortless dignity that somehow make it more compelling than earlier treatment of the same." Watson, 144 

Li Bai especially excelled in the gushi form, or "old style" poems, a type of poetry allowing a great deal of freedom in terms of the form and content of the work. An example is his poem "", translated by Witter Bynner as "Hard Roads in Shu." Shu is a poetic term for Sichuan, the destination of refuge that Emperor Xuanzong considered fleeing to escape the approaching forces of the rebel General An Lushan. Watson comments that, this poem, "employs lines that range in length from four to eleven characters, the form of the lines suggesting by their irregularity the jagged peaks and bumpy mountain roads of Sichuan depicted in the poem." Li Bai was also noted as a master of the cut-verse, or jueju. Watson, 146 

Li Bai was noted for his mastery of the lushi, or "regulated verse", the formally most demanding verse form of the times. Watson notes, however, that his poem "Seeing a Friend Off" was "unusual in that it violates the rule that the two middle couplets ... must observe verbal parallelism," adding that Chinese critics excused this kind of violation in the case of a genius like Li. Watson, 147 

==Influence==
Spring Evening Banquet at the Peach and Pear Blossom Garden with quoted text by Li Bai, painted by Leng Mei, late 17th or early 18th century, National Palace Museum, Taipei

===In the East===
Li Bai's poetry was immensely influential in his own time, as well as for subsequent generations in China. His influence has also been demonstrated in the immediate geographical area of Chinese cultural influence, being known as Ri Haku in Japan. This influence continues even today. Examples range from poetry to painting and to literature.

In his own lifetime, during his many wanderings and while he was attending court in Chang'an, met and parted from various contemporary poets. These meetings and separations were a typical occasion for versification in the tradition of the literate Chinese of the time, a prime example being his relationship with Du Fu.

After his lifetime, his influence continued to grow. Some four centuries later, during the Song Dynasty, for example, just in the case of his poem that is sometimes translated "Drinking Alone Beneath the Moon", the poet Yang Wanli wrote a whole poem alluding to it (and to two other Li Bai poems), in the same gushi, or Old-style Poetry form. Frankel, 22 In the Ming Dynasty, Duan shuqing, dedicated her poem Taibai Tower to him. In the 20th century, Li Bai even influenced the poetry of Mao Zedong.

In China, his poem "Quiet Night Thoughts", reflecting a nostalgia of a traveller away from home, How to read Chinese poetry: a guided anthology By Zong-qi Cai p. 210. Columbia University Press has been widely "memorized by school children and quoted by adults". Speaking of Chinese By Raymond Chang, Margaret Scrogin Chang p. 176 WW Norton & Company 

===In the West===
The ideas underlying Li Bai's poetry had a profound impact in shaping American Imagist and Modernist poetry through the 20th century. Also, Gustav Mahler integrated four of Li Bai's works into his symphonic song cycle Das Lied von der Erde. These were derived from a free German translation by Hans Bethge, published in an anthology called (The Chinese Flute), Bethge, Hans (2001). Die Chinesische Flte (YinYang Media Verlag, Kelkheim, Germany). ISBN 978-3-9806799-5-4. Re-issue of the 1907 edition (Insel Verlag, Leipzig). Bethge based his version on the pioneering translation into French by Saint-Denys. There is another striking musical setting of Li Bai's verse by the American composer Harry Partch, whose Seventeen Lyrics by Li Po for intoning voice and Adapted Viola (an instrument of Partch's own invention) are based on the texts in The Works of Li Po, the Chinese Poet translated by Shigeyoshi Obata. Obata, Shigeyoshi (1923). The Works of Li Po, the Chinese Poet (J. M. Dent & Co, ). ASIN B000KL7LXI In Brazil, the songwriter Beto Furquim included a musical setting of the poem "Jing Ye Si" in his album "Muito Prazer". (2008, ISRC BR-OQQ-08-00002) 

====Ezra Pound====
Li Bai is influential in the West partly due to Ezra Pound's versions of some of his poems in the collection Cathay, (Pound transliterating his name according to the Japanese manner as "Rihaku"). Li Bai's interactions with nature, friendship, his love of wine and his acute observations of life inform his best poems. Some, like Changgan xing (translated by Ezra Pound as "The River Merchant's Wife: A Letter"), record the hardships or emotions of common people. An example of the liberal, but poetically influential, translations, or adaptations, of Japanese versions of his poems made, largely based on the work of Ernest Fenollosa and professors Mori and Ariga. Pound, Ezra (1915). Cathay (Elkin Mathews, London). ASIN B00085NWJI. 

==Modern cultural references==
===In fiction===
Simon Elegant novelized Li Bai's life in his 1997 work, A Floating Life. Elegant, Simon (1997). A Floating Life (Ecco Press, ). ISBN 978-0-88001-559-2 Li Bai appears (under a fictional name) as a major character in Guy Gavriel Kay's Under Heaven, a fantasy novel set in Tang Dynasty China. New York: ROC/Penguin (ISBN 978-0451463302), 2010 

MacDonald Harris' novel 'Herma' (Atheneum, 1981) refers to Li Bai under the name of Li Po, citing one of his poems and describing the reports of his death (page 175).

In John Steinbeck's Cannery Row, the town intellectuals reads Li Bai's poetry at the party that ends the story.

===In non-fiction===
In "An American Childhood," Annie Dillard distinguishing "one sort of poetry" that "was full of beauty and longing; it exhaled, enervated and helpless, like Li Po," with other kinds of poems, that were "threats and vows."

===In music===
In 2013, Gareth Bonello (a.k.a The Gentle Good) released a Welsh-Chinese folk album, Y Bardd Anfarwol ("The Immortal Bard"), whose lyrics were inspired by and based on the life of Li Bai. The album was partly recorded in Chengdu with local musicians.

===Epcot===
In both versions of Epcot's Circle-Vision 360 film in the China pavilion, Li Bai serves as the narrator and guide of the film.

===Astronomy===
A crater on the planet Mercury has been named after him.

==Translation==
Li Bai's poetry was introduced to Europe by Jean Joseph Marie Amiot, a Jesuit missionary in Beijing, in his Portraits des Clbres Chinois, published in the series Mmoires concernant l'histoire, les sciences, les arts, les murs, les usages, &c. des Chinois, par les missionnaires de Pekin. (17761797). Further translations into French were published by Marquis d'Hervey de Saint-Denys in his 1862 Posies de l'poque des Thang. 
D'Hervey de Saint-Denys (1862). Posies de l'poque des Thang (Amyot, Paris). See Minford, John and Lau, Joseph S. M. (2000)). Classic Chinese Literature (Columbia University Press) ISBN 978-0-231-09676-8. 

Joseph Edkins read a paper, "On Li Tai-po", to the Peking Oriental Society in 1888, which was subsequently published in that society's journal. Obata, p. v. The early sinologist Herbert Allen Giles included translations of Li Bai in his 1898 publication Chinese Poetry in English Verse, and again in his History of Chinese Literature (1901). Obata, v-vi The third early translator into English was L. Cranmer-Byng (18721945). His Lute of Jade: Being Selections from the Classical Poets of China (1909) and A Feast of Lanterns (1916) both featured Li's poetry.

Renditions of Li Bai's poetry into modernist English poetry were influential through Ezra Pound in Cathay (1915) and Amy Lowell in Fir-Flower Tablets (1921). Neither worked directly from the Chinese: Pound relied on more or less literal, word for word, though not terribly accurate, translations of Ernest Fenollosa and what Pound called the "decipherings" of professors Mori and Ariga; Lowell on those of Florence Ayscough. Witter Bynner with the help of Kiang Kang-hu included several of Li's poems in The Jade Mountain (1939). Although Li was not his preferred poet, Arthur Waley translated a few of his poems into English for the Asiatic Review, and included them in his More Translations from the Chinese. Shigeyoshi Obata, in his 1922 The Works of Li Po, made what he claimed to be "the first attempt ever made to deal with any single Chinese poet exclusively in one book for the purpose of introducing him to the English-speaking world. 

Li Bai became a favorite among translators for his straightforward and seemingly simple style. Later translations are too numerous to discuss here, but an extensive selection of Li's poems, translated by a variety of translators, is included in John Minford and Joseph S. M. Lau, Classical Chinese Literature (2000) Ch 19 "Li Bo (701-762): The Banished Immortal" Introduction by Burton Watson; translations by Elling Eide; Ezra Pound; Arthur Cooper, David Young; five poems in multiple translations, in John Minford and Joseph S. M. Lau, eds., Classical Chinese Literature (New York; Hong Kong: Columbia University Press; The Chinese University Press, 2000), pp. 721-763. 

===Exemplary translation===
Text of Li Bai's poem Drinking Alone by Moonlight, in the classical top-to-bottom, right-to-left order.
One of Li Bai's best known poems and a good example of his writing is his Drinking Alone by Moonlight (, pinyin: Yu Xi D Zhu), which has been translated into English by various authors, including this translation, by Arthur Waley: Waley, Arthur (1919). "Drinking Alone by Moonlight: Three Poems," More Translations from the Chinese (Alfred A. Knopf, New York), pp. 27-28. Li Bai wrote 4 poems with the same name (Quantangshi 182_22 ); Waley published translations of three. 

:A cup of wine, under the flowering trees;
:I drink alone, for no friend is near.
:Raising my cup I beckon the bright moon,
:For he, with my shadow, will make three men.

:The moon, alas, is no drinker of wine;
:Listless, my shadow creeps about at my side.
:Yet with the moon as friend and the shadow as slave
:I must make merry before the Spring is spent.

:To the songs I sing the moon flickers her beams;
:In the dance I weave my shadow tangles and break.
:While we were sober, three shared the fun;
:Now we are drunk, each goes his way.
:May we long share our odd, inanimate feast,
:And meet at last on the Cloudy River of the sky.

(Note: the "Cloudy River of the sky" refers to the Milky Way)

To hear the poem read in Chinese and to see another translation, go to GREAT TANG POETS: LI BO (701-762) "Drinking Alone under the Moon" Asia For Educators (Columbia University)

==See also==

* Chinese martial arts
* Ci (poetry)
* Classical Chinese poetry
* Classical Chinese poetry forms
* Guqin
* Jiangyou
* Modernist poetry in English
* Poetry of Mao Zedong
* Shi (poetry)
* Tang poetry
* List of Three Hundred Tang Poems poets
* Xu Yushi
* A Quiet Night Thought

==Notes==

==References==
===Translations===
* Cooper, Arthur (1973). Li Po and Tu Fu: Poems Selected and Translated with an Introduction and Notes (Penguin Classics, 1973). ISBN 978-0-14-044272-4.
* Hinton, David (2008). Classical Chinese Poetry: An Anthology. New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux. ISBN 0-374-10536-7 / ISBN 978-0-374-10536-5.
* Hinton, David (1998). The Selected Poems of Li Po (Anvil Press Poetry, 1998). ISBN 978-0-85646-291-7 .
* Holyoak, K. (translator) (2007). Facing the Moon: Poems of Li Bai and Du Fu. (Durham, NH: Oyster River Press). ISBN 978-1-882291-04-5.
* Obata, Shigeyoshi. (1922) The Works of Li Po, the Chinese Poet. (New York: Dutton). Reprinted: New York: Paragon, 1965. Free E-Book.
* Pound, Ezra (1915). Cathay (Elkin Mathews, London). ASIN B00085NWJI
* Stimson, Hugh M. (1976). Fifty-five T'ang Poems. Far Eastern Publications: Yale University. ISBN 0-88710-026-0
* Seth, V. (translator) (1992). Three Chinese Poets: Translations of Poems by Wang Wei, Li Bai, and Du Fu. (London: Faber & Faber). ISBN 0-571-16653-9.
* Weinberger, Eliot. The New Directions Anthology of Classical Chinese Poetry. (New York: New Directions, 2004). ISBN 0-8112-1605-5. Introduction, with translations by William Carlos Williams, Ezra Pound, Kenneth Rexroth, Gary Snyder, and David Hinton.
* Watson, Burton (1971). Chinese Lyricism: Shih Poetry from the Second to the Twelfth Century. New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 0-231-03464-4
* 

===Background and criticism===
* Edkins, Joseph (1888). "Li Tai-po as a Poet", The China Review, Vol. 17 No. 1 (1888 Jul) . Retrieved from , 19 January 2011.
* Eide, Elling (1973). "On Li Po", in Perspectives on the T'ang. New Haven, London: Yale University Press, 367-403.
* Frankel, Hans H. (1978). The Flowering Plum and the Palace Lady. (New Haven and London: Yale University Press) ISBN 0-300-02242-5.
* Kroll, Paul (2001). Poetry of the Tang Dynasty, in Victor H. Mair. ed., The Columbia History of Chinese Literature. (New York: Columbia University Press, 2001). ISBN 0231109849), pp. 274313.
* Stephen Owen 'Li Po: a new concept of genius," in Stephen Owen. The Great Age of Chinese Poetry : The High T'ang. (New Haven Conn.: Yale University Press, 1981). ISBN 9780300023671. 
* Varsano, Paula M. (2003). Tracking the Banished Immortal: The Poetry of Li Bo and its Critical Reception (University of Hawai'i Press, 2003). ISBN 978-0-8248-2573-7, 
* Waley, Arthur (1950). The Poetry and Career of Li Po (New York: MacMillan, 1950). ASIN B0006ASTS4.
* Wu, John C. H. (1972). The Four Seasons of Tang Poetry. Rutland, Vermont: Charles E. Tuttle. ISBN 978-0-8048-0197-3

==External links==

Online translations (some with original Chinese, pronunciation, and literal translation):
* Li Bai's poems at University of Michigan
* Poems by Li Bai at Poems Found in Translation
* Li Bai: Poems Extensive collection of Li Bai poems in English
* 20 Li Bai poems, in Chinese using simplified and traditional characters and pinyin, with literal and literary English translations by Mark Alexander.
* 34 Li Bai poems, in Chinese with English translation by Witter Bynner, from the Three Hundred Tang Poems anthology.
* Complete text of Cathay, the Ezra Pound/Ernest Fenollosa translations of poems principally by Li Po (J., Rihaku) together with public domain recordings (MP3) of the same
* 27 Recordings of "Drinking Alone by Moonlight," from the LibriVox website. Retrieved July 1, 2007.
* Das Lied von der Erde: The Literary Changes  synopsis of original Chinese poems, Bethge's translations and Mahler's changes
* Profile Variety of translations of Li Bai's poetry by a range of translators, along with photographs of geographical sites relevant to his life.
* At Project Gutenberg from More Translations From The Chinese by Arthur Waley, 1919 (includes six titles of poems by Li Po).
* The works of Li Po, the Chinese poet, translated by Shigeyoshi Obata Google books version of Obata's 1922 translation.
* Li Po's poems published by PoemHunter.com

Guqin related
* John Thompson on Li Bai and the qin musical instrument



[[Longship]]

The Gokstad ship, on display at the Viking Ship Museum in Oslo, Norway.

Longships (aka longboats) were sea vessels made and used by the Vikings from the Nordic countries for trade, commerce, exploration, and warfare during the Viking Age although scientific analysis of the oak timber shows at least one well known ship was built in Dublin, Ireland. The longships design evolved over many years, beginning in the Stone Age with the invention of the umiak and continuing up to the 9th century with the Nydam and Kvalsund ships. The longship appeared in its complete form between the 9th and 13th centuries. The character and appearance of these ships have been reflected in Scandinavian boat-building traditions until today. The particular skills and methods employed in making longships are still used world wide, often with modern adaptations. They were all made out of wood, with cloth flags and had lots of details and carvings on the hull.

The longship is characterized as a graceful, long, narrow, light, wooden boat with a shallow-draft hull designed for speed. The ship's shallow draft allowed navigation in waters only one metre deep and permitted beach landings, while its light weight enabled it to be carried over portages. Longships were also double-ended, the symmetrical bow and stern allowing the ship to reverse direction quickly without having to turn around; this trait proved particularly useful in northern latitudes where icebergs and sea ice posed hazards to navigation. Longships were fitted with oars along almost the entire length of the boat itself. Later versions had a rectangular sail on a single mast which was used to replace or augment the effort of the rowers, particularly during long journeys. The average speed of Viking ships varied from ship to ship but lay in the range of 5&ndash;10 knots and the maximum speed of a longship under favorable conditions was around 15 knots. The Viking Ship Museum, The five Skuldelev ships 

Longships were the epitome of Scandinavian naval power at the time, and were highly valued possessions. They were often owned by coastal farmers and commissioned by the king in times of conflict, in order to build a powerful naval force. While longships were used by the Norse in warfare, they were troop transports, not warships. In the tenth century, these boats would sometimes be tied together in battle to form a steady platform for infantry warfare. During the 9th century peak of the Viking expansion, large fleets set out to attack the degrading Frankish empire by attacking up navigable rivers such as the Seine. Rouen was sacked in 841, the year after the death of Louis the Pious, a son of Charlemagne. Quentovic, near modern Etables, was attacked in 842 and 600 Danish ships attacked Hamburg in 845. In the same year 129 ships returned to attack up the Seine. M Magnusson.The Vikings. P 71 Tempus. 2003. They were called "dragonships" by enemies such as the English Ervan G. Garrison: . A history of engineering and technology: artful methods, p 111 because they had a dragon-shaped bow. The Norse had a strong sense of naval architecture, and during the early medieval period they were advanced for their time. History World NOVA 

==Types of longships==
Longships can be classified into a number of different types, depending on size, construction details, and prestige. The most common way to classify longships is by the number of rowing positions on board.

===Karvi===
The Karvi are the smallest vessel that is considered a longship. According to the 10th century Gulating Law, a ship with 13 rowing benches is the smallest ship suitable for military use. A ship with between 6 and 16 benches would be classified as a Karvi. These ships were considered to be general purpose ships, mainly used for fishing and trade, but occasionally were commissioned for military use. While most longships held a length to width ratio of 7:1, the Karvi ships were closer to 4.5:1. 
The Gokstad Ship is a famous Karvi ship, built around the end of the 9th century, excavated in 1880 by Nicolay Nicolyasen. It was approximately 23 m long with 16 rowing positions.

===Snekkja===
Full-scale replica of a Viking snekkja based in Morg, Poland
The snekkja, meaning 'thin and projecting,' was typically the smallest longship used in warfare and was classified as a ship with at least 20 rowing benches. A typical snekkja might have a length of 17 m, a width of 2.5 m, and a draught of only 0.5 m. It would carry a crew of around 41 men (40 oarsmen and one cox).

Snekkjas were one of the most common types of ship. According to Viking lore, Canute the Great used 1,200 in Norway in 1028, and William the Conqueror used about 600 for the invasion of Britain in 1066 in the post Viking period.

The Norwegian snekkjas, designed for deep fjords and Atlantic weather, typically had more draught than the Danish model designed for low coasts and beaches. Snekkjas were so light that they had no need of ports &ndash; they could simply be beached, and potentially even carried across a portage.

The snekkjas continued to evolve after the end of the Viking age, with later Norwegian examples becoming larger and heavier than Viking age ships. They are still being used in Norway, and are now called snekke.

===Skeid===
Skeid (skei), meaning that which cuts through water, ships were larger warships, consisting of more than 30 rowing benches. Ships of this classification are some of the largest (see Busse) longships ever discovered. A group of these ships was discovered by Danish archaeologists in Roskilde during development in the harbor-area in 1962 and 1996-97. The ship discovered in 1962, Skuldelev 2 is an oak-built Skeid longship. It is believed to have been built in the Dublin area around 1042. Skuldelev 2 could carry a crew of some 70&ndash;80 and measures just less than 30 m in length. In 1996-97 archaeologists discovered the remains of another ship in the harbour. This ship, called the Roskilde 6, at 37 metres is the longest Viking ship ever discovered and has been dated to around 1025. 

===Drekkar===
Drekkar are known from historical sources, such as the 13th century Gngu-Hrlfs Saga (the Saga of Rollo). Here, the ships are described as elegant and ornately decorated, and used by those who went raiding and plundering. According to the historical sources the ships' prows carried carvings of menacing beasts, such as dragons and snakes, allegedly to protect the ship and crew, and to ward off the terrible sea monsters of Norse mythology. It is however likely that the carvings, like those on the Oseberg ship, might have had a ritual purpose, or that the purported effect was to frighten enemies and townspeople. No true dragon ship, as defined by the sagas, has been found by archaeological excavation.

===Transport===
On 10 September 2007, Professor Stephen Harding of the University of Nottingham, used ground penetrating radar (GPR) equipment to pinpoint the location of a 1,000-year-old Viking transport longship (Nordic clinker design) beneath 6&ndash;10 feet (2&ndash;3 meters) of clay in Meols, Wirral, (a well-known settling place of Vikings). The ship had been previously uncovered in 1938 during excavation of a car park. Workers at the time covered the ship over again so as not to delay construction. BBC NEWS, Viking ship 'buried beneath pub' 

==Construction==
The Stora Hammars I stone showing armed warriors in a longship.

The first longships can trace their origin back to between 500 and 300 BC, when the Danish Hjortspring boat was built. It was fastened with cord, not nailed, and paddled, not rowed. It had rounded cross sections and although 65 ft long was only 6 ft wide. The rounded sections gave maximum displacement for the lowest wetted surface area, similar to a modern narrow rowing skiff, so were very fast but had little carrying capacity. The shape suggests mainly river use. Unlike later boats, it had a low bow and stern. A distinctive feature is the two-prong cutaway bow section.

The first true longship, that was rowed was the Nydam ship built in Denmark around 350 AD. It also had very rounded underwater sections but had more pronounced flair in the topsides, giving it more stability as well as keeping more water out of the boat at speed or in waves. It had no sail. It was of lapstrake construction fastened with iron nails. The bow and stern had slight elevation. The keel was a flattened plank about twice as thick as a normal strake plank but still not strong enough to withstand the downwards thrust of a mast.

The Sutton Hoo longship, sometimes referred to as the ghost ship of the Wufflings, is about 27 m x 4.5 m maximum beam and built about 625 AD. It is associated with the Saxons. The ship was crushed by the weight of soil when buried but most details have been reconstructed. The ship was similar in hull section to the Nydam ship with flared topsides. Compared to later longships, the oak planks are wide-about 250 mm including laps,with less taper at bow and stern. Planks were 25 mm thick. The 26 heavy frames are spaced at 850 mm in the centre. Each frame tapers from the turn of the bilge to the inwale. This suggests that knees were used to brace the upper two or three topside planks but appear to have rotted away. The hull had a distinctive leaf shape with the bow sections much narrower than the stern quarters. There were nine wide planks per side. The ship had a light keel plank but pronounced stem and stern deadwood. The reconstruction suggests the stern was much lower than the bow. It had a steering oar to starboard braced by an extra frame. The raised prow extended about 3.7 m above the keel and the hull was estimated to draw 750 mm when lightly laden. Between each futtock the planks were lapped in normal clinker style and fastened with six iron rivets per plank. There is no evidence of a mast, sail, or strengthening of the keel amidships but a half-sized replica, the Soe Wylfing, sailed very well with a modest sail area.

Sails started to be used from possibly the 8th century. The earliest had either plaited or chequered pattern, with narrow strips sewn together. M.Magnusson.P90.Tempus.2003 

About 700 AD the Kvalslund ship was built. It is the first with a true keel. Its cross sectional shape was flatter on the bottom with less flair to the topsides. This shape is far more stable and able to handle rougher seas. It had the high prow of the later longships. After several centuries of evolution, the fully developed longship emerged some time in the middle of the ninth century. Its long, graceful, menacing head figure carved in the stern, such as the Oseburg ship, echoed the designs of its predecessors. The mast was now square in section and located toward the middle of the ship, and could be lowered and raised. The hulls sides were fastened together to allow it to flex with the waves, combining lightness and ease of handling on land. The ships were large enough to carry cargo and passengers on long ocean voyages, but still maintained speed and agility, making the longship a versatile warship and cargo carrier.

===Keel, stems and hull===
The Viking shipbuilders had no written diagrams or standard written design plan. The shipbuilder pictured the longship before its construction, based on previous builds, and the ship was then built from the keel up. The keel and stems were made first. The shape of the stem was based on segments of circles of varying sizes. The keel was an inverted T shape to accept the garboard planks. In the longships the keel was made up of several sections spliced together and fastened with treenails. The next step was building the strakes &ndash; the lines of planks joined endwise from stern to stern. Nearly all longships were clinker (also known as lapstrake) built, meaning that each hull plank overlapped the next. Each plank was hewn from an oak tree so that the finished plank was about 25 mm thick and tapered along each edge to a thickness of about 20 mm. The planks were radially hewn so that the grain is approximately at right angles to the surface of the plank. This provides maximum strength, an even bend and an even rate of expansion and contraction in water. It modern terms this is called quarter sawn timber and has the least natural shrinkage of any cut section of wood. The plank above the turn of the bilge, the meginhufr, was about 37 mm thick on very long ships, but narrower to take the strain of the crossbeams. This was also the area subject to collisions. The planks overlapped by about 25 mm30 mm and were joined by iron rivets. Each overlap was stuffed with wool or animal hair or sometimes hemp soaked in pine tar to ensure water tightness. At midlength, where the planks are straight, the rivets are about 170 mm apart but were closer together as the planks sweep up to the curved bow and stern. There is considerable twist and bend in the end planks. This was achieved by using both thinner (by 50%) and narrower planks. In more sophisticated builds, forward planks were cut from natural curved trees called reaction wood. Planks were installed unseasoned or wet. Partly worked stems and sterns have been located in bogs. It has been suggested they were stored there over winter to stop the wood drying and cracking. The moisture in wet planks allowed the builder to force the planks into a more acute bend if need be. Once dry it would stay in the forced position. At the bow and the stern builders were able to create hollow sections, or compound bends, at the waterline making the entry point very fine. In less sophisticated ships short and nearly straight planks were used at the bow and stern. Where long timber was not available, or the ship was very long, the planks were butt joined although over lapping scarf joints, fixed with nails.

As the planks reached the desired height, the interior frame (futtocks) and cross beams were added. Frames were placed close together which is an enduring feature of thin planked ships,still used today on some lightweight wooden racing craft such as those designed by Bruce Farr. Viking boat builders used a spacing of about 850 mm. Part of the reason for this spacing was to achieve the correct distance between rowing stations and to create space for the chests used by Norse sailors as thwarts (seats). The bottom futtocks next to the keel were made from natural L-shaped crooks. The upper futtocks were usually not attached to the lower futtocks to allow some hull twist. The parts were held together with iron rivets, hammered in from the outside of the hull and fastened from the inside with a rove (washers). The surplus rivet was then cut off. A ship normally used about 700 kg of iron nails in a 18 m long ship. In some ships the gap between the lower uneven futtock and the lapstrake planks was filled with a spacer block about 200 mm long. In later ships spruce stringers were fastened lengthwise to the futtocks roughly parallel to the keel. Longships had about five rivets for each yard (90 cm) of plank. In many early ships treenails (trenails, trunnels) were used to fasten large timbers. First, a hole about 20 mm wide hole was drilled through two adjoining timbers, a wooden pegs inserted which was split and a thin wedge inserted to expand the peg. Some treenails have been found with traces of linseed oil suggesting that treenails were soaked before the pegs were inserted. When dried the oil would act as a semi waterproof weak filler/glue.

The longships narrow deep keel provided strength beneath the waterline. A typical size keel of a longer ship was 100 mm300 mm amidships, tapering in width at the bow and stern. Sometimes there was a false outer keel to take the wear while being dragged up a beach. These large timbers were shaped with both adze and broadaxe. At the bow the cut water was especially strong, as longboats sailed in ice strewn water in spring. Hulls up to 560 cm wide gave stability, making the longship less likely to tip when sailed. The greater beam provided more moment of leverage by placing the crew or any other mobile weight on the windward side. Ocean going longships had higher topsides about a 1 m high to keep out water. Higher topsides were supported with knees with the long axis fastened to the top of the crossbeams. The hull was waterproofed with animal hair, wool, hemp or moss drenched in pine tar. In the autumn the ships would be tarred and then left in a boathouse over the winter to allow time for the tar to dry. To keep the sea out, wooden disks were put into the oar holes. These could be shut from the inside when the oars were not in use. A drain plug hole about 25 mm was drilled in the garboard plank on one side to allow rain water drainage.

The oars did not use rowlocks or thole pins but square holes cut below the gunwale line. The holes were also used for belaying mooring lines and sail sheets. At the bow the forward upper futtock protruded about 400 mm above the sheerline and was carved to retain anchor or mooring lines.

===Timber===
Analysis of timber samples from Viking long boats shows that a variety of timbers were used, but there was strong preference for oak which was associated with Odin in Viking mythology. Oak is a heavy, durable timber that can be easily worked by adze and axe when green (wet/unseasoned). Generally large and prestigious ships were made from oak. Other timber used were ash, elm, pine, spruce and larch. Spruce is light and seems to have been more common in later designs for internal hull battens (stringers). Although it is used for spars in modern times there is as yet no evidence the Vikings used spruce for masts. All timber was used unseasoned. The bark was removed by a bark spade. This consisted of a 1.2 m long wooden handle with a T crossbar at the upper end, fitted with a broad chisel-like cutting edge of iron. The cutting edge was 60 mm wide  80 mm long with a 120 mm long neck where the handle was inserted. It appears that in cold winters wood work stopped and partly completed timber work was buried in mud to prevent it drying out. Timber was worked with iron adzes and axes. Most of the smoothing was done with a side axe. Other tools used in woodwork were hammers, wedges, drawknives, planes and saws. Iron saws were probably very rare. The doomsday book in England (1086 AD)records only 13 saws. Possibly these were pit saws and it is uncertain if they were used in longship construction.

===Sail and mast===
Even though no longship sail has been found, accounts verify that longships had square sails. Sails measured perhaps 35 ft to 40 ft across, and were made of rough wool cloth. Unlike in knarrs, a longship sail was not stitched.

The sail was held in place by the mast which was up to 16 m tall. It base was about 250180 mm. The mast was supported by a large wooden maststep called a kerling ("Old Woman" in Old Norse) that was semicircular in shape. (Trent) The kerling was made of oak, and about 700 mm wide and up to 6 m long in the larger ships. It usually heavily tapered into a joint with the internal keelson, although keelsons were by no means universal. The kerling lay across two strong frames that ran width-wise above the keel in the centre of the boat. The kerling also had a companion: the "mast fish," a wooden timber above the kerling just below deck height that provided extra help in keeping the mast erect. It was a large wooden bulk of timber about 3 m long with a 1.4 m long slot, facing aft to accommodate the mast as it was raised. This acted as a mechanism to catch and secure the mast before the stays were secured. It was an early form of mast partner but was aligned fore and aft. In later longships there is no mast fish-the mast partner is an athwartwise beam similar to more modern construction. Most masts were about half the length of the ship so that it did not project beyond the hull when unstepped. When lowered the mast foot was kept in the base of the mast step and the top of the mast secured in a natural wooden crook about 1.5 m-2.5 m high, on the port side, so that it did not interfere with steering on the starboard side.

There is a suggestion that the rig was sometimes used in a lateen style with the top cross spar dipped at an angle to aid sailing to windward i.e. the spar became the luff. There is little or no evidence to support this theory. No explanation is offered as to how this could be accomplished with a square sail as the lower reefed portion of the sail would be very bulky and would prevent even an approximation of the laminar flow necessary for windward sailing. There is no evidence of any triangular sails in use. Masts were held erect by side stays and possibly fore and aft stays. Each side stay was fitted at it lower end with a 150 mm long toggle. There were no chain plates. The lower part of the side stay consisted of ropes looped under the end of a knee of upper futtock which had a hole underneath. The lower part of the stay was about 500-800 mmm long and attached to a combined flat wooden turnblock and multi V jamb cleat called an angel (maiden, virgin). About 4 turns of rope went between the angel and the toggle to give the mechanical advantage to tighten the side stays. At each turn the v shape at the bottom of the angels "wings" jambed the stay preventing slippage and movement.

===Rudder===
Early long boats used some form of steering oar but by the 10th century the side rudder (called a steerboard, which is why that side of the vessel is now called starboard) was well established. It consisted of a length of timber about 2.4 m long. The upper section was rounded to a diameter of about 150 mm. The lower blade was about 1.8 m x 400 mm. Since there is only a single steerboard, drag from that would make the ship steer a point or too to that side, so the shipwrights created a hydrofoil. Just like an airfoil, movement through fluid creates lift, which perfectly compensates for the offset drag. The steerboard on the Gokstad ship in the Viking Ship Museum in Oslo, Norway, is about 8 inches wide, completely flat inboard and with about a 3" maximum width at the center of the foil. The head of the rudder shaft had two square holes about 200300 mm apart. When the rudder was in its normal position the tiller was inserted in the upper hole so that the tiller faced athwartwise. The shaft was attached to the gunwale by a U shaped joint. Near the stern, about halfway down the starboard topsides, was a rounded wooden block about 150 mm in diameter and 100 mm high, with a central hole for a rope. This corresponded to a hole in the midsection of the rudder blade. From the outside the rope ran through the blade, through the round block and topsides and was fastened inside the hull. The flexibility of the hemp rope allowed the blade to pivot. When beached or in shallow water the tiller was moved to the lower hole, the blade rope was slackened and the rudder head pulled up so the rudder could operate in shallow waters. Modern facsimiles are reported to steer quite well but require a very large amount of physical effort compared to the modern fore and aft tiller.

===Anchors===
Longships for the most part used two different kinds of anchors. The most common was a natural wood yoke formed from a tree branch. The weight was supplied by a stone passing laterally through the U of the yoke. The top of the yolk was closed by either a length of hardwood or a curved iron head, which kept the stone in place. One side of the head stuck out so it could dig into mud or sand. In Denmark an iron Viking age anchor has been found that resembles the modern fisherman's anchor but without the crossbar. The cross bar may have rusted away. These anchors had an iron ring to which the hemp warp was attached.

===Ship builders toolkit===

At the height of Viking expansion into Dublin and Jorvik 875954 AD the longship reached a peak of development such as the Gokstad ship 890. Archaeological discoveries from this period at Coppergate, York, show the shipwright had a large range of sophisticated woodwork tools. As well as the heavy adze, broad axe, wooden mallets and wedges, the craftsman had steel tools such as anvils, files, snips, awls, augers, gouges, draw knife, knives, including folding knives, chisels and small 300 mm long bow saws with antler handles. Edged tools were kept sharp with sharpening stones from Norway. One of the most sophisticated tools was a 25 mm diameter twist drill bit, perfect for drilling hole for treenails. Simple mechanical pole wood lathes were used to make cups and bowls.

===Replica longships===
Since the discovery of the original longships in the 1800s, many boat builders have built many replicas. However, most have not been able to resist the temptation to use more modern techniques and tools in construction. In 189293 a full-size near-replica of the Gokstad ship, the Viking, was built by the Norwegian Magnus Andersen in Bergen. It was used to sail the Atlantic. It had a deeper keel with 1.5m draught to stiffen the hull and a range of non-authentic triangular sails to help performance and big fenders on each gunwale filled with reindeer hair to give extra buoyancy in case of swamping. The skipper recorded that the keel bowed upwards as much as 20mm and the gunwale flexed inwards as much as 150 mm in heavy seas. .M Andersen.Vikingfoerden, 1895 A half-size replica of the Sutton Hoo longship has been equipped with a substantial sail, despite the original having oar power only.

==Navigation and propulsion==

===Navigation===
A replica of the Gokstad ship, named Viking was sailed across the Atlantic to the World's Columbian Exposition in 1893
The Vikings were experts in judging speed and wind direction, and in knowing the current and when to expect high and low tides. Viking navigational techniques are not well understood, but historians postulate that the Vikings probably had some sort of primitive astrolabe and used the stars to plot their course.

The Danish archaeologist Thorkild Ramskou suggested in 1967 that the "sun-stones" referred to in some sagas might have been natural crystals capable of polarizing skylight. The mineral cordierite occurring in Norway has the local name "Viking's Compass." Its changes in colour would allow determining the sun's position (azimuth) even through an overcast or foggy horizon. 

An ingenious navigation method is detailed in Viking Navigation Using the Sunstone, Polarized Light and the Horizon Board by Leif K. Karlsen. One Earth Press To derive a course to steer relative to the sun direction, he uses a sun-stone (Solarsteinn) made of Iceland spar (optical calcite or Silfurberg), and a "horizon-board." The author constructed the latter from an Icelandic saga source, and describes an experiment performed to determine its accuracy. Karlsen also discusses why on North Atlantic trips the Vikings might have preferred to navigate by the sun rather than by stars, as at high latitudes in summer the days are long and the nights short.

A Viking named Stjerner Oddi compiled a chart showing the direction of sunrise and sunset, which enabled navigators to sail longships from place to place with ease. Almgren, an earlier Viking, told of another method: "All the measurements of angles were made with what was called a 'half wheel' (a kind of half sun-diameter which corresponds to about sixteen minutes of arc). This was something that was known to every skipper at that time, or to the long-voyage pilot or kendtmand ('man who knows the way') who sometimes went along on voyages... When the sun was in the sky, it was not, therefore, difficult to find the four points of the compass, and determining latitude did not cause any problems either." (Algrem)

Birds provided a helpful guide to finding land. A Viking legend states that Vikings used to take caged crows aboard ships and let them loose if they got lost. The crows would instinctively head for land, giving the sailors a course to steer.

Archaeologists have found two devices which they interpret as navigation instruments. Both appear to be sundials with gnomon curves etched on a flat surface. The devices are small enough to be held flat in the hand at 70 mm diameter. A wooden version dated to about 1000 AD was found in Greenland. A stone version was also found at Vatnahverfi, Greenland. By looking at the place where the shadow from the rod falls on a carved curve, a navigator is able to sail along a line of latitude. Both gnomon curve devices show the curve for 60 north very prominently. This was the approximate latitude that the Vikings would have sailed along to get to Greenland from Scandinavia. The wooden device also has north marked and had 32 arrow heads around the edge that may be the points of a compass. Other lines are interpreted as the solstice and equinox curves. The device was tested successfully, as a sun compass, during a 1984 reenactment when a longship sailed across the North Atlantic. It was accurate to within  5. Cultural Atlas of the Viking World. Ed. J Graham Campbell et al. Andromeda. 1994. 

===Propulsion===

The longships had two methods of propulsion: oars and sail. At sea, the sail enabled longships to travel faster than by oar and to cover long distances overseas with far less manual effort. Sails could be raised or lowered quickly.In a modern facile the mast can be lowered in 90 seconds. Oars were used when near the coast or in a river, to gain speed quickly, and when there was an adverse (or insufficient) wind. In combat, the variability of wind power made rowing the chief means of propulsion. The ship was steered by a vertical flat blade with a short round handle, at right angles, mounted over the starboard side of the aft gunwale.

Longships were not fitted with benches. When rowing, the crew sat on sea chests (chests containing their personal possessions) that would otherwise take up space. The chests were made the same size and were the perfect height for a Viking to sit on and row. Longships had hooks for oars to fit into, but smaller oars were also used, with crooks or bends to be used as oarlocks. If there were no holes then a loop of rope kept the oars in place.

An innovation that improved the sail's performance was the beitass, or stretching pole &ndash; a wooden spar stiffening the sail. The windward performance of the ship was poor by modern standards as there was no centreboard, deep keel or leeboard. To assist in tacking the beitasss kept the luff taunt. Bracing lines were attached to the luff and lead through holes on the forward gunwale. Such holes were often reinforced with short sections of timber about 500 mm to 700 mm long on the outside of the hull.

==Legacy==
The Vikings were major contributors to the shipbuilding technology of their day. Their shipbuilding methods spread through extensive contact with other cultures, and ships from the 11th and 12th centuries are known to borrow many of the longships design features, despite the passing of many centuries. The Lancha Poveira, a boat from Pvoa de Varzim, Portugal is one of the last remnants from the longship, keeping all the longboat features but without a long stern and bow, and with a Mediterranean sail. It was used until the 1950s. Today there is just one boat: F em Deus.

Image from the Bayeux Tapestry showing Harold Godwinson's ship approaching a beach, probably in the Somme Estuary. Wolfgang Grape, The Bayeux Tapestry, Prestel. ISBN 3-7913-1365-7. p. 95. 
Many historians, archaeologists and adventurers have reconstructed longships in an attempt to understand how they worked. Sea Stallion from Glendalough 2007 These re-creators have been able to identify many of the advances that the Vikings implemented in order to make the longship a superior vessel. One replica longship covered 223 nmi in a single day, and another re-creator was able to go faster than 8 kn in his longship.

The longship was a master of all trades. It was wide and stable, yet light, fast, and nimble. With all these qualities combined in one ship, the longship was unrivaled for centuries, until the arrival of the great cog.

In Scandinavia, the longship was the usual vessel for war even with the introduction of cogs in the 12th&ndash;13th centuries. Leidang fleet-levy laws remained in place for most of the Middle Ages, demanding that the freemen should build, man and furnish ships for war if demanded by the king&mdash;ships with at least 20 or 25 oar-pairs (40&ndash;50+ rowers). However, by the late 14th century, these low-boarded vessels were at a disadvantage against newer, taller vessels &ndash; when the Victual Brothers, in the employee of the Hansa, attacked Bergen in the autumn of 1393, the "great ships" of the pirates could not be boarded by the Norwegian levy ships called out by Margaret I of Denmark and the raiders were able to sack the town with impunity. While earlier times had seen larger and taller longships in service, by this time the authorities had also gone over to other types of ships for warfare. The last Viking longship was defeated in 1429.

== Famous longships ==
* The Oseberg ship and the Gokstad ship &ndash; both from Vestfold in Norway.
* The Ormen Lange ("The Long Serpent") was the most famous longship of Norwegian king Olaf Tryggvason.
* The Mora was the ship given to William the Conqueror by his wife, Matilda, and used as the flagship in the Norman conquest of England.
* The Sea Stallion, the second largest Viking ship replica ever made, is an almost new 30 m replica of the Skuldelev 2, and sailed from Roskilde, Denmark to Dublin in summer 2007 to commemorate the voyage of the original. In the winter 2007/2008 The Sea Stallion was exhibited outside the National Museum in Dublin. In the summer 2008 the Sea Stallion returned to Roskilde on a route going south of England.
* The Nydam ship (c. 350&ndash;400) is a burial ship from Denmark. This vessel is 80 ft long and may have had its mast and sail removed for burial. The ship shows a combination of building styles and was propelled by oars.
* Dragon Harald Fairhair, is the largest replica longship ever built. The ship was built in Haugesund, Norway and launched in 2012. Equipped with 50 oars, it is 35 m long.
* The slendingur (Icelander) is a 22 m replica of the Gokstad ship that was built, using traditional building techniques. In 2000, it was used to sail from Iceland to the L'Anse aux Meadows in Newfoundland, to participate in the 1000 year anniversary of Leif Ericson's discovery of America. 

==See also==

* Birlinn
* Dragon Harald Fairhair (ship)
* Hugin (longship)
* Knarr
* Leidang
* Medieval ships
* Nordland (boat)
* Viking ship
* Viking ship replicas

==Notes==

==References==

*Bruun, Per (1997).The Viking Ship, Journal of Coastal Research, 4 (1997): 1282-1289. http://www.jstor.org/stable/4298737
*Durham, Keith (2002). Viking Longship, Vanguard 47, Osprey Publishing, 2002. ISBN 9781841763491
*W. Fitzhugh and E. Ward, Vikings: The North Atlantic Saga. Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press. 2000.
*A. W. Brgger (1951). The Viking ships, their ancestry and evolution, Oslo: Dreyer. 1951.
*Hale, J.R (1998)."'The Viking Longship", Scientific American February 1998, pp.58-66.
*K. McCone, 'Zisalpinisch-gallisch uenia und lokan' in Festschrift Untermann, ed Heidermans et al., Innsbruck, 1993.1.
*L. Trent (1999). The Viking Longship, San Diego: Lucent Books, 1999.
*A. Forte, R. Oram, and F. Pederson. Viking Empires. 1st. ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005 ISBN 0-521-82992-5.
*D. Dersin, ed., What Life Was Like When Longships Sailed. 1st ed. Richmond: Time Life Books, 1998.
*A. W. Brgger and H. Shetelig, The Viking Ships. Twayne Publishers, New York, 1971, and C. Hurst, London, 1971.
*Chartrand, Rene, Mark Harrison, Ian Heath, and Keith Durham. The Vikings: voyagers of discovery and plunder. Osprey Publishing, 2006. 142&ndash;190.

== External links ==
* The Viking Ship Museum in Roskilde
* The Viking Ship Museum in Oslo
* The Ormen Friske disaster &ndash; a warning against construction errors in Viking ship replicas
* The Ormen Friske disaster in 1950 investigated
* Viking ships and traditional Norse wooden boats
* 
* 

* Longship



[[Luigi Alamanni]]

Luigi Alamanni
Luigi Alamanni (sometimes spelt Alemanni) (6 March 1495  18 April 1556) was an Italian poet and statesman. Luigi Alamanni Biography - Biography.com He was regarded as a prolific and versatile poet. He was credited with introducing the epigram into Italian poetry.

==Biography==
Alamanni was born in Florence. His father was a devoted adherent of the Medici party, but Luigi, smarting under a supposed injustice, joined with others in an unsuccessful conspiracy against Giulio de' Medici, afterwards Pope Clement VII. He was obliged in consequence to take refuge in Venice, and, on the accession of Clement, to flee to France. When Florence shook off the papal yoke in 1527, Alamanni returned, and took a prominent part in the management of the affairs of the republic.

On the restoration of the Medici in 1530, he had again to take refuge in France, where he composed the greater part of his works. He was a favourite with Francis I, who sent him as ambassador to Charles V after the Peace of Crepy in 1544.

As an instance of his tact in this capacity, it is related that when Charles interrupted a complimentary address by quoting from a satirical poem of Alamanni's the words:"l' aquila grifagna, Che per piu devorar, duoi rostri porta" ("Two crooked bills the ravenous eagle bears, The better to devour"), the latter at once replied that he spoke them as a poet, who was permitted to use fictions, but that he spoke now as an ambassador, who was obliged to tell the truth. The ready reply pleased Charles, who added some complimentary words.

After the death of Francis, Alamanni enjoyed the confidence of his successor Henry II, and in 1551 was sent by him as his ambassador to Genoa. He died at Amboise on April 18, 1556.

He wrote a large number of poems, distinguished by the purity and excellence of their style. The best is a didactic poem, La Coltivazione (Paris, 1546; see 1546 in poetry), written in imitation of Virgil's Georgics. His Opere Toscane (Lyon, 1532) consists of satirical pieces written in blank verse. An unfinished poem, Avarchide, in imitation of the Iliad, was the work of his old age and has little merit.

It has been said by some that Alamanni was the first to use blank verse in Italian poetry, but that distinction belongs rather to his contemporary Giangiorgio Trissino.

==Bibliography==
*A poetical romance, Girone il Cortese (Paris, 1548; see 1548 in poetry)
*A tragedy, Antigone
*A comedy, Flora

==Notes==

==References==
*



[[Louis Aleman]]

Louis Aleman (c. 1390  September 16, 1450) was a French cardinal.

==Biography==
Aleman was born of a noble family at the castle of Arbent near Bugey. A relative was the Papal Chamberlain. He was successively bishop of Maguelonne (1418), archbishop of Arles (1423) and Cardinal Priest of S. Cecilia (1426).

Aleman was a prominent member of the council of Basel, and, together with Cardinal Julian Cesarini, led the party which maintained the supremacy of general councils over the pope's authority.

In 1440 Aleman obtained the support of the emperor Sigismund and of the duke of Milan to his views, and proclaiming the deposition of Pope Eugene IV, placed the tiara upon the head of Amadeus VIII, Duke of Savoy (henceforward known as Antipope Felix V).

Eugene retorted by excommunicating the antipope and depriving Aleman of all his ecclesiastical dignities. In order to make an end of the schism, Felix V finally abdicated on Aleman's advice, and Nicholas V, who had succeeded in 1447, restored the cardinal to all his honours and employed him as legate to Germany in 1449.

On his return he retired to his diocese of Arles, where he devoted himself zealously to the instruction of his people. He died on September 16, 1450, and was beatified by Pope Clement VII in 1527.

==Notes==

==References==
*

;Attribution
* 

==Further reading==
* See U. Chevalier, Repert. des sources hist. (Paris, 1905), p. 130.



[[LR parser]]

In computer science, LR parsers are a type of bottom-up parsers that efficiently handle deterministic context-free languages in guaranteed linear time. The LALR parsers and the SLR parsers are common variants of LR parsers. LR parsers are often mechanically generated from a formal grammar for the language by a parser generator tool. They are very widely used for the processing of computer languages, more than other kinds of generated parsers.

The name LR is an acronym. The L means that the parser reads input text in one direction without backing up; that direction is typically Left to right within each line, and top to bottom across the lines of the full input file. (This is true for most parsers.) The R means that the parser produces a reversed Rightmost derivation; it does a bottom-up parse, not a top-down LL parse or ad-hoc parse. The name LR is often followed by a numeric qualifier, as in LR(1) or sometimes LR(k). To avoid backtracking or guessing, the LR parser is allowed to peek ahead at k lookahead input symbols before deciding how to parse earlier symbols. Typically k is 1 and is not mentioned. The name LR is often preceded by other qualifiers, as in SLR and LALR.

LR parsers are deterministic; they produce a single correct parse without guesswork or backtracking, in linear time. This is ideal for computer languages. But LR parsers are not suited for human languages which need more flexible but slower methods. Other parser methods (CYK algorithm, Earley parser, and GLR parser) that backtrack or yield multiple parses may take O(n2), O(n3) or even exponential time when they guess badly.

The above properties of L, R, and k are actually shared by all shift-reduce parsers, including precedence parsers. But by convention, the LR name stands for the form of parsing invented by Donald Knuth, and excludes the earlier, less powerful precedence methods (for example Operator-precedence parser). 
LR parsers can handle a larger range of languages and grammars than precedence parsers or top-down LL parsing. Language theoretic comparison of LL and LR grammars This is because the LR parser waits until it has seen an entire instance of some grammar pattern before committing to what it has found. An LL parser has to decide or guess what it is seeing much sooner, when it has only seen the leftmost input symbol of that pattern. LR is also better at error reporting. It detects syntax errors as early in the input stream as possible.

== Overview ==

===Bottom-up parse tree for example A*2 + 1 ===

Bottom-up parse tree built in numbered steps

An LR parser scans and parses the input text in one forward pass over the text. The parser builds up the parse tree incrementally, bottom up, and left to right, without guessing or backtracking. At every point in this pass, the parser has accumulated a list of subtrees or phrases of the input text that have been already parsed. Those subtrees are not yet joined together because the parser has not yet reached the right end of the syntax pattern that will combine them. 

At step 6 in the example parse, only "A*2" has been parsed, incompletely. Only the shaded lower-left corner of the parse tree exists. None of the parse tree nodes numbered 7 and above exist yet. Nodes 3, 4, and 6 are the roots of isolated subtrees for variable A, operator *, and number 2, respectively. These three root nodes are temporarily held in a parse stack. The remaining unparsed portion of the input stream is "+ 1".

===Shift and reduce actions===

As with other shift-reduce parsers, an LR parser works by doing some combination of Shift steps and Reduce steps. 
* A Shift step advances in the input stream by one symbol. That shifted symbol becomes a new single-node parse tree.
* A Reduce step applies a completed grammar rule to some of the recent parse trees, joining them together as one tree with a new root symbol.
If the input has no syntax errors, the parser continues with these steps until all of the input has been consumed and all of the parse trees have been reduced to a single tree representing an entire legal input.

LR parsers differ from other shift-reduce parsers in how they decide when to reduce, and how to pick between rules with similar endings. But the final decisions and the sequence of shift or reduce steps are the same. 

Much of the LR parser's efficiency is from being deterministic. To avoid guessing, the LR parser often looks ahead (rightwards) at the next scanned symbol, before deciding what to do with previously scanned symbols. The lexical scanner works one or more symbols ahead of the parser. The lookahead symbols are the 'right-hand context' for the parsing decision. 
Engineering a Compiler (2nd edition), by Keith Cooper and Linda Torczon, Morgan Kaufman 2011. 

===Bottom-up parse stack===

Bottom-Up Parser at step 6

Like other shift-reduce parsers, an LR parser lazily waits until it has scanned and parsed all parts of some construct before committing to what the combined construct is. The parser then acts immediately on the combination instead of waiting any further. In the parse tree example, the phrase A gets reduced to Value and then to Products in steps 1-3 as soon as lookahead * is seen, rather than waiting any later to organize those parts of the parse tree. The decisions for how to handle A are based only on what the parser and scanner have already seen, without considering things that appear much later to the right.

Reductions reorganize the most recently parsed things, immediately to the left of the lookahead symbol. So the list of already-parsed things acts like a stack. This parse stack grows rightwards. The base or bottom of the stack is on the left and holds the leftmost, oldest parse fragment. Every reduction step acts only on the rightmost, newest parse fragments. (This accumulative parse stack is very unlike the predictive, leftward-growing parse stack used by top-down parsers.)

===Bottom-up parse steps for example A*2 + 1 ===

 Step Parse Stack Unparsed Shift/Reduce 
 0 empty A*2 + 1 shift 
 1 id *2 + 1 Value  id 
 2 Value *2 + 1 Products  Value 
 3 Products *2 + 1 shift 
 4 Products * 2 + 1 shift 
 5 Products * int + 1 Value  int 
 6 Products * Value + 1 Products  Products * Value 
 7 Products + 1 Sums  Products 
 8 Sums + 1 shift 
 9 Sums + 1 shift 
 10 Sums + int eof Value  int 
 11 Sums + Value eof Products  Value 
 12 Sums + Products eof Sums  Sums + Products 
 13 Sums eof done 
 

Step 6 applies a grammar rule with multiple parts:
: Products  Products * Value
This matches the stack top holding the parsed phrases "... Products * Value". The reduce step replaces this instance of the rule's right hand side, "Products * Value" by the rule's left hand side symbol, here a larger Products. If the parser builds complete parse trees, the three trees for inner Products, *, and Value are combined by a new tree root for Products. Otherwise, semantic details from the inner Products and Value are output to some later compiler pass, or are combined and saved in the new Products symbol. 
Crafting and Compiler, by Charles Fischer, Ron Cytron, and Richard LeBlanc, Addison Wesley 2009. 

===LR parse steps for example A*2 + 1 ===

In LR parsers, the shift and reduce decisions are potentially based on the entire stack of everything that has been previously parsed, not just on a single, topmost stack symbol. If done in an unclever way, that could lead to very slow parsers that get slower and slower for longer inputs. LR parsers do this with constant speed, by summarizing all the relevant left context information into a single number called the LR(0) parser state. For each grammar and LR analysis method, there is a fixed (finite) number of such states. Besides holding the already-parsed symbols, the parse stack also remembers the state numbers reached by everything up to those points. 

At every parse step, the entire input text is divided into a stack of previously parsed phrases, and a current lookahead symbol, and the remaining unscanned text. The parser's next action is determined by its current LR(0) (rightmost on the stack) and the lookahead symbol. In the steps below, all the black details are exactly the same as in other non-LR shift-reduce parsers. LR parser stacks add the state information in purple, summarizing the black phrases to their left on the stack and what syntax possibilities to expect next. Users of an LR parser can usually ignore state information. These states are explained in a later section. 

 Step Parse Stack * LookAhead Unscanned ParserAction Grammar Rule NextState 
 0 id *2 + 1 shift 
 1 id * 2 + 1 reduce Value  id 
 2 Value * 2 + 1 reduce Products  Value 
 3 Products * 2 + 1 shift 
 4 Products * int + 1 shift 
 5 Products * int + 1 reduce Value  int 
 6 Products * Value + 1 reduce Products  Products * Value 
 7 Products + 1 reduce Sums  Products 
 8 Sums + 1 shift 
 9 Sums + int eof shift 
 10 Sums + int eof reduce Value  int 
 11 Sums + Value eof reduce Products  Value 
 12 Sums + Products eof reduce Sums  Sums + Products 
 13 Sums eof done 
 

At initial step 0, the input stream "A*2 + 1" is divided into
* an empty section on the parse stack,
* lookahead text "A" scanned as an id symbol, and
* the remaining unscanned text "*2 + 1".
The parse stack begins by holding only initial state 0. When state 0 sees the lookahead id, it knows to shift that id onto the stack, and scan the next input symbol *, and advance to state 9.

At step 4, the total input stream "A*2 + 1" is currently divided into 
* the parsed section "A *" with 2 stacked phrases Products and *,
* lookahead text "2" scanned as an int symbol, and
* the remaining unscanned text " + 1".
The states corresponding to the stacked phrases are 0, 4, and 5. The current, rightmost state on the stack is state 5. When state 5 sees the lookahead int, it knows to shift that int onto the stack as its own phrase, and scan the next input symbol +, and advance to state 8.

At step 12, all of the input stream has been consumed but only partially organized. The current state is 3. When state 3 sees the lookahead eof, it knows to apply the completed grammar rule
::Sums  Sums + Products
by combining the stack's rightmost three phrases for Sums, +, and Products into one thing. State 3 itself doesn't know what the next state should be. This is found by going back to state 0, just to the left of the phrase being reduced. When state 0 sees this new completed instance of a Sums, it advances to state 1 (again). This consulting of older states is why they are kept on the stack, instead of keeping only the current state.

===Grammar for the example A*2 + 1===

LR parsers are constructed from a grammar that formally defines the syntax of the input language as a set of patterns. The grammar doesn't cover all language rules, such as the size of numbers, or the consistent use of names and their definitions in the context of the whole program. LR parsers use a context-free grammar that deals just with local patterns of symbols. 

The example grammar used here is a tiny subset of the Java or C language:

::r0: Goal  Sums eof
::r1: Sums  Sums + Products
::r2: Sums  Products
::r3: Products  Products * Value
::r4: Products  Value
::r5: Value  int
::r6: Value  id

The grammar's terminal symbols are the multi-character symbols or 'tokens' found in the input stream by a lexical scanner. Here these include + * and int for any integer constant, and id for any identifier name, and eof for end of input file. The grammar doesn't care what the int values or id spellings are, nor does it care about blanks or line breaks. The grammar uses these terminal symbols but does not define them. They are always leaf nodes (at the bottom bushy end) of the parse tree.

The capitalized terms like Sums are nonterminal symbols. These are names for concepts or patterns in the language. They are defined in the grammar and never occur themselves in the input stream. They are always internal nodes (above the bottom) of the parse tree. They only happen as a result of the parser applying some grammar rule. Some terminals are defined with two or more rules; these are alternative patterns. Rules can refer back to themselves, which are called recursive. This grammar uses recursive rules to handle repeated math operators. Grammars for complete languages use recursive rules to handle lists, parenthesized expressions, and nested statements.

Any given computer language can be described by several different grammars. An LR(1) parser can handle many but not all common grammars. It is usually possible to manually modify a grammar so that it fits the limitations of LR(1) parsing and the generator tool.

The grammar for an LR parser must be unambiguous itself, or must be augmented by tie-breaking precedence rules. This means there is only one correct way to apply the grammar to a given legal example of the language, resulting in a unique parse tree with just one meaning, and a unique sequence of shift/reduce actions for that example. LR parsing is not a useful technique for human languages with ambiguous grammars that depend on the interplay of words. Human languages are better handled by parsers like Generalized LR parser, the Earley parser, or the CYK algorithm that can simultaneously compute all possible parse trees in one pass.

===Parse table for the example grammar===

Most LR parsers are table driven. The parser's program code is a simple generic loop that is the same for all grammars and languages. The knowledge of the grammar and its syntactic implications are encoded into unchanging data tables called parse tables. Entries in a table show whether to shift or reduce (and by which grammar rule), for every legal combination of parser state and lookahead symbol. The parse tables also tell how to compute the next state, given just a current state and a next symbol. 

The parse tables are much larger than the grammar. LR tables are hard to accurately compute by hand for big grammars. So they are mechanically derived from the grammar by some parser generator tool like Bison. 
Flex & Bison: Text Processing Tools, by John Levine, O'Reilly Media 2009. 

Depending on how the states and parsing table are generated, the resulting parser is called either a SLR (simple LR) parser, LALR (look-ahead LR) parser, or canonical LR parser. LALR parsers handle more grammars than SLR parsers. Canonical LR parsers handle even more grammars, but use many more states and much larger tables. The example grammar is SLR. 

LR parse tables are two-dimensional. Each current LR(0) parser state has its own row. Each possible next symbol has its own column. Some combinations of state and next symbol are not possible for valid input streams. These blank cells trigger syntax error messages. 

The Action left half of the table has columns for lookahead terminal symbols. These cells determine whether the next parser action is shift (to state n), or reduce (by grammar rule rn).

The Goto right half of the table has columns for nonterminal symbols. These cells show which state to advance to, after some reduction's Left Hand Side has created an expected new instance of that symbol. This is like a shift action but for nonterminals; the lookahead terminal symbol is unchanged.

The table column "Current Rules" documents the meaning and syntax possibilities for each state, as worked out by the parser generator. It is not included in the actual tables used at parsing time. The (pink dot) marker shows where the parser is now, within some partially recognized grammar rules. The things to the left of have been parsed, and the things to the right are expected soon. A state has several such current rules if the parser has not yet narrowed possibilities down to a single rule.

 Curr Lookahead LHS Goto 
 State Current Rules int id * + eof Sums Products Value 
 0 Goal  Sums eof 8 9 1 4 7 
 1 Goal  Sums eof Sums  Sums + Products 2 done 
 2 Sums  Sums + Products 8 9 3 7 
 3 Sums  Sums + Products Products  Products * Value 5 r1 r1 
 4 Sums  Products Products  Products * Value 5 r2 r2 
 5 Products  Products * Value 8 9 6 
 6 Products  Products * Value r3 r3 r3 
 7 Products  Value r4 r4 r4 
 8 Value  int r5 r5 r5 
 9 Value  id r6 r6 r6 
 

In state 2 above, the parser has just found and shifted-in the + of grammar rule
::r1: Sums  Sums + Products
The next expected phrase is Products. Products begins with terminal symbols int or id. If the lookahead is either of those, the parser shifts them in and advances to state 8 or 9, respectively. When a Products has been found, the parser advances to state 3 to accumulate the complete list of summands and find the end of rule r0. A Products can also begin with nonterminal Value. For any other lookahead or nonterminal, the parser announces a syntax error.

In state 3, the parser has just found a Products phrase, that could be from two possible grammar rules:
::r1: Sums  Sums + Products 
::r3: Products  Products * Value
The choice between r1 and r3 can't be decided just from looking backwards at prior phrases. The parser has to check the lookahead symbol to tell what to do. If the lookahead is *, it is in rule 3, so the parser shifts in the * and advances to state 5. If the lookahead is eof, it is at the end of rule 1 and rule 0, so the parser is done.

In state 9 above, all the non-blank, non-error cells are for the same reduction r6. Some parsers save time and table space by not checking the lookahead symbol in these simple cases. Syntax errors are then detected somewhat later, after some harmless reductions, but still before the next shift action or parser decision.

Individual table cells must not hold multiple, alternative actions, otherwise the parser would be nondeterministic with guesswork and backtracking. If the grammar is not LR(1), some cells will have shift/reduce conflicts between a possible shift action and reduce action, or reduce/reduce conflicts between multiple grammar rules. LR(k) parsers resolve these conflicts (where possible) by checking additional lookahead symbols beyond the first.

=== LR parser loop ===

The LR parser begins with a nearly empty parse stack containing just the start state 0, and with the lookahead holding the input stream's first scanned symbol. The parser then repeats the following loop step until done, or stuck on a syntax error:

The topmost state on the parse stack is some state s, and the current lookahead is some terminal symbol t. Look up the next parser action from row s and column t of the Lookahead Action table. That action is either Shift, Reduce, Done, or Error:
* Shift n:
::Shift the matched terminal t onto the parse stack and scan the next input symbol into the lookahead buffer.
::Push next state n onto the parse stack as the new current state.
* Reduce rm: Apply grammar rule rm: Lhs  S1 S2 ... SL
::Remove the matched topmost L symbols (and parse trees and associated state numbers) from the parse stack.
::This exposes a prior state p that was expecting an instance of the Lhs symbol.
::Join the L parse trees together as one parse tree with new root symbol Lhs.
::Lookup the next state n from row p and column Lhs of the LHS Goto table.
::Push the symbol and tree for Lhs onto the parse stack.
::Push next state n onto the parse stack as the new current state.
::The lookahead and input stream remain unchanged.
* Done: Lookahead t is the eof marker. End of parsing. If the state stack contains just the start state report success. Otherwise, report a syntax error.
* No action: Report a syntax error. The parser ends, or attempts some recovery.

Note: LR parser stack usually stores just the LR(1) automaton states, as the grammar symbols may be derived from them (in the automaton, all input transitions to some state are marked with the same symbol, which is the symbol associated with this state). Moreover these symbols are almost never needed as the state is all that matters when making the parsing decision. Compilers: Principles, Techniques, and Tools (2nd Edition), by Alfred Aho, Monica Lam, Ravi Sethi, and Jeffrey Ullman, Prentice Hall 2006. 

==LR generator analysis==

This section of the article can be skipped by most users of LR parser generators.

===LR states===

State 2 in the example parse table is for the partially parsed rule 
::r1: Sums  Sums + Products
This shows how the parser got here, by seeing Sums then + while looking for a larger Sums. The marker has advanced beyond the beginning of the rule. It also shows how the parser expects to eventually complete the rule, by next finding a complete Product. But more details are needed on how to parse all the parts of that Products.

The partially parsed rules for a state are called its "core LR(0) items". The parser generator adds additional rules or items for all the possible next steps in building up the expected Products:
::r3: Products  Products * Value
::r4: Products  Value
::r5: Value  int
::r6: Value  id
Note that the marker is at the beginning of each of these added rules; the parser has not yet confirmed and parsed any part of them. These additional items are called the "closure" of the core items. For each nonterminal symbol immediately following a , the generator adds the rules defining that symbol. This adds more markers, and possibly different follower symbols. This closure process continues until all follower symbols have been expanded. The follower nonterminals for state 2 begins with Products. Value is then added by closure. The follower terminals are int and id.

The kernel and closure items together show all possible legal ways to proceed from the current state to future states and complete phrases. If a follower symbol appears in only one item, it leads to a next state containing only one core item with the marker advanced. So int leads to next state 8 with core
::r5: Value  int 

If the same follower symbol appears in several items, the parser cannot yet tell which rule applies here. So that symbol leads to a next state that shows all remaining possibilities, again with the marker advanced. Products appears in both r1 and r3. So Products leads to next state 4 with core
::r1: Sums  Sums + Products 
::r3: Products  Products * Value
In words, that means if the parser has seen a single Products, it might be done, or it might still have even more things to multiply together. Note that all the core items have the same symbol preceding the marker; all transitions into this state are always with that same symbol.

Some transitions will be to cores and states that have been enumerated already. Other transitions lead to new states. The generator starts with the grammar's goal rule. From there it keeps exploring known states and transitions until all needed states have been found.

These states are called "LR(0)" states because they use a lookahead of k=0, i.e. no lookahead. The only checking of input symbols occurs when the symbol is shifted in. Checking of lookaheads for reductions is done separately by the parse table, not by the enumerated states themselves.

===Finite state machine===

The parse table describes all possible LR(0) states and their transitions. They form a finite state machine (FSM). An FSM is a simple engine for parsing simple unnested languages, without using a stack. In this LR application, the FSM's modified "input language" has both terminal and nonterminal symbols, and covers any partially parsed stack snapshot of the full LR parse. 

Recall step 5 of the Parse Steps Example:

 Step Parse Stack Symbol ... LookAhead Unscanned 
 5 Products * int + 1 
 

The parse stack shows a series of state transitions, from the start state 0, to state 4 and then on to 5 and current state 8. The symbols on the parse stack are the shift or goto symbols for those transitions. Another way to view this, is that the finite state machine can scan the stream "Products * int + 1" (without using yet another stack) and find the leftmost complete phrase that should be reduced next. And that is indeed its job!

How can a mere FSM do this, when the original unparsed language has nesting and recursion and definitely requires an analyzer with a stack? The trick is that everything to the left of the stack top has already been fully reduced. This eliminates all the loops and nesting from those phrases. The FSM can ignore all the older beginnings of phrases, and track just the newest phrases that might be completed next. The obscure name for this in LR theory is "viable prefix".

===Lookahead sets===

The states and transitions give all the needed information for the parse table's shift actions and goto actions. The generator also needs to calculate the expected lookahead sets for each reduce action.

In SLR parsers, these lookahead sets are determined directly from the grammar, without considering the individual states and transitions. For each nonterminal S, the SLR generator works out Follows(S), the set of all the terminal symbols which can immediately follow some occurrence of S. In the parse table, each reduction to S uses Follow(S) as its LR(1) lookahead set. Such follow sets are also used by generators for LL top-down parsers. A grammar that has no shift/reduce or reduce/reduce conflicts when using Follow sets is called an SLR grammar.

LALR parsers have the same states as SLR parsers, but use a more complicated, more precise way of working out the minimum necessary reduction lookaheads for each individual state. Depending on the details of the grammar, this may turn out to be the same as the Follow set computed by SLR parser generators, or it may turn out to be a subset of the SLR lookaheads. Some grammars are okay for LALR parser generators but not for SLR parser generators. This happens when the grammar has spurious shift/reduce or reduce/reduce conflicts using Follow sets, but no conflicts when using the exact sets computed by the LALR generator. The grammar is then called LALR(1) but not SLR. 

An SLR or LALR parser avoids having duplicate states. But this minimization is not necessary, and can sometimes create unnecessary lookahead conflicts. Canonical LR parsers use duplicated (or "split") states to better remember the left and right context of a nonterminal's use. Each occurrence of a symbol S in the grammar can be treated independently with its own lookahead set, to help resolve reduction conflicts. This handles a few more grammars. Unfortunately, this greatly magnifies the size of the parse tables if done for all parts of the grammar. This splitting of states can also be done manually and selectively with any SLR or LALR parser, by making two or more named copies of some nonterminals. A grammar that is conflict-free for a canonical LR generator but has conflicts in an LALR generator is called LR(1) but not LALR(1), and not SLR.

SLR, LALR, and canonical LR parsers make exactly the same shift and reduce decisions when the input stream is correct language. When the input has a syntax error, the LALR parser may do some additional (harmless) reductions before detecting the error than would the canonical LR parser. And the SLR parser may do even more. This happens because the SLR and LALR parsers are using a generous superset approximation to the true, minimal lookahead symbols for that particular state.

===Syntax error recovery===

LR parsers can generate somewhat helpful error messages for the first syntax error in a program, by simply enumerating all the terminal symbols that could have appeared next instead of the unexpected bad lookahead symbol. But this does not help the parser work out how to parse the remainder of the input program to look for further, independent errors. If the parser recovers badly from the first error, it is very likely to mis-parse everything else and produce a cascade of unhelpful spurious error messages.

In the yacc and bison parser generators, the parser has an ad hoc mechanism to abandon the current statement, discard some parsed phrases and lookahead tokens surrounding the error, and resynchronize the parse at some reliable statement-level delimiter like semicolons or braces. This often works well for allowing the parser and compiler to look over the rest of the program.

Many syntactic coding errors are simple typos or omissions of a trivial symbol. Some LR parsers attempt to detect and automatically repair these common cases. The parser enumerates every possible single-symbol insertion, deletion, or substitution at the error point. The compiler does a trial parse with each change to see if it worked okay. (This requires backtracking to snapshots of the parse stack and input stream, normally unneeded by the parser.) Some best repair is picked. This gives a very helpful error message and resynchronizes the parse well. However, the repair is not trustworthy enough to permanently modify the input file. Repair of syntax errors is easiest to do consistently in parsers (like LR) that have parse tables and an explicit data stack.

===Variants of LR parsers===

The LR parser generator decides what should happen for each combination of parser state and lookahead symbol. These decisions are usually turned into read-only data tables that drive a generic parser loop that is grammar- and state-independent. But there are also other ways to turn those decisions into an active parser. 

Some LR parser generators create separate tailored program code for each state, rather than a parse table. These parsers can run several times faster than the generic parser loop in table-driven parsers. The fastest parsers use generated assembler code. 

In the recursive ascent parser variation, the explicit parse stack structure is also replaced by the implicit stack used by subroutine calls. Reductions terminate several levels of subroutine calls, which is clumsy in most languages. So recursive ascent parsers are generally slower, less obvious, and harder to hand-modify than recursive descent parsers.

Another variation replaces the parse table by pattern-matching rules in non-procedural languages such as Prolog.

GLR Generalized LR parsers use LR bottom-up techniques to find all possible parses of input text, not just one correct parse. This is essential for ambiguous grammars such as used for human languages. The multiple valid parse trees are computed simultaneously, without backtracking. GLR is sometimes helpful for computer languages that are not easily described by a conflict-free LALR(1) grammar. 

Left corner parsers use LR bottom-up techniques for recognizing the left end of alternative grammar rules. When the alternatives have been narrowed down to a single possible rule, the parser then switches to top-down LL(1) techniques for parsing the rest of that rule. LC parsers have smaller parse tables than LALR parsers and better error diagnostics. There are no widely used generators for deterministic LC parsers. Multiple-parse LC parsers are helpful with human languages with very large grammars.

===Theory===

LR parsers were invented by Donald Knuth in 1965 as an efficient generalization of precedence parsers. Knuth proved that LR parsers were the most general-purpose parsers possible that would still be efficient in the worst cases. 
:"LR(k) grammars can be efficiently parsed with an execution time essentially proportional to the length of the string." Knuth (1965), p.638 
:For every k1, "a language can be generated by an LR(k) grammar if and only if it is deterministic context-free, if and only if it can be generated by an LR(1) grammar." Knuth (1965), p.635. Knuth didn't mention the restriction k1 there, but it is required by his theorems he referred to, viz. on p.629 and p.630. Similarly, the restriction to context-free languages is tacitly understood from the context. 

In other words, if a language was reasonable enough to allow an efficient one-pass parser, it could be described by an LR(k) grammar. And that grammar could always be mechanically transformed into an equivalent (but larger) LR(1) grammar. So an LR(1) parsing method was, in theory, powerful enough to handle any reasonable language. In practice, the natural grammars for many programming languages are close to being LR(1).

The canonical LR parsers described by Knuth had too many states and very big parse tables that were impractically large for the limited memory of computers of that era. LR parsing became practical when Frank DeRemer invented SLR and LALR parsers with much fewer states. 
Practical Translators for LR(k) Languages, by Frank DeRemer, MIT PhD dissertation 1969. 
Simple LR(k) Grammars, by Frank DeRemer, Comm. ACM 14:7 1971. 

For full details on LR theory and how LR parsers are derived from grammars, see The Theory of Parsing, Translation, and Compiling, Volume 1 (Aho and Ullman). 
The Theory of Parsing, Translation, and Compiling, Volume 1: Parsing, by Alfred Aho and Jeffrey Ullman, Prentice Hall 1972. Compilers: Principles, Techniques, and Tools (2nd Edition), by Alfred Aho, Monica Lam, Ravi Sethi, and Jeffrey Ullman, Prentice Hall 2006. 

Earley parsers apply the techniques and notation of LR parsers to the task of generating all possible parses for ambiguous grammars such as for human languages.

While LR(k) grammars have equal generative power for all k1, the case of LR(0) grammars is slightly different.
A language L is said to have the prefix property if no word in L is a proper prefix of another word in L. Here: Exercise 5.8, p.121. 
A language L has an LR(0) grammar if and only if L is a deterministic context-free language with the prefix property. Hopcroft, Ullman (1979), Theorem 10.12, p.260 
As a consequence, a language L is deterministic context-free if and only if L$ has an LR(0) grammar, where "$" is not a symbol of Ls alphabet. Hopcroft, Ullman (1979), Corollary p.260 

==Additional example 1+1==

Bottom-up parse of 1+1

This example of LR parsing uses the following small grammar with goal symbol E:

: (1) E  E * B
: (2) E  E + B
: (3) E  B
: (4) B  0
: (5) B  1

to parse the following input:
: 1 + 1

=== Action and goto tables ===

The two LR(0) parsing tables for this grammar look as follows:

 state action goto 
 * + 0 1 $ E B 
 0 s1 s2 3 4 
 1 r4 r4 r4 r4 r4 
 2 r5 r5 r5 r5 r5 
 3 s5 s6 acc 
 4 r3 r3 r3 r3 r3 
 5 s1 s2 7 
 6 s1 s2 8 
 7 r1 r1 r1 r1 r1 
 8 r2 r2 r2 r2 r2 

The action table is indexed by a state of the parser and a terminal (including a special terminal $ that indicates the end of the input stream) and contains three types of actions:
* shift, which is written as 'sn&#39; and indicates that the next state is n
* reduce, which is written as 'rm&#39; and indicates that a reduction with grammar rule m should be performed
* accept, which is written as 'acc' and indicates that the parser accepts the string in the input stream.

The goto table is indexed by a state of the parser and a nonterminal and simply indicates what the next state of the parser will be if it has recognized a certain nonterminal. This table is important to find out the next state after every reduction. After a reduction, the next state is found by looking up the goto table entry for top of the stack (i.e. current state) and the reduced rule's LHS (i.e. non-terminal).

=== Parsing steps ===

The table below illustrates each step in the process. Here the state refers to the element at the top of the stack (the right-most element), and the next action is determined by referring to the action table above. Also note that a $ is appended to the input string to denote the end of the stream.

 State Input stream Output stream Stack Next action 
 0 1+1$ Shift 2 
 2 +1$ Reduce 5 
 4 +1$ 5 Reduce 3 
 3 +1$ 5,3 Shift 6 
 6 1$ 5,3 Shift 2 
 2 $ 5,3 Reduce 5 
 8 $ 5,3,5 Reduce 2 
 3 $ 5,3,5,2 Accept 

=== Walkthrough ===

The parser starts out with the stack containing just the initial state ('0'):

: 

The first symbol from the input string that the parser sees is '1'. In order to find out what the next action is (shift, reduce, accept or error), the action table is indexed with the current state (remember that the "current state" is just whatever is on the top of the stack), which in this case is 0, and the current input symbol, which is '1'. The action table specifies a shift to state 2, and so state 2 is pushed onto the stack (again, remember that all the state information is in the stack, so "shifting to state 2" is the same thing as pushing 2 onto the stack). The resulting stack is

: '1' 2

where the top of the stack is 2. For the sake of explanation the symbol (e.g., '1', B) is shown that caused the transition to the next state, although strictly speaking it is not part of the stack.

In state 2 the action table says that regardless of what terminal the parser sees on the input stream, it should do a reduction with grammar rule 5. If the table is correct, this means that the parser has just recognized the right-hand side of rule 5, which is indeed the case. In this case the parser writes 5 to the output stream, pops one state from the stack (since the right-hand side of the rule has one symbol), and pushes on the stack the state from the cell in the goto table for state 0 and B, i.e., state 4. The resulting stack is:

: B 4

However, in state 4 the action table says the parser should now do a reduction with rule 3. So it writes 3 to the output stream, pops one state from the stack, and finds the new state in the goto table for state 0 and E, which is state 3. The resulting stack:

: E 3

The next terminal that the parser sees is a '+' and according to the action table it should then go to state 6:

: E 3 '+' 6

Note that the resulting stack can be interpreted as the history of a finite state automaton that has just read a nonterminal E followed by a terminal '+'. The transition table of this automaton is defined by the shift actions in the action table and the goto actions in the goto table.

The next terminal is now '1' and this means that the parser performs a shift and go to state 2:

: E 3 '+' 6 '1' 2

Just as the previous '1' this one is reduced to B giving the following stack:

: E 3 '+' 6 B 8

Again note that the stack corresponds with a list of states of a finite automaton that has read a nonterminal E, followed by a '+' and then a nonterminal B. In state 8 the parser always performs a reduce with rule 2. Note that the top 3 states on the stack correspond with the 3 symbols in the right-hand side of rule 2.

: E 3

Finally, the parser reads a '$' (end of input symbol) from the input stream, which means that according to the action table (the current state is 3) the parser accepts the input string. The rule numbers that will then have been written to the output stream will be 3, 5, 2 which is indeed a rightmost derivation of the string "1 + 1" in reverse.

== Constructing LR(0) parsing tables ==
=== Items ===

The construction of these parsing tables is based on the notion of LR(0) items (simply called items here) which are grammar rules with a special dot added somewhere in the right-hand side. For example the rule E  E + B has the following four corresponding items:
: E  E + B
: E  E + B
: E  E + B
: E  E + B 
Rules of the form A   have only a single item A  . The item E  E + B, for example, indicates that the parser has recognized a string corresponding with E on the input stream and now expects to read a '+' followed by another string corresponding with B.

=== Item sets ===

It is usually not possible to characterize the state of the parser with a single item because it may not know in advance which rule it is going to use for reduction. For example if there is also a rule E  E * B then the items E  E + B and E  E * B will both apply after a string corresponding with E has been read. Therefore it is convenient to characterize the state of the parser by a set of items, in this case the set { E  E + B, E  E * B }.

=== Extension of Item Set by expansion of non-terminals ===

An item with a dot before a nonterminal, such as E  E + B, indicates that the parser expects to parse the nonterminal B next. To ensure the item set contains all possible rules the parser may be in the midst of parsing, it must include all items describing how B itself will be parsed. This means that if there are rules such as B  1 and B  0 then the item set must also include the items B  1 and B  0. In general this can be formulated as follows:

: If there is an item of the form A  v Bw in an item set and in the grammar there is a rule of the form B  w' then the item B  w' should also be in the item set.

=== Closure of item sets ===

Thus, any set of items can be extended by recursively adding all the appropriate items until all nonterminals preceded by dots are accounted for. The minimal extension is called the closure of an item set and written as clos(I) where I is an item set. It is these closed item sets that are taken as the states of the parser, although only the ones that are actually reachable from the begin state will be included in the tables.

=== Augmented grammar ===

Before the transitions between the different states are determined, the grammar is augmented with an extra rule

: (0) S  E

where S is a new start symbol and E the old start symbol. The parser will use this rule for reduction exactly when it has accepted the whole input string.

For this example, the same grammar as above is augmented thus:

: (0) S  E
: (1) E  E * B
: (2) E  E + B
: (3) E  B
: (4) B  0
: (5) B  1

It is for this augmented grammar that the item sets and the transitions between them will be determined.

== Table construction ==

=== Finding the reachable item sets and the transitions between them ===

The first step of constructing the tables consists of determining the transitions between the closed item sets. These transitions will be determined as if we are considering a finite automaton that can read terminals as well as nonterminals. The begin state of this automaton is always the closure of the first item of the added rule: S  E:

: Item set 0
: S  E
: + E  E * B
: + E  E + B
: + E  B
: + B  0
: + B  1

The boldfaced "+" in front of an item indicates the items that were added for the closure (not to be confused with the mathematical '+' operator which is a terminal). The original items without a "+" are called the kernel of the item set.

Starting at the begin state (S0), all of the states that can be reached from this state are now determined. The possible transitions for an item set can be found by looking at the symbols (terminals and nonterminals) found following the dots; in the case of item set 0 those symbols are the terminals '0' and '1' and the nonterminals E and B. To find the item set that each symbol x leads to, the following procedure is followed for each of the symbols:
# Take the subset, S, of all items in the current item set where there is a dot in front of the symbol of interest, x.
# For each item in S, move the dot to the right of x.
# Close the resulting set of items.

For the terminal '0' (i.e. where x = '0') this results in:

: Item set 1
: B  0 

and for the terminal '1' (i.e. where x = '1') this results in:

: Item set 2
: B  1 

and for the nonterminal E (i.e. where x = E) this results in:

: Item set 3
: S  E 
: E  E * B
: E  E + B

and for the nonterminal B (i.e. where x = B) this results in:

: Item set 4
: E  B 

Note that the closure does not add new items in all cases - in the new sets above, for example, there are no nonterminals following the dot. This process is continued until no more new item sets are found. For the item sets 1, 2, and 4 there will be no transitions since the dot is not in front of any symbol. For item set 3, note that that the dot is in front of the terminals '*' and '+'. For '*' the transition goes to:

: Item set 5
: E  E * B
: + B  0
: + B  1

and for '+' the transition goes to:

: Item set 6
: E  E + B
: + B  0
: + B  1

For item set 5, the terminals '0' and '1' and the nonterminal B must be considered. For the terminals, note that the resulting closed item sets are equal to the already found item sets 1 and 2, respectively. For the nonterminal B the transition goes to:

: Item set 7
: E  E * B 

For item set 6, the terminal '0' and '1' and the nonterminal B must be considered. As before, the resulting item sets for the terminals are equal to the already found item sets 1 and 2. For the nonterminal B the transition goes to:

: Item set 8
: E  E + B 

These final item sets have no symbols beyond their dots so no more new item sets are added, so the item generating procedure is complete. The finite automaton, with item sets as its states is shown below.

The transition table for the automaton now looks as follows:

 Item Set * + 0 1 E B 
 0 1 2 3 4 
 1 
 2 
 3 5 6 
 4 
 5 1 2 7 
 6 1 2 8 
 7 
 8 

=== Constructing the action and goto tables ===

From this table and the found item sets, the action and goto table are constructed as follows:
 
# The columns for nonterminals are copied to the goto table.
# The columns for the terminals are copied to the action table as shift actions.
# An extra column for '$' (end of input) is added to the action table that contains acc for every item set that contains S  E .
# If an item set i contains an item of the form A  w and A  w is rule m with m &gt; 0 then the row for state i in the action table is completely filled with the reduce action rm.
The reader may verify that this results indeed in the action and goto table that were presented earlier on.

==== A note about LR(0) versus SLR and LALR parsing ====

Note that only step 4 of the above procedure produces reduce actions, and so all reduce actions must occupy an entire table row, causing the reduction to occur regardless of the next symbol in the input stream. This is why these are LR(0) parse tables: they don't do any lookahead (that is, they look ahead zero symbols) before deciding which reduction to perform. A grammar that needs lookahead to disambiguate reductions would require a parse table row containing different reduce actions in different columns, and the above procedure is not capable of creating such rows.
 

Refinements to the LR(0) table construction procedure (such as SLR and LALR) are capable of constructing reduce actions that do not occupy entire rows. Therefore, they are capable of parsing more grammars than LR(0) parsers.

=== Conflicts in the constructed tables ===

The automaton is constructed in such a way that it is guaranteed to be deterministic. However, when reduce actions are added to the action table it can happen that the same cell is filled with a reduce action and a shift action (a shift-reduce conflict) or with two different reduce actions (a reduce-reduce conflict). However, it can be shown that when this happens the grammar is not an LR(0) grammar. A classic real-world example of a shift-reduce conflict is the dangling else problem.

A small example of a non-LR(0) grammar with a shift-reduce conflict is:

: (1) E  1 E
: (2) E  1

One of the item sets found is:

: Item set 1
: E  1 E
: E  1 
: + E  1 E
: + E  1

There is a shift-reduce conflict in this item set because in the cell in the action table for this item set and the terminal '1' there will be both a shift action to state 1 and a reduce action with rule 2.

A small example of a non-LR(0) grammar with a reduce-reduce conflict is:

: (1) E  A 1
: (2) E  B 2
: (3) A  1
: (4) B  1

In this case the following item set is obtained:

: Item set 1
: A  1 
: B  1 

There is a reduce-reduce conflict in this item set because in the cells in the action table for this item set there will be both a reduce action for rule 3 and one for rule 4.

Both examples above can be solved by letting the parser use the follow set (see LL parser) of a nonterminal A to decide if it is going to use one of As rules for a reduction; it will only use the rule A  w for a reduction if the next symbol on the input stream is in the follow set of A. This solution results in so-called Simple LR parsers.

==See also==
*Canonical LR parser
*Simple LR
*Look-Ahead LR
*Generalized LR

==References==

== Further reading ==
* Chapman, Nigel P., LR Parsing: Theory and Practice, Cambridge University Press, 1987. ISBN 0-521-30413-X
* Pager, D., A Practical General Method for Constructing LR(k) Parsers. Acta Informatica 7, 249 - 268 (1977)
* "Compiler Construction: Principles and Practice" by Kenneth C. Louden. ISBN 0-534-939724

==External links==
* dickgrune.com, Parsing Techniques - A Practical Guide 1st Ed. web page of book includes downloadable pdf.
* Parsing Simulator This simulator is used to generate parsing tables LR and to resolve the exercises of the book
* Internals of an LALR(1) parser generated by GNU Bison - Implementation issues
* Course notes on LR parsing
* Shift-reduce and Reduce-reduce conflicts in an LALR parser
* A LR parser example
* Practical LR(k) Parser Construction
* The Honalee LR(k) Algorithm



[[Leon Battista Alberti]]

Leon Battista Alberti In Italy, this first name is usually spelled "Leone", but Alberti is known as Leon. (February 14, 1404  April 20, 1472) was an Italian humanist author, artist, architect, poet, priest, linguist, philosopher and cryptographer; he epitomised the Renaissance Man. Although he is often characterized as an "architect" exclusively, as James Beck has observed, James Beck, "Leon Battista Alberti and the 'Night Sky' at San Lorenzo", Artibus et Historiae 10, No. 19 (1989:935), p. 9. "to single out one of Leon Battista's 'fields' over others as somehow functionally independent and self-sufficient is of no help at all to any effort to characterize Alberti's extensive explorations in the fine arts." Alberti's life was described in Giorgio Vasari's Vite de' pi eccellenti pittori, scultori, e architettori or 'Lives of the most excellent painters, sculptors and architects'.

==Life==
Leon Battista Alberti was born in 1404 in Genoa to a wealthy Florentine father who had been exiled from his own city, but who was allowed to return in 1428. Alberti, whose mother is unknown, and who was probably illegitimate, was sent to boarding school in Padua, then studied Law at Bologna. Melissa Snell, Leon Battsta Alberti, About.com: Medieval History. He lived for a time in Florence, then travelled to Rome in 1431, where he took holy orders and entered the service of the papal court. At this time he studied the ancient ruins, which excited his interest in architecture and strongly influenced the form of the buildings that he designed. The Renaissance:a Illustrated Encyclopedia, Octopus (1979) ISBN 0706408578 

Alberti was gifted in many directions. He was tall, strong and a fine athlete, who could ride the wildest horse and jump over a man's head. He distinguished himself as a writer while he was still a child at school, and by the age of twenty had written a play which was successfully passed off as a genuine piece of Classical literature. In 1435, he began his first major written work, Della pittura, in which, inspired by the burgeoning of pictorial art in Florence in the early 15th century, he analyses the nature of painting and explores the elements of perspective, composition and colour. 

In 1438 he began to take a serious interest in architecture, encouraged by the Marchese Leonello d'Este of Ferrara, for whom he built a small triumphal arch to support an equestrian statue of Leonello's father. In 1447 he became the architectural advisor to Pope Nicholas V and was involved with a number of projects at the Vatican. 

His first major architectural commission was in 1446 for the facade of the Rucellai Palace in Florence. This was followed in 1450 by a commission from Sigismondo Malatesta to transform the Gothic church of San Francesco in Rimini into a memorial chapel, the Tempio Malatestiano. In Florence, he designed the upper parts of the facade for the Dominican church of Santa Maria Novella, famously bridging the nave and lower aisles with two ornately inlaid scrolls, solving a visual problem and setting a precedent to be followed by architects of churches for four hundred years. Joseph Rykwert, ed., Leon Baptiste Alberti, Architectul Design, Vol 49 No 5-6, London In 1452, he completed De re aedificatoria, a treatise on architecture, using as its basis the work of Vitruvius and influenced by the archaeological remains of Rome. The work was not published until 1485. It was followed in 1464 by his less influential work, De statua, in which he examines sculpture. Alberti's only known sculpture is a self-portrait medallion, sometimes attributed to Pisanello. see above
Palazzo Rucellai
Alberti was employed to design two churches in Mantua, San Sebastiano, which was never completed, and for which Alberti's intention can only be speculated, and the Basilica of Sant'Andrea. The design for the latter church was completed in 1471, a year before Alberti's death, but was brought to completion and is his most significant work. 

As an artist, Alberti distinguished himself from the ordinary craftsman, educated in workshops. He was a humanist, and part of the rapidly expanding entourage of intellectuals and artisans supported by the courts of the princes and lords of the time. Alberti, as a member of noble family and as part of the Roman curia, had special status. He was a welcomed guest at the Este court in Ferrara, and in Urbino he spent part of the hot-weather season with the soldier-prince Federico III da Montefeltro. The Duke of Urbino was a shrewd military commander, who generously spent money on the patronage of art. Alberti planned to dedicate his treatise on architecture to his friend. 

Among Alberti's smaller studies, pioneering in their field, were a treatise in cryptography, De componendis cifris, and the first Italian grammar. With the Florentine cosmographer Paolo Toscanelli he collaborated in astronomy, a close science to geography at that time, and produced a small Latin work on geography, Descriptio urbis Romae (The Panorama of the City of Rome). Just a few years before his death, Alberti completed De iciarchia (On Ruling the Household), a dialogue about Florence during the Medici rule.

Alberti, having taken holy orders, remained unmarried all his life. He loved animals and had a pet dog, a mongrel, for whom he wrote a panegyric, Canis). Vasari describes him as "an admirable citizen, a man of culture.... a friend of talented men, open and courteous with everyone. He always lived honourably and like the gentleman he was." Vasari, The Lives of the Artists Alberti died in Rome on April 20, 1472 at the age of 68.

==Publications==
Alberti regarded mathematics as the common ground of art and the sciences. "To make clear my exposition in writing this brief commentary on painting," Alberti began his treatise, Della Pittura (On Painting), "I will take first from the mathematicians those things with which my subject is concerned." Leone Battista Alberti, On Painting, editor John Richard Spencer, 1956, p. 43. 

Della pittura (also known in Latin as De Pictura) relied in its scientific content on classical optics in determining perspective as a geometric instrument of artistic and architectural representation. Alberti was well-versed in the sciences of his age. His knowledge of optics was connected to the handed-down long-standing tradition of the Kitab al-manazir (The Optics; De aspectibus) of the Arab polymath Alhazen (Ibn al-Haytham, d. c. 1041), which was mediated by Franciscan optical workshops of the 13th-century Perspectivae traditions of scholars such as Roger Bacon, John Peckham and Witelo (similar influences are also traceable in the third commentary of Lorenzo Ghiberti, Commentario terzo). Nader El-Bizri, "A Philosophical Perspective on Alhazens Optics," Arabic Sciences and Philosophy, vol. 15, issue 2 (2005), pp. 189218 (Cambridge University Press). 
English title page of the first edition of Giacomo Leonis translation of Albertis De Re Aedificatoria (1452). The book is bilingual, with the Italian version being printed on the left and the English version printed on the right.
In both Della pittura and De statua, Alberti stressed that "all steps of learning should be sought from nature." Books and Writing website  http://www.kirjasto.sci.fi/alberti.htm The ultimate aim of an artist is to imitate nature. Painters and sculptors strive "through by different skills, at the same goal, namely that as nearly as possible the work they have undertaken shall appear to the observer to be similar to the real objects of nature." However, Alberti did not mean that artists should imitate nature objectively, as it is, but the artist should be especially attentive to beauty, "for in painting beauty is as pleasing as it is necessary." The work of art is, according to Alberti, so constructed that it is impossible to take anything away from it or add anything to it, without impairing the beauty of the whole. Beauty was for Alberti "the harmony of all parts in relation to one another," and subsequently "this concord is realized in a particular number, proportion, and arrangement demanded by harmony." Alberti's thoughts on harmony were not newthey could be traced back to Pythagorasbut he set them in a fresh context, which fit in well with the contemporary aesthetic discourse.

In Rome, Alberti had plenty of time to study its ancient sites, ruins, and objects. His detailed observations, included in his De Re Aedificatoria (1452, On the Art of Building), Alberti,Leon Battista. On the Art of Building in Ten Books. Trans. Leach, N., Rykwert, J., & Tavenor, R. Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1988 were patterned after the De architectura by the Roman architect and engineer Vitruvius (fl. 4630 BC). The work was the first architectural treatise of the Renaissance. It covered a wide range of subjects, from history to town planning, and engineering to the philosophy of beauty. De re aedificatoria, a large and expensive book, was not fully published until 1485, after which it became a major reference for architects. Center for Palladian Studies in America, Inc., Palladio's Literary Predecessors However, the book was written "not only for craftsmen but also for anyone interested in the noble arts," as Alberti put it. Originally published in Latin, the first Italian edition came out in 1546. and the standard Italian edition by Cosimo Bartoli was published in 1550. Pope Nicholas V, to whom Alberti dedicated the whole work, dreamed of rebuilding the city of Rome, but he managed to realize only a fragment of his visionary plans. Through his book, Alberti opened up his theories and ideals of the Florentine Renaissance to architects, scholars and others.

Alberti wrote I Libri della famigliawhich discussed education, marriage, household management, and moneyin the Tuscan dialect. The work was not printed until 1843. Like Erasmus decades later, Alberti stressed the need for a reform in education. He noted that "the care of very young children is women's work, for nurses or the mother," and that at the earliest possible age children should be taught the alphabet. With great hopes, he gave the work to his family to read, but in his autobiography Alberti confesses that "he could hardly avoid feeling rage, moreover, when he saw some of his relatives openly ridiculing both the whole work and the author's futile enterprise along it." Momus, written between 1443 and 1450, was a misogynist comedy about the Olympian gods. It has been considered as a roman  clefJupiter has been identified in some sources as Pope Eugenius IV and Pope Nicholas V. Alberti borrowed many of its characters from Lucian, one of his favorite Greek writers. The name of its hero, Momus, refers to the Greek word for blame or criticism. After being expelled from heaven, Momus, the god of mockery, is eventually castrated. Jupiter and the other gods come down to earth also, but they return to heaven after Jupiter breaks his nose in a great storm.

==Architectural works==

Alberti did not concern himself with the practicalities of building, and very few of his major works were brought to completion. As a designer and a student of Vitruvius and of ancient Roman remains, he grasped the nature of column and lintel architecture, from the visual rather than structural viewpoint, and correctly employed the Classical orders, unlike his contemporary, Brunelleschi, who utilised the Classical column and pilaster in a free interpretation. Among Alberti's concerns was the social effect of architecture, and to this end he was very well aware of the cityscape. This is demonstrated by his inclusion, at the Rucellai Palace, of a continuous bench for seating at the level of the basement.

In Rome he was employed by Pope Nicholas V for the restoration of the Roman aqueduct of Acqua Vergine, which debouched into a simple basin designed by Alberti, which was swept away later by the Baroque Trevi Fountain.

Some studies D. Mazzini, S. Simone, Villa Medici a Fiesole. Leon Battista Alberti e il prototipo di villa rinascimentale, Centro Di, Firenze 2004 propose that the Villa Medici in Fiesole might owe its design to Alberti, not to Michelozzo, and that it then became the prototype of the Renaissance villa. This hilltop dwelling, commissioned by Giovanni de' Medici, Cosimo il Vecchio's second son, with its view over the city, may be the very first example of a Renaissance villa: that is to say it follows the Albertian criteria for rendering a country dwelling a "villa suburbana". Under this perspective the Villa Medici in Fiesole could therefore be considered the "muse" for numerous other buildings, not only in the Florence area, which from the end of the 15th century onwards find inspiration and creative innovation here.

===Tempio Malatestiano, Rimini===
The Tempio Malatestiano in Rimini (1447, 145360) Franco Borsi. Leon Battista Alberti. New York: Harper & Row, (1977) is the rebuilding of a Gothic church. The facade, with its dynamic play of forms, was left incomplete. 

===Faade of Palazzo Rucellai===
The design of the faade of the Palazzo Rucellai (144651) was one of several commissions for the Rucellai family. The design overlays a grid of shallow pilasters and cornices in the Classical manner onto rusticated masonry, and is surmounted by a heavy cornice. The inner courtyard has Corinthian columns. The palace set a standard in the use of Classical elements that is original in civic buildings in Florence, and greatly influenced later palazzi. The work was executed by Bernardo Rosselino. 

===Santa Maria Novella===
At Santa Maria Novella, Florence, between (144870) the upper facade was constructed to the design of Alberti. It was a challenging task, as the lower level already had three doorways and six Gothic niches containing tombs and employing the polychrome marble typical of Florentine churches such as San Miniato al Monte and the Baptistery of Florence. The design also incorporates an ocular window which was already in place. Alberti introduced Classical features around the portico and spread the polychromy over the entire facade in a manner which includes Classical proportions and elements such as pilasters, cornices and a pediment in the Classical style, ornamented with a sunburst in tesserae, rather than sculpture. The best known feature of this typically aisled church is the manner in which Alberti has solved the problem of visually bridging the different levels of the central nave and much lower side aisles. He employed two large scrolls, which were to become a standard feature of Church facades in the later Renaissance, Baroque and Classical Revival buildings. 

===Pienza===
Piazza Pio II in Pienza, looking towards the Palazzo Piccolomini
Alberti is considered to have been the consultant for the design of the Piazza Pio II, Pienza. The village, previously called Corsignano, was redesigned beginning around 1459. It was the birthplace of Aeneas Silvius Piccolomini, Pope Pius II, in whose employ Alberti served. Pius II wanted to use the village as a retreat but needed for it to reflect the dignity of his position.

The piazza is a trapezoid shape defined by four buildings, with a focus on Pienza Cathedral and passages on either side opening onto a landscape view. The principal residence, Palazzo Piccolomini, is on the west side. It has three stories, articulated by pilasters and entablature courses, with a twin-lighted cross window set within each bay. This structure is similar to Alberti's Palazzo Rucellai in Florence and other later palaces. Noteworthy is the internal court of the palazzo. The back of the palace, to the south, is defined by loggia on all three floors that overlook an enclosed Italian Renaissance garden with Giardino all'italiana era modifications, and spectacular views into the distant landscape of the Val d'Orcia and Pope Pius's beloved Mount Amiata beyond. Below this garden is a vaulted stable that had stalls for 100 horses. The design, which radically transformed the center of the town, included a palace for the pope, a church, a town hall and a building for the bishops who would accompany the Pope on his trips. Pienza is considered an early example of Renaissance urban planning.

===Sant' Andrea, Mantua===
The Basilica of Sant'Andrea, Mantua was begun in 1471, the year before Alberti's death. It was brought to completion and is his most significant work employing the triumphal arch motif, both for its facade and interior, and influencing many works that were to follow. Alberti perceived the role of architect as designer. Unlike Brunelleschi, he had no interest in the construction, leaving the practicalities to builders and the oversight to others. 

===Other buildings===
* San Sebastiano, Mantua, (begun 1458) the unfinished facade of which has promoted much speculation as to Alberti's intention 
* Sepolcro Rucellai in San Pancrazio, 1467) 
* The Tribune for Santissima Annunziata, Florence (1470, completed with alterations, 1477) 

==Painting==
Giorgio Vasari, who argued that historical progress in art reached its peak in Michelangelo, emphasized Alberti's scholarly achievements, not his artistic talents: "He spent his time finding out about the world and studying the proportions of antiquities; but above all, following his natural genius, he concentrated on writing rather than on applied work." Leonardo, who ironically called himself "an uneducated person" (omo senza lettere), followed Alberti in the view that painting is science. However, as a scientist Leonardo was more empirical than Alberti, who was a theorist and did not have similar interest in practice. Alberti believed in ideal beauty, but Leonardo filled his notebooks with observations on human proportions, page after page, ending with his famous drawing of the Vitruvian man, a human figure related to a square and a circle.

In On Painting, Albert uses the expression "We Painters", but as a painter, or sculptor, he was a dilettante. "In painting Alberti achieved nothing of any great importance or beauty," wrote Vasari. "The very few paintings of his that are extant are far from perfect, but this is not surprising since he devoted himself more to his studies than to draughtsmanship." Jacob Burckhardt portrayed Alberti in The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy as a truly universal genius. "And Alberti was to Leonardo Da Vinci as the finisher to the beginner, as the master to the dilettante. Would only that Vasari's work were here supplemented by a description like that of Alberti! The colossal outlines of Leonardo's nature can never be more than dimly and distantly conceived." Jacob Burckhardt in The Civilization of the Renaissance Italy, 2.1, 1860. 

Alberti is said to be in Mantegna's great frescoes in the Camera degli Sposi, the older man dressed in dark red clothes, who whispers in the ear of Ludovico Gonzaga, the ruler of Mantua. In Alberti's self-portrait, a large plaquette, he is clothed as a Roman. To the left of his profile is a winged eye. On the reverse side is the question, Quid tum? (what then), taken from Virgil's Eclogues: "So what, if Amyntas is dark? (quid tum si fuscus Amyntas?) Violets are black, and hyacinths are black."

==Contributions==
Detail of the facade of Tempio Malatestiano
Alberti made a variety of contributions to several fields:
*Alberti was the creator of a theory called "historia". In his treatise De pictura (1435) he explains the theory of the accumulation of people, animals, and buildings, which create harmony amongst each other, and "hold the eye of the learned and unlearned spectator for a long while with a certain sense of pleasure and emotion". De pictura ("On Painting") contained the first scientific study of perspective. An Italian translation of De pictura (Della pittura) was published in 1436, one year after the original Latin version and addressed Filippo Brunelleschi in the preface. The Latin version had been dedicated to Alberti's humanist patron, Gianfrancesco Gonzaga of Mantua. He also wrote works on , De Statua.
*Alberti used his artistic treatises to propound a new humanistic theory of art. He drew on his contacts with early Quattrocento artists such as Brunelleschi, Donatello and Ghiberti to provide a practical handbook for the renaissance artist.
*Alberti wrote an influential work on architecture, De Re Aedificatoria, which by the 16th century had been translated into Italian (by Cosimo Bartoli), French, Spanish and English. An English translation was by Giacomo Leoni in the early 18th century. Newer translations are now available.
*Whilst Alberti's treatises on painting and architecture have been hailed as the founding texts of a new form of art, breaking from the Gothic past, it is impossible to know the extent of their practical impact within his lifetime. His praise of the Calumny of Apelles led to several attempts to emulate it, including paintings by Botticelli and Signorelli. His stylistic ideals have been put into practice in the works of Mantegna, Piero della Francesca and Fra Angelico. But how far Alberti was responsible for these innovations and how far he was simply articulating the trends of the artistic movement, with which his practical experience had made him familiar, is impossible to ascertain.
*He was so skilled in Latin verse that a comedy he wrote in his twentieth year, entitled Philodoxius, would later deceive the younger Aldus Manutius, who edited and published it as the genuine work of 'Lepidus Comicus'.

The upper storey of Santa Maria Novella
One of the giant scrolls at Santa Maria Novella

*He has been credited with being the author, or alternatively the designer of the woodcut illustrations, of the Hypnerotomachia Poliphili, a strange fantasy novel. Liane Lefaivre, Leon Battista Alberti's Hypnerotomachia Poliphili, Cambridge: MIT Press, 1997 
* Apart from his treatises on the arts, Alberti also wrote: Philodoxus ("Lover of Glory", 1424), De commodis litterarum atque incommodis ("On the Advantages and Disadvantages of Literary Studies", 1429), Intercoenales ("Table Talk", c. 1429), Della famiglia ("On the Family", begun 1432) Vita S. Potiti ("Life of St. Potitus", 1433), De iure (On Law, 1437), Theogenius ("The Origin of the Gods", c. 1440), Profugorium ab aerumna ("Refuge from Mental Anguish",), Momus (1450) and De Iciarchia ("On the Prince", 1468). These and other works were translated and printed in Venice by the humanist Cosimo Bartoli in 1586.
* Alberti was an accomplished cryptographer by the standard of his day, and invented the first polyalphabetic cipher, which is now known as the Alberti cipher, and machine-assisted encryption using his Cipher Disk. The polyalphabetic cipher was, at least in principle, for it was not properly used for several hundred years, the most significant advance in cryptography since before Julius Caesar's time. Cryptography historian David Kahn titles him the "Father of Western Cryptography", pointing to three significant advances in the field which can be attributed to Alberti: "the earliest Western exposition of cryptanalysis, the invention of polyalphabetic substitution, and the invention of enciphered code."
* According to Alberti himself, in a short autobiography written c. 1438 in Latin and in the third person, (many but not all scholars consider this work to be an autobiography) he was capable of "standing with his feet together, and springing over a man's head." The autobiography survives thanks to an 18th-century transcription by Antonio Muratori. Alberti also claimed that he "excelled in all bodily exercises; could, with feet tied, leap over a standing man; could in the great cathedral, throw a coin far up to ring against the vault; amused himself by taming wild horses and climbing mountains." Needless to say, many in the Renaissance promoted themselves in various ways and Alberti's eagerness to promote his skills should be understood, to some extent, within that framework. (This advice should be followed in reading the above information, some of which originates in this so-called autobiography.)
*Alberti claimed in his "autobiography" to be an accomplished musician and organist, but there is no hard evidence to support this claim. In fact, musical posers were not uncommon in his day (see the lyrics to the song Musica Son, by Francesco Landini, for complaints to this effect.) He held the appointment of canon in the metropolitan church of Florence, and thus  perhaps  had the leisure to devote himself to this art, but this is only speculation. Vasari also agreed with this. 
* He was also interested in the drawing of maps and worked with the astronomer, astrologer, and cartographer Paolo Toscanelli.

==Works in print==
A window of the Rucellai Palace
* De Pictura, 1435. On Painting, in English, De Pictura, in Latin, 
* Momus, Latin text and English translation, 2003 ISBN 0-674-00754-9
* re aedificatoria (1452, Ten Books on Architecture). Alberti, Leon Battista. De re aedificatoria. On the art of building in ten books. (translated by Joseph Rykwert, Robert Tavernor and Neil Leach). Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1988. ISBN 0-262-51060-X. ISBN 978-0-262-51060-8.
* De Cifris A Treatise on Ciphers (1467), trans. A. Zaccagnini. Foreword by David Kahn, Galimberti, Torino 1997.
* 
*Latin, French and Italian editions of De re aedificatoria
* "Leon Battista Alberti. On Painting. A New Translation an Critical Edition", Edited and Translated by Rocco Sinisgalli, Cambridge University Press, New York, May 2011, ISBN 978-1-107-00062-9
* I libri della famiglia, Italian edition 
* "Dinner pieces". A Translation of the Intercenales by David Marsh. Center for Medieval and Early Renaissance Studies, State University of New York, Binghampton 1987
* "Descriptio urbis Romae. Leon Battista Alberti's Delineation of the city of Rome". Peter Hicks, Arizona Board of Regents for Arizona State university 2007.

==Notes==

==References==
* 
*Wright, D.R. Edward, "Alberti's De Pictura: Its Literary Structure and Purpose", Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes, Vol. 47, 1984 (1984), pp. 5271.
* Robert Tavernor, On Alberti and the Art of Building. New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1998. ISBN 978-0-300-07615-8.
* Mark Jarzombek, The Structural Problematic of Leon Battista Alberti's De pictura, Renaissance Studies 4/3 (September 1990): 273285.
* Anthony Grafton, Leon Battista Alberti. Master Builder of the Italian Renaissance. New York 2000
* Gnther Fischer, Leon Battista Alberti. Sein Leben und seine Architekturtheorie. Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft Darmstadt 2012
* Michel Paoli, Leon Battista Alberti, Torino 2007*
* Francesco Borsi, Leon Battista Alberti. Das Gesamtwerk. Stuttgart 1982
*Manfredo Tafuri, Interpreting the Renaissance: Princes, Cities, Architects, trans. Daniel Sherer. New Haven 2006.
* Les Livres de la famille d'Alberti, Sources, sens et influence, sous la direction de Michel Paoli, avec la collaboration d'Elise Leclerc et Sophie Dutheillet de Lamothe, prface de Franoise Choay, Paris, Classiques Garnier, 2013.
* Korolija Fontana-Giusti, Gordana, 'The Cutting Surface: On Perspective as a Section, Its Relationship to Writing, and Its Role in Understanding Space' AA Files No. 40 (Winter 1999), pp. 5664 London: Architectural Association School of Architecture Article Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/29544173
*Vasari, The Lives of the Artists Oxford University Press, 1998. ISBN 0-19-283410-X

==External links==

*Albertian Bibliography on line
*MS Typ 422.2. Alberti, Leon Battista, 14041472. Ex ludis rerum mathematicarum : manuscript, Houghton Library, Harvard University.
* [http://www.palladiancenter.org/predecessors.html Palladio's Literary Predecessors
* "Learning from the City-States? Leon Battista Alberti and the London Riots", Caspar Pearson, Berfrois, 26 September 2011
*Online resources for Alberti's buildings
**Alberti Photogrammetric Drawings 
**S. Andrea, Mantua, Italy
**Sta. Maria Novella, Florence, Italy
*Alberti's works online
**De pictura/Della pittura, original Latin and Italian texts (English translation)
**Libri della famiglia  Libro 3  Dignit del volgare on audio MP3
** Momus, (printed in Rome in 1520), full digital facsimile, CAMENA Project
**The Architecture of Leon Batista Alberti in Ten Books, (printed in London in 1755), full digital facsimile, Linda Hall Library
**Read online "Ten Books on Architecture by Leone Battista Alberti"
**Works of Alberti, book facsimiles via archive.org



[[Little Nemo]]

Little Nemo is a fictional character created by American cartoonist Winsor McCay. Nemo was originally the protagonist of the comic strip Little Nemo in Slumberland. The full-page weekly strip depicted Nemo having fantastic dreams that were interrupted by his awakening in the final panel. The strip is considered McCay's masterpiece for its experiments with the form of the comics page, its use of color, its timing and pacing, the size and shape of its panels, perspective, architectural and other detail.

Little Nemo in Slumberland ran in The New York Herald from October 15, 1905, until July 23, 1911; the strip was renamed In the Land of Wonderful Dreams when McCay brought it to William Randolph Hearst's New York American, where it ran from 1911 until July 26, 1914. When McCay returned to the Herald in 1924, he revived the strip, and it ran under its original title from Aug 3, 1924, until December 26, 1926, when McCay returned to Hearst.

==Concept==

A weekly fantasy adventure, Little Nemo in Slumberland featured the young Nemo ("No one" in Latin) who dreamed himself into wondrous predicaments from which he awoke in bed in the last panel. The first episode begins with a command from King Morpheus of Slumberland to a minion to collect Nemo. Nemo was to be the Princess of Slumberland's playmate, but it took months of adventures before Nemo finally arrived; a green, cigar-chewing clown named Flip was determined to disturb Nemo's sleep with a top hat emblazoned with the words "Wake Up". Nemo and Flip eventually become companions, and are joined by a mute African Imp whom Flip finds in the Candy Islands. The group travels far and wide, from shanty towns to Mars, from Jack Frost's palace to the bizarre architecture and distorted funhouse-mirror illusions of Befuddle Hall.

Nemo 1907-12-01 panels 3 and 4.jpg|thumb|center|500px|alt=|]

The strip shows McCay's understanding of dream psychology, particularly of dream fearsfalling, drowning, impalement. This dream world has its own moral code, perhaps difficult to understand; breaking it has terrible consequences, as when Nemo ignores instructions not to touch Queen Crystalette, who inhabits a cave of glassovercome with his infatuation, he causes her and her followers to shatter, and awakens with "the groans of the dying guardsmen still ringing in his ears".

==Style==

McCay experimented with the form of the comics page, its timing and pacing, the size and shape of its panels, perspective, and architectural and other detail. From the second installment, McCay had the panel sizes and layouts conform to the action in the strip: as a forest of mushrooms grew, so did the panels, and the panels shrank as the mushrooms collapsed on Nemo. In an early Thanksgiving episode, the focal action of a giant turkey gobbling Nemo's house receives an enormous circular panel in the center of the page. McCay also accommodated a sense of proportion with panel size and shape, showing elephants and dragons at a scale the reader could feel in proportion to the regular characters. Narrative pacing McCay controlled through variation or repetition, as with equally-sized panels whose repeated layouts and minute differences in movement conveyed a feeling of buildup to some climactic action.

McCay sized and placed panels to conform to the action they contained (November 25, 1905)

In his familiar Art Nouveau-influenced style McCay outlined his characters in heavy blacks. Slumberland's ornate architecture was reminiscent of the architecture designed by McKim, Mead & White for the 1893 World's Columbian Exposition in Chicago, as well as Luna Park and Dreamland in Coney Island, and the Parisian Luxembourg Palace.

McCay made imaginative use of color, sometimes changing the backgrounds' or characters' colors from panel to panel in a psychedelic imitation of a dream experience. The colors were enhanced by the careful attention and advanced Ben Day lithographic process employed by the Heralds printing staff. McCay annotated the Nemo pages for the printers with the precise color schemes he wanted.

For the first five months the pages were accompanied with captions beneath them, and at first the captions were numbered. In contrast to the high level of skill in the artwork, the dialogue in the speech balloons is crude, sometimes approaching illegibility, and "disfigur otherwise flawless work", according to critic R. C. Harvey. The level of effort and skill apparent in the title lettering highlights what seems to be the little regard for the dialogue balloons, their content, and their placement in the visual composition. They tend to contain repetitive monologues expressing the increasing distress of the speakers, and showed that McCay's gift was in the visual and not the verbal.

McCay used traditional ethnic stereotypes prominently in Little Nemo, as in the ill-tempered Irishman Flip, and the nearly-mute African Impie.

==Background==

Winsor McCay (  1934) had worked prolifically as a commercial artist and cartoonist in carnivals and dime museums before he began working for newspapers and magazines in 1898. In 1903, he joined the staff of the New York Herald family of newspapers, where he had success with comic strips such as Little Sammy Sneeze (190406) and Dream of the Rarebit Fiend (190411)

Winsor McCay's son Robert served as the model for Nemo.

In 1905, McCay got "an idea from the Rarebit Fiend to please the little folk". In That October, the full-page Sunday strip Little Nemo in Slumberland debuted in the Herald. Considered McCay's masterpiece, its child protagonist's appearance was based on McCay's son Robert, had fabulous dreams that would be interrupted with his awakening in the last panel. McCay experimented with the form of the comics page, its timing and pacing, the size and shape of its panels, perspective, architectural and other detail. The Herald was considered to have the highest quality color printing of any newspaper at the time. Its printing staff used the Ben Day process for color.

==Publication history==

Little Nemo in Slumberland debuted on the last page of the Sunday comics section of The New York Herald on October 15, 1905. The full-page, color comic strip ran until July 23, 1911. In spring 1911, McCay moved to William Randolph Hearst's New York American and took Little Nemos characters with him. The Herald held the strip's copyright, but McCay won a lawsuit that allowed him to continue using the characters. In the American, the strip ran under the title In the Land of Wonderful Dreams. The Herald was unsuccessful in finding another cartoonist to continue the original strip.

McCay left Hearst in May 1924 and returned to the Herald Tribune. He began Little Nemo in Slumberland afresh that August 3. The new strip displayed the virtuoso technique of the old, but the panels were laid out in an unvarying grid. Nemo took a more passive role in the stories, and there was no continuity. The strip came to an end in December 1926, as it was not popular with readers. Hearst executives had been trying to convince McCay to return to the American, and succeeded in 1927. Due to the lack of the 1920s Nemo's success, the Herald Tribune signed over all copyrights to the strip to McCay for one dollar.

In 1937, McCay's son Robert attempted to carry on his father's legacy by reviving Little Nemo. Comic book packager Harry "A" Chesler's syndicate announced a Sunday and daily Nemo strip, credited to "Winsor McCay, Jr." Robert also drew a comic-book version for Chesler called Nemo in Adventureland featuring grown-up versions of Nemo and the Princess. Neither project lasted long. In 1947, Robert and fabric salesman Irving Mendelsohn organized the McCay Feature Syndicate, Inc. to revive the original Nemo strip from McCay's original art, modified to fit the size of modern newspaper pages. This revival also did not last.

In 1966, cartoonist Woody Gelman discovered the original artwork for many Little Nemo strips at a cartoon studio where McCay's son Bob had worked. In 1973, Gelman published a collection of Little Nemo strips in Italy. His collection of McCay originals is preserved at the Billy Ireland Cartoon Library & Museum at Ohio State University.

Collector Peter Maresca self-published a 21 xx volume of Nemo Sundays as Little Nemo in Slumberland: So Many Splendid Sundays!. The volume was large enough to reproduce the pages at the size they originally appeared in newspapers. Restoration work took Maresca five to twenty hours per page A second volume, Little Nemo in Slumberland: Many More Splendid Sundays!, appeared in 2008.

Eric Shanower and Gabriel Rodriguez revived the characters in 2013 in a comic book series entitled Little Nemo: Return to Slumberland.

==Adaptations==

===Theatre===

Master Gabriel as the star of the 1907 Little Nemo musical

As early as 1905, several abortive attempts were made to put Little Nemo on stage. In summer 1907, Marcus Klaw and A. L. Erlanger announced they would put on an extravagant Little Nemo show for an unprecedented $100,000, with a score by Victor Herbert and lyrics by Harry B. Smith. It starred dwarf Gabriel Weigel as Nemo, Joseph Cawthorn as Dr. Pill, and Billy B. Van as Flip. Reviews were positive, and it played to sold-out houses in New York. It went on the road for two seasons. McCay brought his vaudeville act to each city where Little Nemo played. When a Keith circuit refused McCay to perform in Boston without a new act, McCay switched to the William Morris circuit, with a $100-a-week raise. In several cities, McCay brought his son, who sat on a small throne dressed as Nemo as publicity.

As part of an improvised story, Cawthorn introduced a mythical creature he called a "Whiffenpoof". The word stuck with the public, and became the name of a hit song and a singing group. Despite the show's success, it failed to make back its investment due to its enormous expenses, and came to an end in December 1910.
In mid-2012 Toronto-based theatre company Frolick performed and adaptation of the strip into Adventures in Slumberland, a multimedia show featuring puppets large and small and a score that included as a refrain "Wake Up Little Nemo", set to the tune of The Everly Brothers' 1957 hit "Wake Up Little Susie". The Sarasota Opera commissioned composer Daron Hagen and librettist J. D. McClatchy to create an opera based on Little Nemo. Two casts of children alternated performances when it debuted in November 2012. The dreamlike nonlinear story told of Nemo, the Princess, and their comrades trying to prevent the Emperor of Sol and the Guardian of Dawn from bringing daylight to Slumberlnad. Special effects and shifting backgrounds were produced with projections onto a scaffolding of boxes.

===Film===

Little Nemo (1911)

McCay played an important role in the early history of animation. In 1911 he completed his first film, Winsor McCay, the Famous Cartoonist of the N.Y. Herald and His Moving Comics (also known as Little Nemo), first in theatres and then as part of his vaudeville act. McCay made the 4000 rice-paper drawings for the animated portion of the film. The animated portion took up about four minutes of the film's total length. Photography was done at the Vitagraph Studios under the supervision of animation pioneer James Stuart Blackton. During the live-action portion of the film, McCay bets his colleagues he can make his drawings move. He wins the bet by animating his Little Nemo characters, who shapeshift and transform.

In 1984, Arnaud Slignac produced and directed a film called Nemo . or Dream One, starring Jason Connery, Harvey Keitel and Carole Bouquet. It involves a little boy called Nemo, who wears pajamas and travels to a fantasy world, but otherwise the connection to McCay's strip is a loose one. The fantasy world is a dark and dismal beach, and Nemo encounters characters from other works of fiction rather than those from the original strip. Instead of Flip or the Princess, Nemo meets Zorro, Alice and Jules Verne's Nautilus (which was led by Captain Nemo).

A joint American-Japanese feature-length film appeared in 1989, with contributions by Ray Bradbury, Chris Columbus and Moebius, and music by the Sherman Brothers. The story tells of a quest by Nemo and friends to rescue King Morpheus from the Nightmare King. The Princess is given a name, Camille, and Nemo has a pet squirrel named Icarus.

===Other media===

In 1990, Capcom produced a video game for the NES, titled (known as Pajama Hero Nemo in Japan), a licensed game based on the 1989 film. The film would not see a US release until 1992, two years after the game's Japanese release, so the game is often thought to be a standalone adaptation of Little Nemo, not related to the film. An arcade game called simply Nemo was also released in 1990. 

Throughout the years, various pieces of Little Nemo merchandise have been produced. In 1941, Rand, McNally & Co. published a Little Nemo children's storybook. Little Nemo in Slumberland in 3-D was released by Blackthorne Publishing in 1987; this reprinted Little Nemo issues with 3-D glasses. A set of 30 Little Nemo postcards was available through Stewart Tabori & Chang in 1996. In 1993, as promotion for the 1989 animated film, Hemdale produced a Collector's Set which includes a VHS movie, illustrated storybook, and cassette soundtrack. In 2001, Dark Horse Comics released a Little Nemo statue and tin lunchbox.

==Cultural influences==

Since its publishing, Little Nemo has had an influence on other artists, including Alan Moore, in Miracleman No. 4, when the Miracleman family end up in a palace called "Sleepy Town", which has imagery similar to Little Nemo's. In Moore (and J.H. Williams III)'s Promethea, a more direct pastiche  "Little Margie in Misty Magic Land" .  showed Moore's inspiration and debt to McCay's landmark 1905 strip. The Sandman series occasionally references Little Nemo as well. Examples include , where an abused child escapes into dreams styled after McCay's comics and using a similar 'wake-up' mechanism, and (pub. 1996), which features George Alec Effinger's short "Seven Nights in Slumberland" (where Nemo interacts with Neil Gaiman's characters The Endless).

In children's literature, Maurice Sendak has said that this strip inspired his book In the Night Kitchen, and William Joyce included several elements from Little Nemo in his children's book Santa Calls, including appearances by Flip and the walking bed.

In 1984, Italian comic artist Vittorio Giardino started producing a number of stories under the title Little Ego, a parodic adaptation of Little Nemo, in the shape of adult-oriented erotic comics. Brian Bolland's early comic strip, Little Nympho in Slumberland employed a similar technique.

The 1980s teen comic book Power Pack ran an issue which paid direct homage to one of McCay's Nemo storylines, featuring a castle that was drawn sideways and Katie Power re-enacting a classic Nemo panel with a sideways-drawn hallway that served as a bottomless pit with the line "Don't fall in, y'hear?"

The comic strip Cul de Sac includes a strip-within-the-strip, "Little Neuro", a parody of Little Nemo. Neuro is a little boy who hardly ever leaves his bed.

In 2006, electronic artist Daedelus used Little Nemo artwork for his album Denies the Day's Demise.

In 2009, the Pittsburgh ToonSeum established its NEMO Award, given to notable individuals "for excellence in the cartoon arts". Recipients to date include veteran comic-book artist Ron Frenz, Uricchio, Marylynn "ToonSeum cartoon museum holds annual Ka-Blam! fundraiser" Pittsburgh Post-Gazette June 9, 2009 Retrieved December 21, 2010 editorial and comic-strip artist Dick Locher, JimHillMedia.com "Legendary Cartoonist Dick Locher Receives ToonSeum's Nemo Award" March 30, 2011 cartoonist and comics historian Trina Robbins, trinarobbins.wordpress.com "Fear of Blogging Gets Around" June 1, 2011 and comics artist, editorial cartoonist and artists' rights advocate Jerry Robinson. Riggenberg, Steven "Jerry Robinson: January 1st, 1922  December 7th, 2011" The Comics Journal December 13, 2011 

On October 15, 2012, celebrating the 107th anniversary of the first Little Nemo story, Google displayed an interactive animated "Google Doodle" called "Little Nemo in Google-land" on its homepage. The doodle showed a typical Little Nemo adventure through a series of panels, each featuring a letter from the word "Google". The doodle also ends in the same way as the comic strips, with Nemo falling from his bed. . 

The character and themes from the comic strip Little Nemo were used in a song "Scenes from a Night's Dream" written by Tony Banks and Phil Collins of the progressive rock group Genesis on their 1978 recording, ...And Then There Were Three.... Another progressive rock group, from Germany, called Scara Brae also recorded a musical impression of the comic on their rare self-titled disc from 1981 (the track was actually recorded 2 years earlier). Their concept piece was revived on the second album by the Greek band Anger Department, oddly called 'The Strange Dreams of A Rarebit Fiend', again after a McCay-comic. Their 'Little Nemo' was chosen for a theatre play, which was suggested for the cultural program for the Olympic Games in 2004.

At Universal's Islands of Adventure, at the Toon Lagoon section, Little Nemo can be seen falling out of his bed near a shop.

"Little Nemo in Slumberland" is also the inspiration for the video of the 1989 song Runnin' Down a Dream by Tom Petty.

The bar in Nightmare on Elm Street 3: Dream Warriors is called 'Little Nemo's'. http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0093629/trivia?item=tr0659459 

==Legacy==

Comics historian R. C. Harvey has called McCay "the first original genius of the comic strip medium". Harvey claims that McCay's contemporaries lacked the skill to continue with his innovations, so that they were left for future generations to rediscover and build upon. Cartoonist Robert Crumb called McCay a "genius" and one of his favorite cartoonists. Art Spiegelman's In the Shadow of No Towers (2004) appropriated some of McCay's imagery, and included a page of Little Nemo in its appendix. Federico Fellini read Little Nemo in the children's magazine Il corriere dei piccoli, and the strip was a "powerful influence" on the filmmaker, according to Fellini biographer Peter Bondanella.

McCay's original artwork has been poorly preserved. McCay insisted on having his originals returned to him, and a large collection survived him, but much of it was destroyed in a fire in the late 1930s. His wife was unsure how to handle the surviving pieces, so his son took on the responsibility and moved the collection into his own house. The family sold off some of the artwork when they were in need of cash. Responsibility for it passed to Mendelsohn, then later to daughter Marion. By the early twenty-first century, most of McCay's surviving artwork remained in family hands.

==Notes==

==References==

===Works cited===

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* (on included DVD)
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* .
* .
* .

Characters
Nemo, Little



[[Leningrad (disambiguation)]]

Leningrad () is the former name of Saint Petersburg, Russia.

Leningrad may also refer to:
== Places ==
* Leningrad Oblast, a federal subject of Russia, around Saint Petersburg
* Leningrad, Tajikistan, capital of Muminobod district in Khatlon Province

== History ==
* Siege of Leningrad, 194144, by the Axis armies during World War II
* Leningrad Affair, 194953 Stalinist purge of the Leningrad cell of the Communist Party

==Military==
* Leningrad Narodnoe Opolcheniye Army (July-September 1941), for the defence of Leningrad
* Leningrad Front (19415), successor to the preceding
* Leningrad Military District, of the Russian Armed Forces, successor to the preceding

==Music==
* Leningrad (band), Russian ska/punk band
* Symphony No. 7 (Shostakovich) (Op. 60), a symphony by Shostakovich, subtitled Leningrad
* "Leningrad" (song), 1989 song by Billy Joel
* "Leningrad", track #3 on The Storyman, 2006 album by Chris de Burgh
* Leningrad Taneiev Quartet, string quartet
* Leningrad Rock Club, 1980s music venue
* "Leningrad", track 6 on the Leningrad Cowboys album Go Space

==Other==
* 2046 Leningrad, an asteroid named for Leningrad
* Leningrad (computer), ZX Spectrum clone
* Leningrad Zoo
*Leningrad Nuclear Power Plant and Leningrad Nuclear Power Plant II
* Leningrad Gospels, illuminated manuscript c.800
* Leningrad Codex, Hebrew Bible manuscript c.1000

==Ships==
* Soviet helicopter carrier Leningrad, 1968 naval vessel
*Leningrad class destroyer in service 1936-63 
* Leningrad schooner-yacht is vessel

==See also==
*Leningradsky (disambiguation)
*List of places named after Vladimir Lenin



[[Lydia]]

Lydia (Assyrian: Luddu; , ) was an Iron Age kingdom of western Asia Minor located generally east of ancient Ionia in the modern western Turkish provinces of Uak, Manisa and inland zmir. Its population spoke an Anatolian language known as Lydian.

At its greatest extent, the Kingdom of Lydia covered all of western Anatolia. Lydia (known as Sparda by the Achaemenids) was a satrapy (province) of the Achaemenid Persian Empire, with Sardis Rhodes, P.J. A History of the Classical Greek World 478-323 BC. 2nd edition. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell, 2010, p. 6. as its capital. Tabalus, appointed by Cyrus the Great, was the first satrap (governor). (See: Lydia (satrapy)).

Lydia was later the name of a Roman province. Coins are said to have been invented in Lydia "Lydia" in Oxford Dictionary of English. Oxford University Press, 2010. Oxford Reference Online. 14 October 2011. around the 7th century BC.

==Defining Lydia==
The endonym fard (the name the Lydians called themselves) survives in bilingual and trilingual stone-carved notices of the Achaemenid Empire: the satrapy of Sparda (Old Persian), Aramaic Saparda, Babylonian Sapardu, Elamitic Ibarda. These in the Greek tradition are associated with Sardis, the capital city of King Gyges, constructed during the 7th century BC.

The cultural ancestors appear to have been associated with or part of the Luwian political entity of Arzawa; yet the Lydian language is not part of the Luwian subgroup (as are Carian and Lycian).

An Etruscan/Lydian association has long been a subject of conjecture. The Greek historian Herodotus stated that the Etruscans came from Lydia, repeated in Virgil's epic poem the Aeneid, and Etruscan-like language was found on the Lemnos stele from the Aegean Sea island of Lemnos. However, recent decipherment of Lydian and its classification as an Anatolian language mean that Etruscan and Lydian were not even part of the same language family. Nevertheless, a recent genetic study of likely Etruscan descendants in Tuscany found strong similarities with individuals in western Anatolia. http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2007/06/070616191637.htm 

==Geography==
The boundaries of historical Lydia varied across the centuries. It was bounded first by Mysia, Caria, Phrygia and coastal Ionia. Later, the military power of Alyattes II and Croesus expanded Lydia, which, with its capital at Sardis, controlled all Asia Minor west of the River Halys, except Lycia. Lydia never again shrank back into its original dimensions. After the Persian conquest the River Maeander was regarded as its southern boundary, and during imperial Roman times Lydia comprised the country between Mysia and Caria on the one side and Phrygia and the Aegean Sea on the other.

==Language==
The Lydian language was an Indo-European language in the Anatolian language family, related to Luwian and Hittite. It used many prefixes and grammatical particles. Lydia Lydian finally became extinct during the 1st century BC.

==History==

===Early history: Maeonia and Lydia===
Lydia developed as a Neo-Hittite kingdom after the collapse of the Hittite Empire in the 12th century BC. In Hittite times, the name for the region had been Arzawa; it was a Luwian-speaking area. According to Greek source, the original name of the Lydian kingdom was Maionia (), or Maeonia: Homer (Iliad ii. 865; v. 43, xi. 431) refers to the inhabitants of Lydia as Maiones (). As for the etymologies of Lydia and Maionia, see H. Craig Melchert "Greek mlybdos as a Loanword from Lydian", University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, pp. 3, 4, 11 (fn. 5). Homer describes their capital not as Sardis but as Hyde (Iliad xx. 385); Hyde may have been the name of the district in which Sardis was located. See Strabo xiii.626. Later, Herodotus (Histories i. 7) adds that the "Meiones" were renamed Lydians after their king Lydus (), son of Atys, during the mythical epoch that preceded the Heracleid dynasty. This etiological eponym served to account for the Greek ethnic name Lydoi (). The Hebrew term for Lydians, [[Ludim|]] (), as found in the Book of Jeremiah(46.9), has been similarly considered, beginning with Flavius Josephus, to be derived from Lud son of Shem; however Hippolytus of Rome (AD 234) offered an alternative opinion that the Lydians were descended from Ludim, son of Mizraim. During Biblical times, the Lydian warriors were famous archers. Some Maeones still existed during historical times in the upland interior along the River Hermus, where a town named Maeonia existed, according to Pliny the Elder (Natural History book v:30) and Hierocles (author of Synecdemus).

===Lydia in Greek mythology===
Lydian mythology is virtually unknown, and their literature and rituals lost, in the absence of any monuments or archaeological finds with extensive inscriptions; therefore myths involving Lydia are mainly from Greek mythology.

For the Greeks, Tantalus was a primordial ruler of mythic Lydia, and Niobe his proud daughter; her husband Amphion associated Lydia with Thebes in Greece, and through Pelops the line of Tantalus was part of the founding myths of Mycenae's second dynasty. (In reference to the myth of Bellerophon, Karl Kerenyi remarked, in The Heroes of The Greeks 1959, p. 83. "As Lykia was thus connected with Crete, and as the person of Pelops, the hero of Olympia, connected Lydia with the Peloponnesos, so Bellerophontes connected another Asian country, or rather two, Lykia and Karia, with the kingdom of Argos".)

In Greek myth, Lydia was also the origin-place of the double-axe, the labrys. Sources noted in Karl Kerenyi, The Heroes of the Greeks 1959, p. 192. Omphale, daughter of the river Iardanos, was a ruler of Lydia, whom Heracles was required to serve for a time. His adventures in Lydia are the adventures of a Greek hero in a peripheral and foreign land: during his stay, Heracles enslaved the Itones, killed Syleus who forced passers-by to hoe his vineyard; slew the serpent of the river Sangarios (which appears in the heavens as the constellation Ophiucus) Hyginus, Astronomica ii.14. and captured the simian tricksters, the Cercopes. Accounts tell of at least one son born to Omphale and Heracles: Diodorus Siculus (4.31.8) and Ovid (Heroides 9.54) mention a son Lamos, while pseudo-Apollodorus (Bibliotheke 2.7.8) gives the name Agelaus, and Pausanias (2.21.3) names Tyrsenus son of Heracles by "the Lydian woman."

All three heroic ancestors indicate a Lydian dynasty claiming Heracles as their ancestor. Herodotus (1.7) refers to a Heraclid dynasty of kings who ruled Lydia, yet were perhaps not descended from Omphale. He also mentions (1.94) the recurring legend that the Etruscan civilization was founded by colonists from Lydia led by Tyrrhenus, brother of Lydus. However, Dionysius of Halicarnassus was skeptical of this story, indicating that the Etruscan language and customs were known to be totally dissimilar to those of the Lydians. Later chronographers also ignored Herodotus's statement that Agron was the first to be a king, and included Alcaeus, Belus, and Ninus in their list of kings of Lydia. Strabo (5.2.2) makes Atys, father of Lydus and Tyrrhenus, to be a descendant of Heracles and Omphale. All other accounts name Atys, Lydus, and Tyrrhenus as being among the pre-Heraclid kings of Lydia. The gold deposits in the river Pactolus that were the source of the proverbial wealth of Croesus (Lydia's last king) were said to have been left there when the legendary king Midas of Phrygia washed away the "Midas touch" in its waters.
In Euripides' tragedy The Bacchae, Dionysus declares his country to be Lydia. The Complete Greek Tragedies Vol IV., Ed by Grene and Lattimore, line 463 

===First coinage===
Early 6th-century BC one-third stater coin

According to Herodotus, the Lydians were the first people to use gold and silver coins and the first to establish retail shops in permanent locations. Herodotus. Histories, I, 94. It is not known, however, whether Herodotus meant that the Lydians were the first to use coins of pure gold and pure silver or the first precious metal coins in general. Despite this ambiguity, this statement of Herodotus is one of the pieces of evidence often cited in behalf of the argument that Lydians invented coinage, at least in the West, even though the first coins were neither gold nor silver but an alloy of the two. Carradice and Price, Coinage in the Greek World, Seaby, London, 1988, p. 24. 

The dating of these first stamped coins is one of the most frequently debated topics of ancient numismatics, N. Cahill and J. Kroll, "New Archaic Coin Finds at Sardis," American Journal of Archaeology, Vol. 109, No. 4 (October 2005), p. 613. with dates ranging from 700 BC to 550 BC, but the most common opinion is that they were minted at or near the beginning of the reign of King Alyattes (sometimes referred to incorrectly as Alyattes II), who ruled Lydia c. 610-550 BC. A. Ramage, "Golden Sardis," King Croesus' Gold: Excavations at Sardis and the History of Gold Refining, edited by A. Ramage and P. Craddock, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 2000, p. 18. The first coins were made of electrum, an alloy of gold and silver that occurs naturally but that was further debased by the Lydians with added silver and copper. M. Cowell and K. Hyne, "Scientific Examination of the Lydian Precious Metal Coinages," King Croesus' Gold: Excavations at Sardis and the History of Gold Refining, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 2000, pp. 169-174. 

The largest of these coins are commonly referred to as a 1/3 stater (trite) denomination, weighing around 4.7 grams, though no full staters of this type have ever been found, and the 1/3 stater probably should be referred to more correctly as a stater, after a type of a transversely held scale, the weights used in such a scale (from ancient Greek =to stand), which also means "standard." L. Breglia, "Il materiale proveniente dalla base centrale dell'Artemession di Efeso e le monete di Lidia," Istituto Italiano di Numismatica Annali Vols. 18-19 (1971/72), pp. 9-25. These coins were stamped with a lion's head adorned with what is likely a sunburst, which was the king's symbol. E. Robinson, "The Coins from the Ephesian Artemision Reconsidered," Journal of Hellenic Studies 71 (1951), p. 159. To complement the largest denomination, fractions were made, including a hekte (sixth), hemihekte (twelfth), and so forth down to a 96th, with the 1/96 stater weighing only about 0.15 grams. There is disagreement, however, over whether the fractions below the twelfth are actually Lydian. M. Mitchiner, Ancient Trade and Early Coinage, Hawkins Publications, London, 2004, p. 219. 

Alyattes' son was Croesus, who became associated with great wealth. Sardis was renowned as a beautiful city. Around 550 BC, near the beginning of his reign, Croesus paid for the construction of the temple of Artemis at Ephesus, which became one of the Seven Wonders of the ancient world. Croesus was defeated in battle by Cyrus II of Persia in 546 BC, with the Lydian kingdom losing its autonomy and becoming a Persian satrapy.

===Autochthonous Dynasties===

Map of the Lydian Empire in its final period of sovereignty under Croesus, c. 547 BC.
(7th-century BC boundary in red)
Lydia was ruled by three dynasties:

Atyads (1300 BC or earlier) - Heraclids (Tylonids) (to 687 BC)
According to Herodotus the Heraclids ruled for 22 generations during the period from 1185 BC, lasting for 505 years). Alyattes was the king of Lydia in 776 BC. Lydian Period of Anatolia The last king of this dynasty was Myrsilos or Candaules.
*Candaules - After ruling for seventeen years he was assassinated by his former friend Gyges, who succeeded him on the throne of Lydia.

Mermnads
*Gyges, called Gugu of Luddu in Assyrian inscriptions (687-652 BC or 690-657 BC) - Once established on the throne, Gyges devoted himself to consolidating his kingdom and making it a military power. The capital was relocated from Hyde to Sardis. Barbarian Cimmerians sacked many Lydian cities, except for Sardis. Gyges was the son of Dascylus, who, when recalled from banishment in Cappadocia by the Lydian king Mursyloscalled Candaules "the Dog-strangler" (a title of the Lydian Hermes) by the Greekssent his son back to Lydia instead of himself. Gyges turned to Egypt, sending his faithful Carian troops along with Ionian mercenaries to assist Psammetichus in ending Assyrian domination. Some Bible scholars believe that Gyges of Lydia was the Biblical character Gog, ruler of Magog, who is mentioned in the Book of Ezekiel and the Book of Revelation.

*Ardys II (652-621 BC).

*Sadyattes (621-609 BC) or (624-610 BC) - Herodotus wrote (in his Inquiries) that he fought with Cyaxares, the descendant of Deioces, and with the Medes, drove out the Cimmerians from Asia, captured Smyrna, which had been founded by colonists from Colophon, and invaded the city-states Clazomenae and Miletus.

*Alyattes II (609 or 619-560 BC) - one of the greatest kings of Lydia. When Cyaxares attacked Lydia, the kings of Cilicia and Babylon intervened and negotiated a peace in 585 BC, whereby the River Halys was established as the Medes' frontier with Lydia. Herodotus writes:

:"On the refusal of Alyattes to give up his supplicants when Cyaxares sent to demand them of him, war broke out between the Lydians and the Medes, and continued for five years, with various success. In the course of it the Medes gained many victories over the Lydians, and the Lydians also gained many victories over the Medes."

The Battle of the Eclipse was the final battle in a five year Herodotus I.74 war between Alyattes II of Lydia and Cyaxares of the Medes. It took place on May 28, 585 BC, and ended abruptly due to a total solar eclipse.

*Croesus (560-546 BC) - the expression "rich as Croesus" refers to this king. The Lydian Empire ended when Croesus attacked the Persian Empire of Cyrus II and was defeated in 546 BC.

===Persian Empire===

In 547 BC, the Lydian king Croesus besieged and captured the Persian city of Pteria in Cappadocia and enslaved its inhabitants. 
The Persian king Cyrus The Great marched with his army against the Lydians. The Battle of Pteria resulted in a stalemate, thus forcing the Lydians to retreat to their capital city of Sardis. Some months later the Persian and Lydian kings met at the Battle of Thymbra. Cyrus won and captured the capital city of Sardis.

===Hellenistic Empire===
Lydia remained a satrapy after Persia's conquest by the Macedonian king Alexander III (the Great) of Macedon. When Alexander's empire ended after his death, Lydia was possessed by the major Asian diadoch dynasty, the Seleucids, and when it was unable to maintain its territory in Asia Minor, Lydia was acquired by the Attalid dynasty of Pergamum. Its last king avoided the spoils and ravage of a Roman war of conquest by leaving the realm by testament to the Roman Empire.

===Roman province of Asia===
Roman province of Asia
Photo of a 15th-century map showing Lydia
When the Romans entered the capital Sardis in 133 BC, Lydia, as the other western parts of the Attalid legacy, became part of the province of Asia, a very rich Roman province, worthy of a governor with the high rank of proconsul. The whole west of Asia Minor had Jewish colonies very early, and Christianity was also soon present there. Acts of the Apostles 16:14-15 mentions the baptism of a merchant woman called "Lydia" from Thyatira, known as Lydia of Thyatira, in what had once been the satrapy of Lydia. Christianity spread rapidly during the 3rd century AD, based on the nearby Exarchate of Ephesus.

Lydia had numerous Christian communities, and after Christianity became the official religion of the Roman Empire in the 4th century became one of the provinces of the diocese of Asia in the patriarchate of Constantinople. The ecclesiastical province of Lydia had a metropolitan diocese at Sardis and suffragan dioceses for Philadelphia, Thyatira, Tripolis, Settae, Gordus, Tralles, Silandus, Maeonia, Apollonos Hierum, Mostene, Apollonias, Attalia, Hyrcania, Bage, Balandus, Hermocapella, Hierocaesarea, Acrassus, Dalda, Stratonicia, Cerasa, Gabala, Satala, Aureliopolis and Hellenopolis. Bishops from the various dioceses of Lydia were well represented at the Council of Nicaea in 325 and at the later ecumenical councils. Le Quien, Oriens Christianus, i. 85998 

===Roman province of Lydia===
Under the tetrarchy reform of Emperor Diocletian in 296 AD, Lydia was revived as the name of a separate Roman province, much smaller than the former satrapy, with its capital at Sardis. Together with the provinces of Caria, Hellespontus, Lycia, Pamphylia, Phrygia prima and secunda, Pisidia and the Insulae (Ionian islands), it formed the diocese (under a vicarius) of Asiana, which was part of the praetorian prefecture of Oriens, together with the dioceses Pontiana (most of the rest of Asia Minor), Oriens proper (mainly Syria), Aegyptus and Thraciae (on the Balkans, roughly Bulgaria). Under the Byzantine emperor Heraclius (610-641), Lydia became part of Anatolikon, one of the original themata, and later of Thrakesion. Although the Seljuk Turks conquered most of the rest of Anatolia, forming the Sultanate of Ikonion, Lydia remained part of the Byzantine Empire. During the occupation of Constantinople in the Fourth Crusade, Lydia continued to be a part of the Byzantine orthodox 'Greek Empire' based at Nicaea.

===Under Turkish rule===
Lydia was captured finally by Turkish beyliks, which were all absorbed by the Ottoman state in 1390. The area became part of the Ottoman Aydn Province (vilayet), and is now the westernmost part of the modern republic of Turkey.

== Episcopal sees ==

Ancient episcopal sees of the late Roman province of Lydia listed in the Annuario Pontificio as titular sees: Annuario Pontificio 2013 (Libreria Editrice Vaticana 2013 ISBN 978-88-209-9070-1), "Sedi titolari", pp. 819-1013 

==Lydian gods==

*Annat
*Anax
*Artimus
*Asterios
*Atergtus
*Atys

*Baki. See also Bacchus
*Bassareus
*Damasn
*Gugaie/Guge/Gugaia
*Hermos
*Hipta

*Hullos
*Kandauls
*Kaustros
*Kubebe
*Lamtrus
*Lukos

*Lydian Lion
*Mles
*Moxus
*Omfal
*Pldans

==See also==

*List of Kings of Lydia
*List of satraps of Lydia
*Ludim
*Digda

==Notes==

==References==
*Goldsborough, Reid. "World's First Coin"
*R.S.P. Beekes. The Origin of the Etruscans.

== External links ==
* Livius.org: Lydia

 



[[Land's End]]

A 1946 map of Land's End
Land's End ( or Pedn an Wlas) An English-Cornish Glossary in the Standard Written Form (gives both Penn an Wlas and Pedn an Wlas) is a headland and holiday complex in western Cornwall, England. It is the most westerly point of mainland Cornwall and England, is within the Penwith peninsula and is about eight miles (13 km) west-southwest of Penzance at the starting and finishing point of the A30 road. Ordnance Survey: Landranger map sheet 203 Land's End ISBN 978-0-319-23148-7 

==Geography==
Land's End has a particular resonance because it is often used to suggest distance. Land's End to John o' Groats in Scotland is a distance of 838 mi by road and this Land's End to John o' Groats distance is often used to define charitable events such as end-to-end walks and races in the UK.

There are two varieties of granite represented at Land's End. Adjacent to the hotel the granite is coarse-grained with large phenocrysts of orthoclase, sometimes more than 5 in in length. To the north, at the First and Last House, there is a finer grained granite with fewer and smaller phenocrysts, and the different granites can be seen from a distance by the smoother weathering of the finer variety. The granite dates to 268275 million years ago of the Permian period. The contact zone between the Land's End granite pluton and the altered country rocks is nearby and the Longships Lighthouse, offshore, is built on the country rock. The Longships, a group of rocky islets are just over a 1 mi mile offshore, and together with the Seven Stones Reef and the Isles of Scilly which lie approximately 28 mi southwest  are part of the mythical lost land of Lyonesse, referred to in Arthurian literature.

The headland has been designated part of an Important Plant Area, by the organisation Plantlife, for rare species of flora. 

==History==
In 1769, the antiquarian William Borlase wrote:
"Of this time we are to understand what Edward I. says (Sheringham. p. 129.) that Britain, Wales, and Cornwall, were the portion of Belinus, elder son of Dunwallo, and that that part of the Island, afterwards called England, was divided in three shares, viz. Britain, which reached from the Tweed, Westward, as far as the river Ex; Wales inclosed by the rivers Severn, and Dee; and Cornwall from the river Ex to the Land's-End".

In 1987 Peter de Savary purchased Lands End for almost 7 million from David Goldstone. He had two new buildings erected and much of the present theme park development was instigated by him. He sold both Land's End and John o' Groats to businessman Graham Ferguson Lacey in 1991. The current owners purchased Lands End in 1996 and formed a company named Heritage Great Britain PLC. Attractions at the theme park include children's playgrounds and recorded music. Twice a week in August there are firework displays. within the complex is the Land's End Hotel. Clegg, David (2005) Cornwall & the Isles of Scilly; 2nd ed. Leicester: Matador; pp. 12324 

In May 2012, Land's End received worldwide publicity as the starting point of the 2012 Summer Olympics torch relay. 

==Climate==

Land's End has an oceanic climate, similar to most of south-west England, only slightly milder winters and slightly cooler summers with a mean temperature of 11 C. Wind levels in winter reach around 2025 knots, which is windier than most of England. The highest temperature recorded is 28.9 C, the warmest day should reach 25.4 C and one day should reach or exceed 25.1 C. The lowest temperature recorded is 3.4 C. And just 10 to 20 days should record frost.

 Average High Average Low 
 Jan 9 4 
 Feb 9 4 
 Mar 10 5 
 Apr 11 6 
 May 14 9 
 Jun 16 12 
 Jul 18 13 
 Aug 18 13 
 Sep 17 12 
 Oct 14 9 
 Nov 12 6 
 Dec 10 5 
 Average 13.16 8.08 

==Gallery==

File:Land's End, Cornwall, England.jpg|Cliffs at Land's End
File:Lands-End-Village.jpg|The tourist centre at Land's End
File:Lands End Tourist Centre.jpg|The tourist centre at Land's End
File:Lands-End.jpg|The Longships lighthouse off Land's End
File:Land's End (looking south).jpg|Looking south from Land's End
File:Land's End (looking west).jpg|Looking west from Land's End
File:Land's End (looking north).jpg|Looking north from Land's End
File:Signpost at Land's End.JPG|Signpost at Land's End

==See also==
* Land's End Airport
* Land's End to John o' Groats
* John o' Groats
* Sennen, the nearest village
* Corrachadh Mr, the most westerly point in Great Britain
* Finisterra

==References==



[[Liber Memorialis]]

The Liber Memorialis is an ancient book in Latin featuring an extremely concise summary&mdash;a kind of index&mdash;of universal history from earliest times to the reign of Trajan. It was written by Lucius Ampelius, who was possibly a tutor or schoolmaster. Nothing is known of him or of the date at which he lived; the times of Trajan, Hadrian, Antoninus Pius, the beginning of the 3rd century have all been suggested. However, in Chapter V De Orbe Terrarum (The World), he wrote: Book of Notes,Ampelius, http://www.thelatinlibrary.com/ampelius.shtml 

Moesia and Dacia provinces were captured by the Goths in 376 so this book had to have been written many years before. However, from 250-275, Rome lost control many times in these regions.
The Parthian dynasty was overthrown in 224 by the Sassanids but in Chapter V, Ampelius lists:

This suggests that in Ampelius's time, Parthia still included Mesopotamia and he probably lived between Trajan and Aurelius when Roman controlled Mesopotamia and Germanic tribes had not yet crossed Danube river. 
The book is dedicated to a Macrinus, who may have been the emperor who reigned 217218, but that name was not uncommon, and it seems more likely he was simply a young man with a thirst for universal knowledge, which the book was compiled to satisfy.

The book's object and scope are indicated in its dedication:

:"Since you desire to know everything, I have written this 'book of notes,' that you may learn of what the universe and its elements consist, what the world contains, and what the human race has done."

The Liber Memorialis seems to have been intended as a textbook to be learned by heart. This little work, in fifty chapters, gives a sketch of cosmography, geography, mythology (Chapters I-X), and history (Chapters X to end). The historical portion, dealing mainly with the republican period, is untrustworthy and the text in many places corrupt; the earlier chapters are more valuable, and contain some interesting information.

Chapter VIII (Miracula Mundi) contains the following, the only reference by an ancient writer to the famous sculptures of the Pergamon Altar, which were discovered in 1871, excavated in 1878, and are now in Berlin:

:"At Pergamum there is a great marble altar, 40 ft high, with colossal sculptures, representing a battle of the giants."

The first edition of the Liber Memorialis was published in 1638 by Claudius Salmasius (Saumaise) from the Dijon manuscript, now lost, together with the Epitome of Florus. An 1873 edition by Wlfflin was based on Salmasius's copy of the lost codex. The more recent editions are
* Erwin Assmann's Teubner edition of 1935
* Nicola Terzaghi's edition, published by Chiantore in Turin ca. 1947 (preface dated 1943)
* Marie-Pierre Arnaud-Lidet's 1993 edition for the Collection Bud (includes French translation)

==Notes==

==References==
*Glaser, Rheinisches Museum, ii. (1843)
*Wlfflin, De L. Ampelii Libro Memoriali (1854)
*Zink, Eos, ii (1866) 
*

==External links==
*Liber Memorialis (Wlfflin's Latin text) at LacusCurtius
* Liber memoralis (Erwin Assmann's BT-edition) at Bibliotheca Augustana



[[Lancelot Andrewes]]

Lancelot Andrewes (1555  25 September 1626) was an English bishop and scholar, who held high positions in the Church of England during the reigns of Queen Elizabeth I and King James I. During the latter's reign, Andrewes served successively as Bishop of Chichester, Ely and Winchester and oversaw the translation of the Authorized Version (or King James Version) of the Bible. In the Church of England he is commemorated on 25 September with a Lesser Festival.

==Early life, education and ordination==
Andrewes was born in 1555 near All Hallows, Barking, by the Tower of London, of an ancient Suffolk family later domiciled at Chichester Hall, at Rawreth in Essex; his father, Thomas, was master of Trinity House. Andrewes attended the Cooper's free school, Ratcliff, in the parish of Stepney and then the Merchant Taylors' School under Richard Mulcaster. In 1571 he entered Pembroke Hall, Cambridge and graduated with a Bachelor of Arts degree, proceeding to a Master of Arts degree in 1578. His academic reputation spread so quickly that on the foundation in 1571 of Jesus College, Oxford he was named in the charter as one of the founding scholars "without his privity" (Isaacson, 1650); his connection with the college seems to have been purely notional, however. In 1576 he was elected fellow of Pembroke College, Cambridge; in 1580 he took orders and in 1581 was incorporated MA at Oxford. As catechist at his college he read lectures on the Decalogue (published in 1630), which aroused great interest.

Once a year he would spend a month with his parents, and during this vacation, he would find a master from whom he would learn a language of which he had no previous knowledge. In this way, after a few years, he acquired most of the modern languages of Europe. Alexander McClure's Translators Revived, p. 78 

Andrewes was the brother of the scholar and cleric Roger Andrewes who also served as a translator for the King James Version of the Bible.

==During Elizabeth's reign==
In 1588, following a period as chaplain to Henry Hastings, Earl of Huntingdon, President of the North, he became vicar of St Giles, Cripplegate in the City of London, where he delivered striking sermons on the temptation in the wilderness and the Lord's Prayer. In a great sermon (during Easter week) on 10 April 1588, he stoutly vindicated the Reformed character of the Church of England against the claims of Roman Catholicism and adduced John Calvin as a new writer, with lavish praise and affection. 

Through the influence of Francis Walsingham, Andrewes was appointed prebendary of St Pancras in St Paul's, London, in 1589, and subsequently became Master of his own college of Pembroke, as well as a chaplain of Archbishop John Whitgift. From 1589 to 1609 he was prebendary of Southwell. On 4 March 1590, as a chaplain of Queen Elizabeth I, he preached before her an outspoken sermon and, in October that year, gave his introductory lecture at St Paul's, undertaking to comment on the first four chapters of the Book of Genesis. These were later compiled as The Orphan Lectures (1657).

Andrewes liked to move among the people, yet found time to join a society of antiquaries, of which Walter Raleigh, Sir Philip Sidney, Burleigh, Arundel, the Herberts, Saville, Stow and Camden were members. Queen Elizabeth had not advanced him further on account of his opposition to the alienation of ecclesiastical revenues. In 1598 he declined the bishoprics of Ely and Salisbury, because of the conditions attached. On 23 November 1600, he preached at Whitehall a controversial sermon on justification. In 1601 he was appointed dean of Westminster and gave much attention to the school there.

==During James I's reign==
Portrait of Andrewes by Simon de Passe. Engraving
On the accession of James I, to whom his somewhat pedantic style of preaching recommended him, Andrewes rose into great favour. He assisted at James's coronation, and in 1604 took part in the Hampton Court conference.

Andrewes' name is the first on the list of divines appointed to compile the Authorized Version of the Bible. He headed the "First Westminster Company" which took charge of the first books of the Old Testament (Genesis to 2 Kings). He acted, furthermore, as a sort of general editor for the project as well.

On 31 October 1605 his election as Bishop of Chichester was confirmed, he was consecrated a bishop on 3 November, installed at Chichester Cathedral on 18 November and made Lord High Almoner. Following the discovery of the Gunpowder Plot Andrewes was asked to prepare a sermon to be presented to the king in 1606 (Sermons Preached upon the V of November, in Lancelot Andrewes, XCVI Sermons, 3rd. Edition (London,1635) pp. 889,890, 900-1008 ). In this sermon Lancelot Andrewes justified the need to commemorate the deliverance and defined the nature of celebrations. This sermon became the foundation of celebrations which continue 400 years later. The sermon can be found at . In 1609 he published Tortura Torti, a learned work which grew out of the Gunpowder Plot controversy and was written in answer to Bellarmine's Matthaeus Tortus, which attacked James I's book on the oath of allegiance. After moving to Ely (1609), he again controverted Bellarmine in the Responsio ad Apologiam.

In 1617 he accompanied James I to Scotland with a view to persuading the Scots that Episcopacy was preferable to Presbyterianism. He was made dean of the Chapel Royal and translated to Winchester, a diocese that he administered with great success. Following his death in 1626 in Southwark, he was mourned alike by leaders in Church and state, and buried by the high altar in St Mary Overie (now Southwark Cathedral, then in the Diocese of Winchester).

==Legacy==
Portrait of Bishop Andrewes by Hollar
Two generations later, Richard Crashaw caught up the universal sentiment, when in his lines "Upon Bishop Andrewes' Picture before his Sermons" he exclaims:

::This reverend shadow cast that setting sun,
::Whose glorious course through our horizon run,
::Left the dim face of this dull hemisphere,
::All one great eye, all drown'd in one great teare.

Andrewes was a friend of Hugo Grotius, and one of the foremost contemporary scholars, but is chiefly remembered for his style of preaching. As a churchman he was typically Anglican, equally removed from the Puritan and the Roman positions. A good summary of his position is found in his First Answer to Cardinal Perron, who had challenged James I's use of the title "Catholic". His position in regard to the Eucharist is naturally more mature than that of the first reformers.

As to the Real Presence we are agreed; our controversy is as to the mode of it. As to the mode we define nothing rashly, nor anxiously investigate, any more than in the Incarnation of Christ we ask how the human is united to the divine nature in One Person. There is a real change in the elementswe allow ut panis iam consecratus non sit panis quem natura formavit; sed, quem benedictio consecravit, et consecrando etiam immutavit. (Responsio, p. 263). 

Adoration is permitted, and the use of the terms "sacrifice" and "altar" maintained as being consonant with scripture and antiquity. Christ is "a sacrificeso, to be slain; a propitiatory sacrificeso, to be eaten." (Sermons, vol. ii. p. 296).

By the same rules that the Passover was, by the same may ours be termed a sacrifice. In rigour of speech, neither of them; for to speak after the exact manner of divinity, there is but one only sacrifice, veri nominis, that is Christ's death. And that sacrifice but once actually performed at His death, but ever before represented in figure, from the beginning; and ever since repeated in memory to the world's end. That only absolute, all else relative to it, representative of it, operative by it ... Hence it is that what names theirs carried, ours do the like, and the Fathers make no scruple at itno more need we.(Sermons, vol. ii. p. 300).

Andrewes preached regularly and submissively before King James and his court on the anniversaries of the Gowrie Conspiracy and the Gunpowder Plot. These sermons were used to promulgate the doctrine of the Divine Right of Kings. 

His Life was written by Whyte (Edinburgh, 1896), M. Wood (New York, 1898), and Ottley (Boston, 1894). His services to his church have been summed up thus: (1) he has a keen sense of the proportion of the faith and maintains a clear distinction between what is fundamental, needing ecclesiastical commands, and subsidiary, needing only ecclesiastical guidance and suggestion; (2) as distinguished from the earlier protesting standpoint, e.g. of the Thirty-nine Articles, he emphasized a positive and constructive statement of the Anglican position.

His best-known work is the Preces Privatae or Private Prayers, edited by Alexander Whyte (1896), Lancelot Andrewes and his Private Devotions: a biography, a transcript, and an interpretation; by Alexander Whyte. Edinburgh: Oliphant, Anderson and Ferrier, 1896 which has widespread appeal and has remained in print since renewed interest in Andrewes developed in the 19th century. The Preces Privatae were first published by R. Drake in 1648; an improved edition by F. E. Brightman appeared in 1903. Cross, F. L., ed. (1957) The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church; p. 50 ) Andrewes's other works occupy eight volumes in the Library of Anglo-Catholic Theology (18411854). Ninety-six of his sermons were published in 1631 by command of King Charles I, have been occasionally reprinted, and are considered among the most rhetorically developed and polished sermons of the late-sixteenth and early-seventeenth centuries. Because of these, Andrewes has been commemorated by literary greats such as T. S. Eliot.

Andrewes was considered, next to Ussher, to be the most learned churchman of his day, and enjoyed a great reputation as an eloquent and impassioned preacher, but the stiffness and artificiality of his style render his sermons unsuited to modern taste. Nevertheless, there are passages of extraordinary beauty and profundity. His doctrine was High Church, and in his life he was humble, pious, and charitable. He continues to influence religious thinkers to the present day, and was cited as an influence by T. S. Eliot, among others. Eliot also borrowed, almost word for word and without his usual acknowledgement, a passage from Andrewes' 1622 Christmas Day sermon for the opening of his poem "The Journey of the Magi". In his 1997 novel Timequake, Kurt Vonnegut suggested that Andrewes was "the greatest writer in the English language," citing as proof the first few verses of the 23rd Psalm. His translation work has also led him to appear as a character in three plays dealing with the King James Bible, Howard Brenton's Anne Boleyn (2010), Jonathan Holmes' Into Thy Hands (2011) and David Edgar's Written on the Heart (2011).

He has an academic cap named after him, known as the Bishop Andrewes cap, which is like a mortarboard but made of velvet, floppy and has a tump or tuff instead of a tassel. This was in fact the ancient version of the mortarboard before the top square was stiffened and the tump replaced by a tassel and button. This cap is still used by Cambridge DDs and at certain institutions as part of their academic dress.

== References ==

* Eliot, T. S. (1928) Lancelot Andrewes. London: Faber & Gwyer
* Frere, Walter H. (1898) "Lancelot Andrewes as a Representative of Anglican Principles: A Lecture Delivered at Holy Trinity, Chelsea, February 28, 1897" Church Historical Society, 44. London: Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge.
* Higham, Florence (1952) Lancelot Andrewes London: SCM Press 
* Isaacson, Henry (1650). An Exact Narration of the Life and Death of the Late reverend and learned Prelate, and painfull Divine Lancelot Andrewes, Late Bishop of Winchester. Which may serve as a pattern of Piety and Charity to All Godly Disposed Christians. London: John Stafford. (Full text transcribed by Marianne Dorman, 2005)
* Ottley, Robert L. (1894) Lancelot Andrewes. London: Methuen
* Lancelot Andrewes bibliography maintained by William S. Peterson
* Russell, Arthur T. (1863) Memoirs of the Life and Works of Lancelot Andrewes, Lord Bishop of Winchester. Cambridge: J. Palmer.
* Welsby, Paul. A. (1958). Lancelot Andrewes 1555-1626. London: Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge. (considered the foremost Andrewes biography)
* 

==Notes==

== External links ==

*
*
*
*Marianne Dorman's Website Promoting Lancelot Andrewes
*Project Canterbury: Lancelot Andrewes
*Lancelot Andrewes Press
*The Gunpowder Plot Sermon



[[Lucius Tarquinius Priscus]]

Lucius Tarquinius Priscus, or Tarquin the Elder, was the legendary fifth king of Rome from 616 BC to 579 BC. His wife was Tanaquil.

==Early life==
According to Livy, Tarquin came from Etruria. Livy claims that his original Etruscan name was Lucumo, but since Lucumo (Etruscan Lauchume) is the Etruscan word for "King", there is reason to believe that Priscus' name and title have been confused in the official tradition. After inheriting his father's entire fortune, Lucius attempted to gain a political office. Disgruntled with his opportunities in Etruria (he had been prohibited from obtaining political office in Tarquinii because of the ethnicity of his father, Demaratus, who came from the Greek city of Corinth), he migrated to Rome with his wife Tanaquil, at her suggestion. Legend has it that on his arrival in Rome in a chariot, an eagle took his cap, flew away and then returned it back upon his head. Tanaquil, who was skilled in prophecy, interpreted this as an omen of his future greatness. In Rome, he attained respect through his courtesy. The king himself noticed Tarquinius and, by his will, appointed Tarquinius guardian of his own sons. Livy, Ab urbe condita, 1:34 

==King of Rome==
Tarquin and the Eagle
Although Ancus Marcius, the Roman king, was the grandson of Numa Pompilius, the second King of Rome, the principle of hereditary monarchy was not yet established at Rome; none of the first three kings had been succeeded by their sons, and each subsequent king had been acclaimed by the people. Upon the death of Marcius, Tarquin addressed the Comitia Curiata and convinced them that he should be elected king over Marcius' natural sons, who were still only youths. In one tradition, the sons were away on a hunting expedition at the time of their father's death, and were thus unable to affect the assembly's choice. Livy, Ab urbe condita, 1:35 

According to Livy, Tarquin increased the number of the Senate by adding one hundred men from the leading minor families. Among these was the family of the Octavii, from whom first emperor, Augustus, was descended. Suetonius, The Life of Augustus 2. 

Tarquin's first war was waged against the Latins. Tarquinius took the Latin town of Apiolae by storm and took great booty from there back to Rome. According to the Fasti Triumphales, this war must have occurred prior to 588 BC.

His military ability was then tested by an attack from the Sabines, who received auxiliaries from five Etruscan cities. Tarquin doubled the numbers of equites to help the war effort. The Sabines were defeated after difficult street fighting in the city of Rome. Eutropius, Breviarium historiae romanae, I, 6. In the peace negotiations that followed, Tarquin received the town of Collatia, and appointed his nephew, Arruns Tarquinius, better known as Egerius, as commander of the garrison there. Tarquin returned to Rome and celebrated a triumph on September 13, 585 BC. Fasti Triumphales 

Subsequently, the Latin cities of Corniculum, old Ficulea, Cameria, Crustumerium, Ameriola, Medullia and Nomentum were subdued and became Roman. Livy, Ab urbe condita, 1:38 

Since Tarquin had kept the captured Etruscan auxiliaries prisoners for meddling in the war with the Sabines, the five Etruscan cities who had taken part declared war on Rome. Seven other Etruscan cities joined forces with them. The Etruscans soon captured the Roman colony at Fidenae, which thereupon became the focal point of the war. After several bloody battles, Tarquin was once again victorious, and he subjugated the Etruscan cities who had taken part in the war. At the successful conclusion of each of his wars, Rome was enriched by Tarquin's plunder. 

Tarquin is said to have built the Circus Maximus, the first and largest stadium at Rome, for chariot racing. Raised seating was erected privately by the senators and equites, and other areas were marked out for private citizens. There the king established a series of annual games; according to Livy, the first horses and boxers to participate were brought from Etruria. 

After a great flood, Tarquin drained the damp lowlands of Rome by constructing the Cloaca Maxima, Rome's great sewer. He also constructed a stone wall around the city, and began the construction of a temple in honour of Jupiter Optimus Maximus on the Capitoline Hill. The latter is said to have been funded in part by the plunder seized from the Sabines. Livy, Ab urbe condita, 1:38 

Many of the Roman symbols both of war and of civil office date from his reign, and he was the first to celebrate a triumph, after the Etruscan fashion, wearing a robe of purple and gold, and borne on a chariot drawn by four horses. Florus, Epitoma de Tito Livio bellorum omnium annorum DCC, I, 5.6. 

==Death and succession==
Tarquin is said to have reigned for thirty-eight years. According to legend, the sons of his predecessor, Ancus Marcius, believed that the throne should have been theirs. They arranged the king's assassination, disguised as a riot, during which Tarquin received a fatal blow to the head. However, the queen, Tanaquil, gave out that the king was merely wounded, and took advantage of the confusion to establish Servius Tullius as regent; when the death of Tarquin was confirmed, Tullius became king, in place of Marcius' sons, or those of Tarquin.

Tullius, said to have been the son of Servius Tullius, a prince of Corniculum who had fallen in battle against Tarquin, was brought to the palace as a child with his mother, Ocreisia. According to legend, Tanaquil discovered his potential for greatness by means of various omens, and therefore preferred him to her own sons. He married Tarquinia, the king's daughter, thus providing a vital link between the families. Tullius' own daughters were subsequently married to the king's sons (or, in some traditions, grandsons), Lucius and Arruns.

Most ancient writers regarded Tarquin as the father of Lucius Tarquinius Superbus, the seventh and last King of Rome, but some stated that the younger Tarquin was his grandson. As the younger Tarquin died about 496 BC, more than eighty years after Tarquinius Priscus, chronology seems to support the latter tradition. An Etruscan legend related by the emperor Claudius equates Servius Tullius with Macstarna (apparently the Etruscan equivalent of the Latin magister), a companion of the Etruscan heroes Aulus and Caelius Vibenna, who helped free the brothers from captivity, slaying their captors, including a Roman named Gnaeus Tarquinius. This episode is depicted in a fresco at the tomb of the Etruscan Saties family at Vulci, now known as the Franois Tomb. This tradition suggests that perhaps the sons of the elder Tarquin attempted to seize power, but were defeated by the regent, Servius Tullius, and his companions; Tullius would then have attempted to end the dynastic struggle by marrying his daughters to the grandsons of Tarquinius Priscus. However, this plan ultimately failed, as Tullius was himself assassinated at the instigation of his son-in-law, who succeeded him.

==Notes==

==References==
* Livy, Ab urbe condita 15px
* Florus, Epitoma de Tito Livio bellorum omnium annorum DCC 15px
* Eutropius, Breviarium historiae romanae 15px

== External links ==
* Stemma Tarquiniorum, Tarquinius family tree



[[Lucius Tarquinius Superbus]]

Lucius Tarquinius Superbus (d. 495 BC) was the legendary seventh and final king of Rome, reigning from 535 BC until the popular uprising in 509 that led to the establishment of the Roman Republic. He is commonly known as Tarquin the Proud, from his cognomen Superbus, a Latin word meaning "proud, arrogant, lofty". D.P. Simpson, Cassell's Latin & English Dictionary (1963). 

Ancient accounts of the Regal period mingle history and legend. Tarquin was said to have been the son or grandson of Lucius Tarquinius Priscus, the fifth king of Rome, and to have gained the throne through the murders of both his wife and his elder brother, followed by the assassination of his predecessor, Servius Tullius. His reign is described as a tyranny that justified the abolition of the monarchy.

==Background==
Tarquin was the son or grandson of Lucius Tarquinius Priscus, the fifth king of Rome, and Tanaquil. Tanaquil had engineered her husband's succession to the Roman kingdom on the death of Ancus Marcius, and when the sons of Marcius arranged the elder Tarquin's assassination in 579 BC, Tanaquil placed Servius Tullius on the throne, in preference to her own sons. Titus Livius, Ab Urbe Condita i. 41. According to an Etruscan tradition, the hero Macstarna, usually equated with Servius Tullius, defeated and killed a Roman named Gnaeus Tarquinius, and rescued the brothers Caelius and Aulus Vibenna. This may recollect an otherwise forgotten attempt by the sons of Tarquin the elder to reclaim the throne.

To forestall further dynastic strife, Tullius married his daughters, known to history as Tullia Major and Tullia Minor, to Lucius Tarquinius, the future king, and his brother Arruns. Titus Livius, Ab Urbe Condita i. 42. Their sister, Tarquinia, married Marcus Junius Brutus, and was the mother of Lucius Junius Brutus. Titus Livius, Ab Urbe Condita i. 56. 

The elder Tullia was of mild disposition, yet married the ambitious Lucius Tarquinius. Her younger sister was of fiercer temperament, but her husband Arruns was not, and she came to despise him, and conspired with his brother to bring about the deaths of the elder sister and younger brother. After the murder of their siblings, Lucius and Tullia were married. Titus Livius, Ab Urbe Condita i. 46. Together, they had three sons: Titus, Arruns, and Sextus, and a daughter, Tarquinia, who married Octavius Mamilius, the prince of Tusculum.

==Overthrow of Servius Tullius==
Tullia encouraged her husband to advance his own position, ultimately persuading him to usurp the throne. Tarquin solicited the support of the patrician senators, especially those from families who had received their senatorial rank under Tarquin the Elder. He bestowed presents upon them, and spread criticism of Servius the king. Titus Livius, Ab urbe condita, i. 47. 

In time, Tarquin felt ready to seize the throne. He went to the senate-house with a group of armed men, sat himself on the throne, and summoned the senators to attend upon King Tarquin. He then spoke to the senators, denigrating Servius as a slave born of a slave; for failing to be elected by the senate and the people during an interregnum, as had been the tradition for the election of kings of Rome; for being gifted the throne by a woman; for favouring the lower classes of Rome over the wealthy, and for taking the land of the upper classes for distribution to the poor; and for instituting the census so that the wealth of the upper classes might be exposed in order to excite popular envy. 

When word of this brazen deed reached Servius, he hurried to the curia to confront Tarquin, who leveled the same accusations against his father-in-law, and then in his youth and vigor carried the king outside and flung him down the steps of the senate-house and into the street. The king's retainers fled, and as he made his way, dazed and unattended, toward the palace, the aged Servius was set upon and murdered by Tarquin's assassins, perhaps on the advice of his own daughter. Titus Livius, Ab urbe condita, i. 48. 

Tullia, meanwhile, drove in her chariot to the senate-house, where she was the first to hail her husband as king. But Tarquin bade her return home, concerned that the crowd might do her violence. As she drove toward the Urbian Hill, her driver stopped suddenly, horrified at the sight of the king's body, lying in the street. But in a frenzy, Tullia herself seized the reins, and drove the wheels of her chariot over her father's corpse. The king's blood spattered against the chariot and stained Tullia's clothes, so that she brought a gruesome relic of the murder back to her house. The street where Tullia disgraced the dead king afterward became known as the Vicus Sceleratus, the Street of Crime. 

==Reign==
Tarquinius Superbus makes himself King; from The Comic History of Rome by Gilbert Abbott  Beckett (c. 1850s)

Tarquin commenced his reign by refusing to bury the dead Servius, and then putting to death a number of leading senators, whom he suspected of remaining loyal to Servius. By not replacing the slain senators, and not consulting the senate on matters of government, he diminished both the size and the authority of the senate. In another break with tradition, Tarquin judged capital crimes without the advice of counselors, causing fear amongst those who might think to oppose him. He made a powerful ally when he betrothed his daughter to Octavius Mamilius of Tusculum, among the most eminent of the Latin chiefs. Titus Livius Ab urbe condita i. 49. 

Early in his reign, Tarquin called a meeting of the Latin leaders to discuss the bonds between Rome and the Latin towns. The meeting was held at a grove sacred to the goddess Ferentina. At the meeting, Turnus Herdonius inveighed against the Tarquin's arrogance, and warned his countrymen against trusting the Roman king. Tarquin then bribed Turnus' servant to store a large number of swords in his master's lodging. Tarquin called together the Latin leaders, and accused Turnus of plotting his assassination. The Latin leaders accompanied Tarquin to Turnus' lodging and, the swords then being discovered, the Latin's guilt was then speedily inferred. Turnus was condemned to be thrown into a pool of water in the grove, with a wooden frame, or cratis, placed over his head, into which stones were thrown, drowning him. The meeting of the Latin chiefs then continued, and Tarquin persuaded them to renew their treaty with Rome, becoming her allies rather than her enemies. It was agreed that the soldiers of the Latins would attend at the grove on an appointed day, and form a united military force with the Roman army. Titus Livius, Ab urbe condita, i. 5052. 

Next, Tarquin instigated a war against the Volsci, taking the wealthy town of Suessa Pometia. He celebrated a triumph, and with the spoils of this conquest, he commenced the erection of the Temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus, which Tarquin the Elder had vowed. Fasti Triumphales He then engaged in a war with Gabii, one of the Latin cities that had rejected the treaty with Rome. Unable to take the city by force of arms, Tarquin resorted to another stratagem. His son, Sextus, pretending to be ill-treated by his father, and covered with the bloody marks of stripes, fled to Gabii. The infatuated inhabitants entrusted him with the command of their troops, and when he had obtained the unlimited confidence of the citizens, he sent a messenger to his father to inquire how he should deliver the city into his hands. The king, who was walking in his garden when the messenger arrived, made no reply, but kept striking off the heads of the tallest poppies with his stick. Sextus took the hint, and put to death, or banished on false charges, all the leading men of Gabii, after which he had no difficulty in compelling the city to submit. Titus Livius, Ab urbe condita i. 5355. 

Tarquin agreed upon a peace with the Aequi, and renewed the treaty of peace between Rome and the Etruscans. According to the Fasti Triumphales, he won a victory over the Sabines, and established Roman colonies at the towns of Signia and Circeii. Titus Livius, Ab urbe condita i. 55, 56. 

At Rome, Tarquin leveled the top of the Tarpeian Rock, overlooking the Forum, and removed a number of ancient Sabine shrines, in order to make way for the Temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus on the Capitoline Hill. He constructed tiers of seats in the circus, and ordered the excavation of Rome's great sewer, the cloaca maxima. Titus Livius, Ab urbe condita i. 56. 

Tarquinius Superbus by Lawrence Alma-Tadema, depicting the king receiving a laurel; the poppies in the foreground refer to the "tall poppy" allegory (see below)
According to one story, Tarquin was approached by the Cumaean Sibyl, who offered him nine books of prophecy at an exorbitant price. Tarquin abruptly refused, and the Sibyl proceeded to burn three of the nine. She then offered him the remaining books, but at the same price. He hesitated, but refused again. The Sibyl then burned three more books before offering him the three remaining books at the original price. At last Tarquin accepted, in this way obtaining the Sibylline Books. Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Romaike Archaiologia iv. 62. Gaius Plinius Secundus, Historia Naturalis xiii. 88. Servius, ad Virg. Aen. vi. 72. 

==Overthrow and exile==

In 509 BC, having angered the Roman populace through the pace and burden of constant building, Tarquin embarked on a campaign against the Rutuli. At that time, the Rutuli were a very wealthy nation, and Tarquin was keen to obtain the spoils that would come with victory, in hopes of assuaging the ire of his subjects. Failing to take their capital of Ardea by storm, the king determined to take the city by siege. Titus Livius, Ab urbe condita, i. 57. 

With little prospect of battle, the young noblemen in the king's army fell to drinking and boasting. When the subject turned to the virtue of their wives, Lucius Tarquinius Collatinus claimed to have the most dedicated of spouses. With his companions, they secretly visited each other's homes, and discovered all of the wives enjoying themselves, except for Lucretia, the wife of Collatinus, who was engaged in domestic activities. Lucretia received the princes graciously, and together her beauty and virtue kindled the flame of desire in Collatinus' cousin, Sextus Tarquinius, the king's son. After a few days, Sextus returned to Collatia, where he implored Lucretia to give herself to him. When she refused, he threatened to kill her, and claim that he had discovered her in the act of adultery with a slave, if she did not yield to him. Titus Livius, Ab urbe condita, i. 58. 

To spare her husband the shame threatened by Sextus, Lucretia submitted to his whims. But when he had departed for the camp, she sent for her husband and father, revealing the whole affair, and accusing Sextus. Despite the pleas of her family, Lucretia took her own life out of shame. Collatinus, together with his father-in-law, Spurius Lucretius Tricipitinus, and his companions, Lucius Junus Brutus and Publius Valerius, swore an oath to expel the king and his family from Rome. Titus Livius, Ab urbe condita, i. 59. 

As Tribune of the Celeres, Brutus was head of the king's personal bodyguard, and entitled to summon the Roman comitia. This he did, and by recounting the various grievances of the people, the king's abuses of power, and by inflaming public sentiment with the tale of the rape of Lucretia, Brutus persuaded the comitia to revoke the king's imperium and send him into exile. Tullia fled the city in fear of the mob, while Sextus Tarquinius, his deed revealed, fled to Gabii, where he hoped for the protection of the Roman garrison. However, his previous conduct there had made him many enemies, and he was soon assassinated. In place of the king, the comitia centuriata resolved to elect two consuls to hold power jointly. Lucretius, the prefect of the city, presided over the election of the first consuls, Brutus and Collatinus. Titus Livius, Ab urbe condita, i. 60. 

When word of the uprising reached the king, Tarquin abandoned Ardea, and sought support from his allies in Etruria. The cities of Veii and Tarquinii sent contingents to join the king's army, and he prepared to march upon Rome. Brutus, meanwhile, prepared a force to meet the returning army. In a surprising reversal, Brutus demanded that his colleague, Collatinus, resign the consulship and go into exile, because he bore the hated name of Tarquinius. Stunned by this betrayal, Collatinus complied, and his father-in-law was chosen to succeed him. Titus Livius, Ab urbe condita, ii. 13. 

Meanwhile, the king sent ambassadors to the senate, ostensibly to request the return of his personal property, but in reality to subvert a number of Rome's leading men. When this plot was discovered, those found guilty were put to death by the consuls. Brutus was forced to condemn to death his two sons, Titus and Tiberius, who had taken part in the conspiracy. Titus Livius, Ab urbe condita, ii. 5. Leaving Lucretius in charge of the city, Brutus departed to meet the king upon the field of battle. At the Battle of Silva Arsia, the Romans won a hard-fought victory over the king and his Etruscan allies. Each side sustained painful losses; the consul Brutus and his cousin, Arruns Tarquinius, fell in battle against each other. Titus Livius, Ab urbe condita, ii. 67. 

After this failure, Tarquin turned to Lars Porsena, the king of Clusium. Porsena's march on Rome and the valiant defense of the Romans achieved legendary status, giving rise to the story of Horatius at the bridge, and the bravery of Gaius Mucius Scaevola. Accounts vary as to whether Porsena finally entered Rome, or was thwarted, but modern scholarship suggests that he was able to occupy the city briefly before withdrawing. In any case, his efforts were of no avail to the exiled Roman king. Titus Livius, Ab urbe condita, ii. 814. 

Tarquin's final attempt to regain the Roman kingdom came in 498 or 496 BC, when he persuaded his son-in-law, Octavius Mamilius, dictator of Tusculum, to march on Rome at the head of a Latin army. The Roman army was led by the dictator, Albus Postumius Albus, and his Master of the Horse, Titus Aebutius Elva, while the elderly king and his last remaining son, Titus Tarquinius, accompanied by a force of Roman exiles, fought alongside the Latins. Once more the battle was hard fought and narrowly decided, with both sides suffering great losses. Mamilius was slain, the master of the horse grievously injured, and Titus Tarquinius barely escaped with his life. But in the end, the Latins abandoned the field, and Rome retained her independence. Titus Livius, Ab urbe condita, ii. 1920. 

After the Latin defeat and the death of his son-in-law, Tarquin went to the court of Aristodemus at Cumae, where he died in 495. Titus Livius, Ab urbe condita, ii. 21. 

==Cultural references==
Tarquin is mentioned by William Shakespeare in his plays, Titus Andronicus and Julius Caesar.

In 1765, Patrick Henry gave a speech before the Virginia House of Burgesses, in opposition to the Stamp Act of 1765. Toward the end of his speech, he inserted as a rhetorical flourish, a comparison between King George III and various historical figures who were brought low by their enemies, including Charles I, Caesar, and in some accounts of the speech, Tarquin. James D. Hart and Phillip W. Leininger, entry on "Henry, Patrick," The Oxford Companion to American Literature (Oxford University Press, 1941, 6th ed. 1995), p. 286. 

The cultural phenomenon known as "tall poppy syndrome," in which persons of unusual merit are attacked or resented because of their achievements, derives its name from the episode in Livy, in which Tarquin is said to have instructed his son, Sextus, to weaken the city of Gabii by destroying its leading men. The motif of using an unwitting messenger to deliver such a message, through the metaphor of cutting the heads off the tallest poppies, may have been borrowed from Herodotus, whose Histories contain a similar story, involving ears of wheat instead of poppies. A passage concerning Livy's version of the story appears in Kierkegaard's Fear and Trembling. John Lippitt, Routledge Philosophy Guidebook to Kierkegaard and 'Fear and Trembling', (Routledge, 2003), pp. 137138. 

==Notes==

==References==
* 

==External links==
* Stemma Tarquiniorum



[[Libertarian socialism]]

Libertarian socialism (sometimes called social anarchism, Ostergaard, Geoffrey. "Anarchism". A Dictionary of Marxist Thought. Blackwell Publishing, 1991. p. 21. Chomsky, Noam (2004). Language and Politics. In Otero, Carlos Peregrn. AK Press. p. 739 left-libertarianism Bookchin, Murray and Janet Biehl. The Murray Bookchin Reader. Cassell, 1997. p. 170 ISBN 0-304-33873-7 Hicks, Steven V. and Daniel E. Shannon. The American journal of economics and sociolology. Blackwell Pub, 2003. p. 612 and socialist libertarianism Miller, Wilbur R. (2012). The social history of crime and punishment in America. An encyclopedia. 5 vols. London: Sage Publications. p. 1007. ISBN 1412988764. "There exist three major camps in libertarian thought: right-libertarianism, socialist libertarianism, and ..." ) is a group of political philosophies that promote a non-hierarchical, non-bureaucratic society without private property in the means of production. Libertarian socialists believe in converting present-day private productive property into common, while retaining respect for personal property, based on occupancy and use. "The revolution abolishes private ownership of the means of production and distribution, and with it goes capitalistic business. Personal possession remains only in the things you use. Thus, your watch is your own, but the watch factory belongs to the people."Alexander Berkman. "What Is Communist Anarchism?" Libertarian socialism is opposed to coercive forms of social organization. It promotes free association in place of government and opposes the social relations of capitalism, such as wage labor. As Noam Chomsky put it, a consistent libertarian "must oppose private ownership of the means of production and the wage slavery, which is a component of this system, as incompatible with the principle that labor must be freely undertaken and under the control of the producer". Chomsky (2003) p. 26 The term libertarian socialism is used by some socialists to differentiate their philosophy from state socialism, Paul Zarembka. Transitions in Latin America and in Poland and Syria. Emerald Group Publishing, 2007. p. 25 Guerin, Daniel. Anarchism: A Matter of Words: "Some contemporary anarchists have tried to clear up the misunderstanding by adopting a more explicit term: they align themselves with libertarian socialism or communism." Faatz, Chris, Towards a Libertarian Socialism. and by some as a synonym for anarchism. Ross, Dr. Jeffery Ian. Controlling State Crime, Transaction Publishers (2000) p. 400 ISBN 0-7658-0695-9 

Adherents of libertarian socialism assert that a society based on freedom and equality can be achieved through abolishing authoritarian institutions that control certain means of production and subordinate the majority to an owning class or political and economic elite. Mendes, Silva. Socialismo Libertrio ou Anarchismo Vol. 1 (1896): "Society should be free through mankind's spontaneous federative affiliation to life, based on the community of land and tools of the trade; meaning: Anarchy will be equality by abolition of private property (while retaining respect for personal property) and liberty by abolition of authority". Libertarian socialism also constitutes a tendency of thought that promotes the identification, criticism, and practical dismantling of illegitimate authority in all aspects of life. "Authority is defined in terms of the right to exercise social control (as explored in the "sociology of power") and the correlative duty to obey (as explred in the "philosophy of practical reason"). Anarchism is distinguished, philosophically, by its scepticism towards such moral relations  by its questioning of the claims made for such normative power  and, practically, by its challenge to those "authoritative" powers which cannot justify their claims and which are therefore deemed illegitimate or without moral foundation."Anarchism and Authority: A Philosophical Introduction to Classical Anarchism by Paul McLaughlin. AshGate. 2007. pg. 1 "The IAF - IFA fights for : the abolition of all forms of authority whether economical, political, social, religious, cultural or sexual.""Principles of The International of Anarchist Federations" "Anarchism, then, really stands for the liberation of the human mind from the dominion of religion; the liberation of the human body from the dominion of property; liberation from the shackles and restraint of government. Anarchism stands for a social order based on the free grouping of individuals for the purpose of producing real social wealth; an order that will guarantee to every human being free access to the earth and full enjoyment of the necessities of life, according to individual desires, tastes, and inclinations." Emma Goldman. "What it Really Stands for Anarchy" in Anarchism and Other Essays. Individualist anarchist Benjamin Tucker defined anarchism as opposition to authority as follows "They found that they must turn either to the right or to the left,  follow either the path of Authority or the path of Liberty. Marx went one way; Warren and Proudhon the other. Thus were born State Socialism and Anarchism...Authority, takes many shapes, but, broadly speaking, her enemies divide themselves into three classes: first, those who abhor her both as a means and as an end of progress, opposing her openly, avowedly, sincerely, consistently, universally; second, those who profess to believe in her as a means of progress, but who accept her only so far as they think she will subserve their own selfish interests, denying her and her blessings to the rest of the world; third, those who distrust her as a means of progress, believing in her only as an end to be obtained by first trampling upon, violating, and outraging her. These three phases of opposition to Liberty are met in almost every sphere of thought and human activity. Good representatives of the first are seen in the Catholic Church and the Russian autocracy; of the second, in the Protestant Church and the Manchester school of politics and political economy; of the third, in the atheism of Gambetta and the socialism of Karl Marx." Benjamin Tucker. Individual Liberty. Anarchist historian George Woodcock report of Mikhail Bakunin's anti-authoritarianism and shows opposition to both state and non-state forms of authority as follows: "All anarchists deny authority; many of them fight against it." (pg. 9)...Bakunin did not convert the League's central committee to his full program, but he did persuade them to accept a remarkably radical recommendation to the Berne Congress of September 1868, demanding economic equality and implicitly attacking authority in both Church and State." 

Accordingly, libertarian socialists believe that "the exercise of power in any institutionalized formwhether economic, political, religious, or sexualbrutalizes both the wielder of power and the one over whom it is exercised". Libertarian socialists generally place their hopes in decentralized means of direct democracy such as libertarian municipalism, citizens' assemblies, trade unions, and workers' councils. 

Political philosophies commonly described as libertarian socialist include most varieties of anarchism (especially anarchist communism, anarchist collectivism, anarcho-syndicalism, and mutualism A Mutualist FAQ: A.4. Are Mutualists Socialists? ) as well as autonomism, Communalism, participism, libertarian Marxist philosophies such as council communism and Luxemburgism, Murray Bookchin, Ghost of Anarcho-Syndicalism; Robert Graham, The General Idea of Proudhon's Revolution and some versions of "utopian socialism" Kent Bromley, in his preface to Peter Kropotkin's book The Conquest of Bread, considered early French utopian socialist Charles Fourier to be the founder of the libertarian branch of socialist thought, as opposed to the authoritarian socialist ideas of Babeuf and Buonarroti." Kropotkin, Peter. The Conquest of Bread, preface by Kent Bromley, New York and London, G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1906. and individualist anarchism. "(Benjamin) Tucker referred to himself many times as a socialist and considered his philosophy to be "Anarchistic socialism." An Anarchist FAQ by Various Authors French individualist anarchist mile Armand shows clearly opposition to capitalism and centralized economies when he said that the individualist anarchist "inwardly he remains refractory  fatally refractory  morally, intellectually, economically (The capitalist economy and the directed economy, the speculators and the fabricators of single are equally repugnant to him.)""Anarchist Individualism as a Life and Activity" by Emile Armand Anarchist Peter Sabatini reports that In the United States "of early to mid-19th century, there appeared an array of communal and "utopian" counterculture groups (including the so-called free love movement). William Godwin's anarchism exerted an ideological influence on some of this, but more so the socialism of Robert Owen and Charles Fourier. After success of his British venture, Owen himself established a cooperative community within the United States at New Harmony, Indiana during 1825. One member of this commune was Josiah Warren (17981874), considered to be the first individualist anarchist"Peter Sabatini. "Libertarianism: Bogus Anarchy" 

==Overview==

Libertarian socialism is a western philosophy with diverse interpretations, though some general commonalities can be found in its many incarnations. Its proponents generally advocate a worker-oriented system of production and organization in the workplace that in some aspects radically departs from neoclassical economics in favor of democratic cooperatives or common ownership of the means of production (socialism). Brooks, Frank H. The Individualist Anarchists: An Anthology of Liberty Transaction Publishers (1994) p. 75 They propose that this economic system be executed in a manner that attempts to maximize the liberty of individuals and minimize concentration of power or authority (libertarianism).

August 17, 1860 edition of libertarian Communist publication Le Libertaire edited by Joseph Djacque.

Libertarian socialists are strongly critical of coercive institutions, which often leads them to reject the legitimacy of the state in favor of anarchism. Spiegel, Henry. The Growth of Economic Thought Duke University Press (1991) p.446 Adherents propose achieving this through decentralization of political and economic power, usually involving the socialization of most large-scale private property and enterprise (while retaining respect for personal property). Libertarian socialism tends to deny the legitimacy of most forms of economically significant private property, viewing capitalist property relations as forms of domination that are antagonistic to individual freedom. Paul, Ellen Frankel et al. Problems of Market Liberalism Cambridge University Press (1998) p.305 However, libertarian socialism retains respect for personal property. 

The first anarchist journal to use the term "libertarian" was Le Libertaire, Journal du Mouvement Social and it was published in New York City between 1858 and 1861 by French anarcho-communist Joseph Djacque. The Anarchist FAQ Editorial Collective. "150 years of Libertarian"] "The next recorded use of the term was in Europe, when "libertarian communism" was used at a French regional anarchist Congress at Le Havre (1622 November 1880). January the following year saw a French manifesto issued on "Libertarian or Anarchist Communism." Finally, 1895 saw leading anarchists Sbastien Faure and Louise Michel publish La Libertaire in France." The word stems from the French word libertaire, and was used to evade the French ban on anarchist publications. Wikiquote. Retrieved June 4, 2006. In this tradition, the term "libertarianism" in "libertarian socialism" is generally used as a synonym for anarchism, which some say is the original meaning of the term; hence "libertarian socialism" is equivalent to "socialist anarchism" to these scholars. In the context of the European socialist movement, libertarian has conventionally been used to describe those who opposed state socialism, such as Mikhail Bakunin.

The association of socialism with libertarianism predates that of capitalism, and many anti-authoritarians still decry what they see as a mistaken association of capitalism with libertarianism in the United States. Bookchin, Murray. The Modern Crisis Black Rose Books (1987) pp. 15455 ISBN 0-920057-61-6 As Noam Chomsky put it, a consistent libertarian "must oppose private ownership of the means of production and wage slavery, which is a component of this system, as incompatible with the principle that labor must be freely undertaken and under the control of the producer." Chomsky (2003) p. 26 

In a chapter recounting the history of libertarian socialism, economist Robin Hahnel relates that thus far the period where libertarian socialism has had its greatest impact was at the end of the 19th century through the first four decades of the twentieth century.

On the other hand a libertarian trend also developed within marxism which gained visibility around the late 1910s mainly in reaction against Bolshevism and Leninism rising to power and establishing the Soviet Union. Contemporary libertarian Marxist Harry Cleaver describes the situation as follows:

===Anti-capitalism===

Libertarian socialists are anti-capitalist, and can thus be distinguished from right-wing libertarians. Whereas capitalist (and right-libertarian) principles concentrate economic power in the hands of those who own the most capital, libertarian socialism aims to distribute power, and thus freedom, more equally amongst members of society. A key difference between libertarian socialism and capitalist libertarianism is that advocates of the former generally believe that one's degree of freedom is affected by one's economic and social status, whereas advocates of the latter focus on freedom of choice within a capitalist framework. This is sometimes characterized as a desire to maximize "free creativity" in a society in preference to "free enterprise." Chomsky (2003) pp. 3031 

Within anarchism there emerged a critique of wage slavery which refers to a situation perceived as quasi-voluntary slavery, . where a person's livelihood depends on wages, especially when the dependence is total and immediate. It is a negatively connoted term used to draw an analogy between slavery and wage labor by focusing on similarities between owning and renting a person. The term wage slavery has been used to criticize economic exploitation and social stratification, with the former seen primarily as unequal bargaining power between labor and capital (particularly when workers are paid comparatively low wages, e.g. in sweatshops), and the latter as a lack of workers' self-management, fulfilling job choices and leisure in an economy. . Libertarian socialists believe if freedom is valued, then society must work towards a system in which individuals have the power to decide economic issues along with political issues. Libertarian socialists seek to replace unjustified authority with direct democracy, voluntary federation, and popular autonomy in all aspects of life, Harrington, Austin, et al. 'Encyclopedia of Social Theory' Routledge (2006) p.50 including physical communities and economic enterprises. With the advent of the industrial revolution, thinkers such as Proudhon and Marx elaborated the comparison between wage labor and slavery in the context of a critique of societal property not intended for active personal use, . Luddites emphasized the dehumanization brought about by machines while later Emma Goldman famously denounced wage slavery by saying: "The only difference is that you are hired slaves instead of block slaves.". 

Many libertarian socialists argue that large-scale voluntary associations should manage industrial manufacture, while workers retain rights to the individual products of their labor. Lindemann, Albert S. 'A History of European Socialism' Yale University Press (1983) p.160 As such, they see a distinction between the concepts of "private property" and "personal possession". Whereas "private property" grants an individual exclusive control over a thing whether it is in use or not, and regardless of its productive capacity, "possession" grants no rights to things that are not in use. Ely, Richard et al. 'Property and Contract in Their Relations to the Distribution of Wealth' The Macmillan Company (1914) 

===Anti-authoritarianism and opposition to the state===

Libertarian socialists generally regard concentrations of power as sources of oppression that must be continually challenged and justified. Most libertarian socialists believe that when power is exercised, as exemplified by the economic, social, or physical dominance of one individual over another, the burden of proof is always on the authoritarian to justify their action as legitimate when taken against its effect of narrowing the scope of human freedom. Chomsky (2004) p. 775 Libertarian socialists typically oppose rigid and stratified structures of authority, be they political, economic, or social. Ed, Andrew. 'Closing the Iron Cage: The Scientific Management of Work and Leisure' Black Rose Books (1999) p. 116 

In lieu of corporations and states, libertarian socialists seek to organize society into voluntary associations (usually collectives, communes, municipalities, cooperatives, commons, or syndicates) that use direct democracy or consensus for their decision-making process. Some libertarian socialists advocate combining these institutions using rotating, recallable delegates to higher-level federations. Bookchin, Murray Social Anarchism Or Lifestyle Anarchism AK Press (1995) pp. 7172 ISBN 1-873176-83-X Spanish anarchism is a major example of such federations in practice.

Contemporary examples of libertarian socialist organizational and decision-making models in practice include a number of anti-capitalist and global justice movements Purkis, Jon. Bowen, James. 'Changing Anarchism' Manchester University Press (2004) p.165,179 including Zapatista Councils of Good Government and the Global Indymedia network (which covers 45 countries on six continents). There are also many examples of indigenous societies around the world whose political and economic systems can be accurately described as anarchist or libertarian socialist, each of which is unique and uniquely suited to the culture that birthed it. Graeber, David. "Fragments of an Anarchist Anthropology" Prickly Paradigm Press (2004) p. 2223, 2629 For libertarians, that diversity of practice within a framework of common principles is proof of the vitality of those principles and of their flexibility and strength.

Contrary to popular opinion, libertarian socialism has not traditionally been a utopian movement, tending to avoid dense theoretical analysis or prediction of what a future society would or should look like. The tradition instead has been that such decisions cannot be made now, and must be made through struggle and experimentation, so that the best solution can be arrived at democratically and organically, and to base the direction for struggle on established historical example. They point out that the success of the scientific method comes from its adherence to open rational exploration, not its conclusions, in sharp contrast to dogma and predetermined predictions. To libertarian socialists, dogmatic approaches to social organization are doomed to failure; and thus they reject Marxist notions of linear and inevitable historical progression. Noted anarchist Rudolf Rocker once stated, "I am an anarchist not because I believe anarchism is the final goal, but because there is no such thing as a final goal". The London Years, 1956 

Because libertarian socialism encourages exploration and embraces a diversity of ideas rather than forming a compact movement, there have arisen inevitable controversies over individuals who describe themselves as libertarian socialists but disagree with some of the core principles of libertarian socialism. For example, Peter Hain interprets libertarian socialism as minarchist rather than anarchist, favoring radical decentralization of power without going as far as the complete abolition of the state Hain, Peter "Rediscovering our Libertarian Roots" Chartist (August 2000) and libertarian socialist Noam Chomsky supports dismantling all forms of unjustified social or economic power, while also emphasizing that state intervention should be supported as a temporary protection while oppressive structures remain in existence.

Proponents are known for opposing the existence of states or government and refusing to participate in coercive state institutions. Indeed, in the past many refused to swear oaths in court or to participate in trials, even when they faced imprisonment Bookchin, Murray. 'The Spanish Anarchists: the heroic years, 18681936' AK Press (1998) p. 112 ISBN 1-873176-04-X. or deportation. Polenberg, Richard Fighting Faiths: The Abrams Case, the Supreme Court, and Free Speech. Cornell University Press (1999) pp. 127130 ISBN 0-8014-8618-1 

===Civil liberties and individual freedom===

Libertarian socialists have been strong advocates and activists of civil liberties that provide an individual specific rights such as the freedom in issues of love and sex (free love) (see Anarchism and issues related to love and sex) and of thought and conscience (freethought). In this activism they have clashed with state and religious institutions which have limited such rights (see Anarchism and religion). Anarchism has been an important advocate of free love since its birth. Later a strong tendency of free love appeared alongside anarcha-feminism and advocacy of LGBT rights (see Anarchism and issues related to LGBTI persons). In recent times anarchism has also voiced opinions and taken action around certain sex related subjects such as pornography, BDSM "Interview with an anarchist dominatrix" by Organise and the sex industry. 
American anarchist Emma Goldman, prominent anarcha-feminist, free love and freethought activist
Anarcha-feminism developed as a synthesis of radical feminism and anarchism that views patriarchy (male domination over women) as a fundamental manifestation of compulsory government. It was inspired by the late 19th century writings of early feminist anarchists such as Lucy Parsons, Emma Goldman, Voltairine de Cleyre and Virginia Bolten. Anarcha-feminists, like other radical feminists, criticise and advocate the abolition of traditional conceptions of family, education and gender roles. Also the council communist Sylvia Pankhurst was a feminist activist as well as a libertarian marxist. Anarchists also took a pioneering interest in issues related to LGBTI persons. An important current within anarchism is free love. Free love advocates sometimes traced their roots back to the early anarchist Josiah Warren and to experimental communities, viewed sexual freedom as a clear, direct expression of an individual's self-ownership. Free love particularly stressed women's rights since most sexual laws discriminated against women: for example, marriage laws and anti-birth control measures. 

Libertarian socialists have traditionally been skeptical of and opposed to organized religion. Freethought is a philosophical viewpoint that holds opinions should be formed on the basis of science, logic, and reason, and should not be influenced by authority, tradition, or other dogmas. The cognitive application of freethought is known as "freethinking," and practitioners of freethought are known as "freethinkers." In the United States, "freethought was a basically anti-Christian, anti-clerical movement, whose purpose was to make the individual politically and spiritually free to decide for himself on religious matters. A number of contributors to Liberty (anarchist publication) were prominent figures in both freethought and anarchism. The individualist anarchist George MacDonald was a co-editor of Freethought and, for a time, The Truth Seeker. E.C. Walker was co-editor of the...free-thought / free love journal Lucifer, the Light-Bearer". Wendy McElroy. "The culture of individualist anarchist in Late-nineteenth century America" Free Society (18951897 as The Firebrand; 18971904 as Free Society) was a major anarchist newspaper in the United States at the end of the nineteenth and beginning of the twentieth centuries. "Free Society was the principal English-language forum for anarchist ideas in the United States at the beginning of the twentieth century." Emma Goldman: Making Speech Free, 19021909, p.551. The publication staunchly advocated free love and women's rights, and critiqued "Comstockery"  censorship of sexual information. In 1901, Catalan anarchist and free-thinker Francesc Ferrer i Gurdia established "modern" or progressive schools in Barcelona in defiance of an educational system controlled by the Catholic Church. The schools' stated goal was to "educate the working class in a rational, secular and non-coercive setting". Fiercely anti-clerical, Ferrer believed in "freedom in education", education free from the authority of church and state (see Anarchism and education).

===Violent and non-violent means===

Some libertarian socialists see violent revolution as necessary in the abolition of capitalist society. Along with many others, Errico Malatesta argued that the use of violence was necessary; as he put it in Umanit Nova (no. 125, September 6, 1921):

Pierre-Joseph Proudhon argued in favor of a non-violent revolution through a process of dual power in which libertarian socialist institutions would be established and form associations enabling the formation of an expanding network within the existing state-capitalist framework with the intention of eventually rendering both the state and the capitalist economy obsolete. The progression towards violence in anarchism stemmed, in part, from the massacres of some of the communes inspired by the ideas of Proudhon and others. Many anarcho-communists began to see a need for revolutionary violence to counteract the violence inherent in both capitalism and government. Goldman, Emma. 'Anarchism and Other Essays' Mother Earth (1910) p.113. 

Anarcho-pacifism is a tendency within the anarchist movement which rejects the use of violence in the struggle for social change. Woodcock "Resisting the Nation State, the pacifist and anarchist tradition" by Geoffrey Ostergaard. Ppu.org.uk (1945-08-06). Retrieved on 2011-12-28. The main early influences were the thought of Henry David Thoreau and Leo Tolstoy. It developed "mostly in Holland (sic), Britain, and the United States, before and during the Second World War". Woodcock, p. 21: "Finally, somewhat aside from the curve that runs from anarchist individualism to anarcho-syndicalism, we come to Tolstoyanism and to pacifist anarchism that appeared, mostly in Holland (sic), Britain, and the United states, before and after the Second World War and which has continued since then in the deep in the anarchist involvement in the protests against nuclear armament." Opposition to the use of violence has not prohibited anarcho-pacifists from accepting the principle of resistance or even revolutionary action (see: non-violent revolution) provided it does not result in violence; it was in fact their approval of such forms of opposition to power that lead many anarcho-pacifists to endorse the anarcho-syndicalist concept of the general strike as the great revolutionary weapon. Later anarcho-pacifists have also come to endorse to non-violent strategy of dual power.

Other anarchists have believed that violence (especially self-defense) is justified as a way to provoke social upheaval which could lead to a social revolution.

===Environmental issues===

Green anarchism, or ecoanarchism, is a school of thought within anarchism which puts a particular emphasis on environmental issues. An important early influence was the thought of the American anarchist Henry David Thoreau and his book Walden, as well as Leo Tolstoy and Elisee Reclus. An Anarchist FAQ by Various authors In the late 19th century there emerged anarcho-naturism as the fusion of anarchism and naturist philosophies within individualist anarchist circles in France, Spain, Cuba and Portugal. Important contemporary currents are anarcho-primitivism and social ecology. "While almost all forms of modern anarchism consider themselves to have an ecological dimension, the specifically eco-anarchist thread within anarchism has two main focal points, Social Ecology and "primitivist"."An Anarchist FAQ by Various authors An important meeting place for international libertarian socialism in the early 1990s was the journal Democracy & Nature in which prominent activists and theorists such as Takis Fotopoulos, Noam Chomsky, "Noam Chomsky, "Nationalism and the New World Order: An Interview by Takis Fotopoulos" at Democracy and Nature Vol. 2, No. 2 (Issue 5), 1994 pp. 1-7 Murray Bookchin and Cornelius Castoriadis "It was with sadness and a certain frustration that I read in Democracy and Nature (Vol. 3, No. 3, pp. 198-202) that Murray Bookchin and Janet Biehl have resigned from the D&N International Advisory Board, Murray complaining, among other things, that the journal has become too "Castoriadian" in its orientation. The sadness stems from the fact that I found inherently appealing D&N's effort to examine what it considered the best of Bookchin and Castoriadis so as to encourage the emergence of a "new liberatory project." "On the Bookchin/Biehl Resignations and the Creation of a New Liberatory Project" by David Ames Curtis at Agora International website wrote. The journal promoted a green libertarian socialism when it manifested as its aims that:

==Political roots==

===Within early modern socialist thought===

====Peasant revolts in the post-reformation era====
Woodcut from a Diggers document by William Everard.
Various libertarian socialist authors have identified the written work of English Protestant social reformer Gerrard Winstanley and the social activism of his group, the Diggers, as anticipating this line of thought. "It was in these conditions of class struggle that, among a whole cluster of radical groups such as the Fifth Monarchy Men, the Levellers and the Ranters, there emerged perhaps the first real proto-anarchists, the Diggers, who like the classical 19th century anarchists identified political and economic power and who believed that a social, rather than political revolution was necessary for the establishment of justice. Gerrard Winstanley, the Diggers' leader, made an identification with the word of God and the principle of reason, an equivalent philosophy to that found in Tolstoy's The Kingdom of God is Within You. In fact, it seems likely Tolstoy took much of his own inspiration from Winstanley "Marlow. "Anarchism and Christianity" "While the ideal commonwealth conceived by James Harrington tried to combine the existence of a powerful state with respect for the political rights of the citizens, Thomas Hobbes and Gerrard Winstanley, for opposite reasons, denied the possibility of power being shared between the state and the people...Before defining the government of a true Commonwealth Winstanley denounces the kingly government based on property and like Proudhon he believes that property is theft. Marie Louise Berneri ""Utopias of the English Revolution" For anarchist historian George Woodcock although (Pierre Joseph) Proudhon was the first writer to call himself an anarchist, at least two predecessors outlined systems that contain all the basic elements of anarchism. The first was Gerrard Winstanley (1609-c. 1660), a linen draper who led the small movement of the Diggers during the Commonwealth. Winstanley and his followers protested in the name of a radical Christianity against the economic distress that followed the Civil War and against the inequality that the grandees of the New Model Army seemed intent on preserving. George Woodcock "Anarchism". The Encyclopedia of Philosophy 

In 16491650 the Diggers squatted on stretches of common land in southern England and attempted to set up communities based on work on the land and the sharing of goods. The communities failed, but a series of pamphlets by Winstanley survived, of which The New Law of Righteousness (1649) was the most important. Advocating a rational Christianity, Winstanley equated Christ with the universal liberty and declared the universally corrupting nature of authority. He saw an equal privilege to share in the blessing of liberty and detected an intimate link between the institution of property and the lack of freedom." George Woodcock "Anarchism". The Encyclopedia of Philosophy For Murray Bookchin "In the modern world, anarchism first appeared as a movement of the peasantry and yeomanry against declining feudal institutions. In Germany its foremost spokesman during the Peasant Wars was Thomas Muenzer; in England, Gerrard Winstanley, a leading participant in the Digger movement. The concepts held by Muenzer and Winstanley were superbly attuned to the needs of their time  a historical period when the majority of the population lived in the countryside and when the most militant revolutionary forces came from an agrarian world. It would be painfully academic to argue whether Muenzer and Winstanley could have achieved their ideals. What is of real importance is that they spoke to their time; their anarchist concepts followed naturally from the rural society that furnished the bands of the peasant armies in Germany and the New Model in England." Lewis Herber. (Murray Bookchin) "Ecology and Revolutionary Thought". Theanarchistlibrary.org (2009-04-27). Retrieved on 2011-12-28. 

====The Enlightenment====
William GodwinAnother often mentioned name is that of English enlightenment thinker William Godwin. Kenneth C. Wenzer "Godwin's Place in the Anarchist Tradition  a Bicentennial Tribute". The anarchist library (2011-02-12). Retrieved on 2011-12-28. For Woodcock a more elaborate sketch of anarchism, although still without the name, was provided by William Godwin in his Enquiry Concerning Political Justice (1793). Godwin was a gradualist anarchist rather than a revolutionary anarchist; he differed from most later anarchists in preferring above revolutionary action the gradual and, as it seemed to him, more natural process of discussion among men of good will, by which he hoped truth would eventually triumph through its own power. Godwin, who was influenced by the English tradition of Dissent and the French philosophy of the Enlightenment, put forward in a developed form the basic anarchist criticisms of the state, of accumulated property, and of the delegation of authority through democratic procedure." 

During the French Revolution, Sylvain Marchal, in his Manifesto of the Equals (1796), demanded "the communal enjoyment of the fruits of the earth" and looked forward to the disappearance of "the revolting distinction of rich and poor, of great and small, of masters and valets, of governors and governed." The term "anarchist" first entered the English language in 1642, during the English Civil War, as a term of abuse, used by Royalists against their Roundhead opponents. By the time of the French Revolution some, such as the Enrags, began to use the term positively, Sheehan, Sean. Anarchism, London: Reaktion Books, 2004. p. 85. in opposition to Jacobin centralisation of power, seeing "revolutionary government" as oxymoronic. By the turn of the 19th century, the English word "anarchism" had lost its initial negative connotation. 

====The Romantic era and "Utopian Socialism"====
Charles Fourier
Kent Bromley, in his preface to Peter Kropotkin's book The Conquest of Bread, considered early French socialist Charles Fourier to be the founder of the libertarian branch of socialist thought, as opposed to the authoritarian socialist ideas of Babeuf and Buonarroti. Kropotkin, Peter. The Conquest of Bread, preface by Kent Bromley, New York and London, G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1906. Anarchist Hakim Bey describes Fourier's ideas as follows: "In Fourier's system of Harmony all creative activity including industry, craft, agriculture, etc. will arise from liberated passion  this is the famous theory of "attractive labor." Fourier sexualizes work itself  the life of the Phalanstery is a continual orgy of intense feeling, intellection, & activity, a society of lovers & wild enthusiasts." Fourierism manifested itself "in the middle of the 19th century (where) literally hundreds of communes (phalansteries) were founded on fourierist principles in France, N. America, Mexico, S. America, Algeria, Yugoslavia, etc. Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, Friedrich Engels, and Peter Kropotkin all read him with fascination, as did Andr Breton and Roland Barthes. Hakim Bey (1991) "The Lemonade Ocean & Modern Times" 

Anarchist Peter Sabatini reports that in the United States "of early to mid-19th century, there appeared an array of communal
and "utopian" counterculture groups (including the
so-called free love movement). William Godwin's anarchism exerted an ideological influence on some of this, but
more so the socialism of Robert Owen and Charles Fourier. After success of his British venture, Owen himself
established a cooperative community within the United
States at New Harmony, Indiana during 1825. One member of
this commune was Josiah Warren (17981874), considered to be
the first individualist anarchist". Peter Sabatini. "Libertarianism: Bogus Anarchy". Theanarchistlibrary.org (2009-12-03). Retrieved on 2011-12-28. 

===Anarchism===

As Albert Meltzer and Stuart Christie stated in their book The Floodgates of Anarchy, anarchism has:

Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, who is often considered the father of modern anarchism, coined the phrase "Property is theft" to describe part of his view on the complex nature of ownership in relation to freedom. When he said property is theft, he was referring to the capitalist who he believed stole profit from laborers. For Proudhon, the capitalist's employee was "subordinated, exploited: his permanent condition is one of obedience." General Idea of the Revolution in the Nineteenth Century (1851), Sixth Study,  3  5. 
Peter Kropotkin, main theorist of anarcho-communism
Seventeen years (1857) after Proudhon first called himself an anarchist (1840), anarchist communist Joseph Djacque was the first person to describe himself as a libertarian. De l'tre-humain mle et femelleLettre  P.J. Proudhon par Joseph Djacque (in French) Outside the United States, "libertarian" generally refers to anti-authoritarian anti-capitalist ideologies. 

Libertarian socialism has its roots in both classical liberalism and socialism, though it is often in conflict with liberalism (especially neoliberalism and right-libertarianism) and authoritarian State socialism simultaneously. While libertarian socialism has roots in both socialism and liberalism, different forms have different levels of influence from the two traditions. For instance mutualist anarchism is more influenced by liberalism while communist and syndicalist anarchism are more influenced by socialism. It is interesting to note, however, that mutualist anarchism has its origins in 18th and 19th century European socialism (such as Fourierian socialism) Swartz, Clarence Lee. What is Mutualism? "Ricardian socialism". The Blackwell Encyclopaedia of Political Thought. 1987. p. 441 while communist and syndicalist anarchism has its earliest origins in early 18th century liberalism (such as the French Revolution). Graham, Robert. Anarchism - A Documentary History of Libertarian Ideas  Volume One: From Anarchy to Anarchism (300CE to 1939), Black Rose Books, 2005 

Anarchism posed an early challenge to the vanguardism and statism it detected in important sectors of the socialist movement. As such "The consequences of the growth of parliamentary action, ministerialism, and party life, charged the anarchists, would be de-radicalism and embourgeoisiement. Further, state politics would subvert both true individuality and true community. In response, many anarchists refused Marxist-type organisation, seeking to dissolve or undermine power and hierarchy by way of loose political-cultural groupings, or by championing organisation by a single, simultaneously economic and political administrative unit (Ruhle, Syndicalism). The power of the intellectual and of science were also rejected by many anarchists: In conquering the state, in exalting the role of parties, they reinforce the hierarchical principle embodied in political and administrative institutions. Revolutions could only come through force of circumstances and/or the inherently rebellious instincts of the masses (the instinct for freedom (Bakunin, Chomsky)). Thus, in Bakunins words: All that individuals can do is to clarify, propagate, and work out ideas corresponding to the popular instinct.". 

===Marxism===

William Morris, early english libertarian marxistMarxism started to develop a libertarian strand of thought after specific circumstances. "One does find early expressions of such perspectives in (William) Morris and the Socialist Party of Great Britain (the SPGB), then again around the events of 1905, with the growing concern at the bureaucratisation and de-radicalisation of international socialism". Morris established the Socialist League in December 1884, which was encouraged by Friedrich Engels and Eleanor Marx. As the leading figure in the organization Morris embarked on a relentless series of speeches and talks on street corners, in working men's clubs and lecture theatres across England and Scotland. From 1887, anarchists began to outnumber socialists in the Socialist League. Beer, A History of British Socialism, vol. 2, pg. 256. The 3rd Annual Conference of the League, held in London on 29 May 1887 marked the change, with a majority of the 24 branch delegates voting in favor of an anarchist-sponsored resolution declaring that "This conference endorses the policy of abstention from parliamentary action, hitherto pursued by the League, and sees no sufficient reason for altering it." Marx-Engels Collected Works: Volume 48. New York: International Publishers, 2001; pg. 538, fn. 95. Morris played peacemaker but sided with the anti-Parliamentarians, who won control of the League, which consequently lost the support of Engels and saw the departure of Eleanor Marx and her partner Edward Aveling to form the separate Bloomsbury Socialist Society.

However, "the most important ruptures are to be traced to the insurgency during and after the First World War. Disillusioned with the capitulation of the social democrats, excited by the emergence of workers councils, and slowly distanced from Leninism, many communists came to reject the claims of socialist parties and to put their faith instead in the masses." For these socialists, The intuition of the masses in action can have more genius in it than the work of the greatest individual genius. Luxemburgs workerism and spontaneism are exemplary of positions later taken up by the far-left of the period  Pannekoek, Roland Holst, and Gorter in Holland, Sylvia Pankhurst in Britain, Gramsci in Italy, Lukacs in Hungary. In these formulations, the dictatorship of the proletariat was to be the dictatorship of a class, not of a party or of a clique." However within this line of thought "The tension between anti-vanguardism and vanguardism has frequently resolved itself in two diametrically opposed ways: the first involved a drift towards the party; the second saw a move towards the idea of complete proletarian spontaneity...The first course is exemplified most clearly in Gramsci and Lukacs...The second course is illustrated in the tendency, developing from the Dutch and German far-lefts, which inclined towards the complete eradication of the party form." 

In the emerging Soviet state there appeared Left-wing uprisings against the Bolsheviks which were a series of rebellions and uprisings against the Bolsheviks led or supported by left wing groups including Socialist Revolutionaries, Carr, E.H.  The Bolshevik Revolution 19171923. W. W. Norton & Company 1985. Left Socialist Revolutionaries, Mensheviks, and anarchists. Avrich, Paul. "Russian Anarchists and the Civil War", Russian Review, Vol. 27, No. 3 (Jul., 1968), pp. 296306. Blackwell Publishing Some were in support of the White Movement while some tried to be an independent force. The uprisings started in 1918 and continued through the Russian Civil War and after until 1922. In response the Bolsheviks increasingly abandoned attempts to get these groups to join the government and suppressed them with force. is a work by Vladimir Lenin himself attacking assorted critics of the Bolsheviks who claimed positions to their left.

For "many Marxian libertarian socialists, the political bankruptcy of socialist orthodoxy necessitated a theoretical break. This break took a number of forms. The Bordigists and the SPGB championed a super-Marxian intransigence in theoretical matters. Other socialists made a return behind Marx to the anti-positivist programme of German idealism. Libertarian socialism has frequently linked its anti-authoritarian political aspirations with this theoretical differentiation from orthodoxy... Karl Korsch... remained a libertarian socialist for a large part of his life and because of the persistent urge towards theoretical openness in his work. Korsch rejected the eternal and static, and he was obsessed by the essential role of practice in a theorys truth. For Korsch, no theory could escape history, not even Marxism. In this vein, Korsch even credited the stimulus for Marxs Capital to the movement of the oppressed classes. " 

In rejecting both capitalism and the state, some libertarian marxists align themselves with anarchists in opposition to both capitalist representative democracy and to authoritarian forms of Marxism. Although anarchists and Marxists share an ultimate goal of a stateless society, anarchists criticise most Marxists for advocating a transitional phase under which the state is used to achieve this aim. Nonetheless, libertarian Marxist tendencies such as autonomist Marxism and council communism have historically been intertwined with the anarchist movement. Anarchist movements have come into conflict with both capitalist and Marxist forces, sometimes at the same time, as in the Spanish Civil War, though as in that war Marxists themselves are often divided in support or opposition to anarchism. Other political persecutions under bureaucratic parties have resulted in a strong historical antagonism between anarchists and libertarian Marxists on the one hand and Leninist Marxists and their derivatives such as Maoists on the other. In recent history, however, libertarian socialists have repeatedly formed temporary alliances with Marxist-Leninist groups for the purposes of protest against institutions they both reject. Part of this antagonism can be traced to the International Workingmen's Association, the First International, a congress of radical workers, where Mikhail Bakunin, who was fairly representative of anarchist views, and Karl Marx, whom anarchists accused of being an "authoritarian", came into conflict on various issues. Bakunin's viewpoint on the illegitimacy of the state as an institution and the role of electoral politics was starkly counterposed to Marx's views in the First International. Marx and Bakunin's disputes eventually led to Marx taking control of the First International and expelling Bakunin and his followers from the organization. This was the beginning of a long-running feud and schism between libertarian socialists and what they call "authoritarian communists", or alternatively just "authoritarians".Some Marxists have formulated views that closely resemble syndicalism, and thus express more affinity with anarchist ideas. Several libertarian socialists, notably Noam Chomsky, believe that anarchism shares much in common with certain variants of Marxism such as the council communism of Marxist Anton Pannekoek. In Chomsky's Notes on Anarchism, he suggests the possibility "that some form of council communism is the natural form of revolutionary socialism in an industrial society. It reflects the belief that democracy is severely limited when the industrial system is controlled by any form of autocratic elite, whether of owners, managers, and technocrats, a 'vanguard' party, or a State bureaucracy."

In the mid-20th century some libertarian socialist groups emerged out of dissagreements with Trotskyism which presented itself as leninist anti-stalinism. As such the french group Socialisme ou Barbarie emerged out of the Trotskyist Fourth International, where Castoriadis and Claude Lefort constituted a ChaulieuMontal Tendency in the French Parti Communiste Internationaliste in 1946. In 1948, they experienced their "final disenchantment with Trotskyism", , p. 133 leading them to break away to form Socialisme ou Barbarie, whose journal began appearing in March 1949. Castoriadis later said of this period that "the main audience of the group and of the journal was formed by groups of the old, radical left: Bordigists, council communists, some anarchists and some offspring of the German "left" of the 1920s". , p. 134 Also in the United Kingdom the group Solidarity was founded in 1960 by a small group of expelled members of the Trotskyist Socialist Labour League. Almost from the start it was strongly influenced by the French Socialisme ou Barbarie group, in particular by its intellectual leader Cornelius Castoriadis, whose essays were among the many pamphlets Solidarity produced. The intellectual leader of the group was Chris Pallis ( who wrote under the name Maurice Brinton). Brinton, Maurice (Goodway, David ed). For Workers' Power: the selected writings of Maurice Brinton. AK Press. 2004. ISBN 1-904859-07-0 

In the People's Republic of China (PRC) since 1967, the terms Ultra-Left and left communist refers to political theory and practice self-defined as further "left" than that of the central Maoist leaders at the height of the GPCR ("Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution"). The terms are also used retroactively to describe some early 20th century Chinese anarchist orientations. As a slur, the Communist Party of China (CPC) has used the term "ultra-left" more broadly to denounce any orientation it considers further "left" than the party line. According to the latter usage, in 1978 the CPC Central Committee denounced as "ultra-left" the line of Mao Zedong from 1956 until his death in 1976. "Ultra-Left" refers to those GPCR rebel positions that diverged from the central Maoist line by identifying an antagonistic contradiction between the CPC-PRC party-state itself and the masses of workers and "peasants" "Peasant ()" was the official term for workers on people's communes. According to the Ultra-Left, both peasants and (urban) workers together composed a proletarian class divorced from any meaningful control over production or distribution. conceived as a single proletarian class divorced from any meaningful control over production or distribution. Whereas the central Maoist line maintained that the masses controlled the means of production through the Party's mediation, the Ultra-Left argued that the objective interests of bureaucrats were structurally determined by the centralist state-form in direct opposition to the objective interests of the masses, regardless of however "red" a given bureaucrat's "thought" might be. Whereas the central Maoist leaders encouraged the masses to criticize reactionary "ideas" and "habits" among the alleged 5% of bad cadres, giving them a chance to "turn over a new leaf" after they had undergone "thought reform," the Ultra-Left argued that "cultural revolution" had to give way to "political revolution"  "in which one class overthrows another class". See, for instance, "Whither China?" by Yang Xiguang. The 70s Collective, ed. 1996. China: The Revolution is Dead, Long Live the Revolution. Montreal: Black Rose Books. 

In 1969 french platformist anarcho-communist Daniel Guerin published an essay called "Libertarian Marxism?" in which he dealt with the debate between Karl Marx and Mikhail Bakunin at the First International and afterwards he suggested that "Libertarian marxism rejects determinism and fatalism, giving the greater place to individual will, intuition, imagination, reflex speeds, and to the deep instincts of the masses, which are more far-seeing in hours of crisis than the reasonings of the elites; libertarian marxism thinks of the effects of surprise, provocation and boldness, refuses to be cluttered and paralysed by a heavy scientific apparatus, doesnt equivocate or bluff, and guards itself from adventurism as much as from fear of the unknown." In the US from 1970 to 1981 there existed the publication Root & Branch Root & Branch at libcom.org which had as a subtitle "A Libertarian Marxist Journal". Root & Branch # 7 at libcom.org 

Autonomist Marxism, Neo-Marxism and Situationist theory are also regarded as being anti-authoritarian variants of Marxism that are firmly within the libertarian socialist tradition. For libcom.org "In the 1980s and 90s, a series of other groups developed, influenced also by much of the above work. The most notable are Kolinko, Kurasje and Wildcat in Germany, Aufheben in England, Theorie Communiste in France, TPTG in Greece and Kamunist Kranti in India. They are also connected to other groups in other countries, merging autonomia, operaismo, Hegelian Marxism, the work of the JFT, Open Marxism, the ICO, the Situationist International, anarchism and post-68 German Marxism." Related to this were intellectuals who were influenced by Italian left communist Amadeo Bordiga but who disagreed with his leninist positions and so these included the french publication Invariance edited by Jacques Camatte, published since 1968 and Gilles Dauve who published Troploin with Karl Nesic.

==Notable libertarian socialist tendencies==

===Classical anarchist tendencies===
In a chronological and theoretical sense, there are classical  those created throughout the 19th century  and post-classical anarchist schools  those created since the mid-20th century and after.

====Mutualism====

Proudhon and his children, by Gustave Courbet (1865).

Mutualism is a political and economic theory largely associated with Pierre-Joseph Proudhon. Proudhon argued that "all capital, whether material or mental, being the result of collective labour, is, in consequence, collective property." Proudhon, Pierre-Joseph. 'What is Property?' This meant that artisans would manage the tools required for their own work while, in large scale enterprises, this meant replacing wage labour by workers' co-operatives. He argued "it is necessary to form an ASSOCIATION among workers... because without that, they would remain related as subordinates and superiors, and there would ensue two... castes of masters and wage-workers, which is repugnant to a free and democratic society." Proudhon, Pierre-Joseph. The General Idea of the revolution Freedom Press (1923) As he put it in 1848:

"Under the law of association, transmission of wealth does not apply to the instruments of labour, so cannot become a cause of inequality.... We are socialists... under universal association, ownership of the land and of the instruments of labour is social ownership... We want the mines, canals, railways handed over to democratically organised workers' associations... We want these associations to be models for agriculture, industry and trade, the pioneering core of that vast federation of companies and societies, joined together in the common bond of the democratic and social Republic." Proudhon, Pierre-Joseph. 'Oeuvres Compltes' (Lacroix edition), volume 17, pp. 1889 

Mutualists believe that a free labor market would allow for conditions of equal income in proportion to exerted labor. Tandy, Francis D., 1896, Voluntary Socialism, chapter 6, paragraphs 9, 10, 15, 19 & 22. Carson, Kevin, 2004, Studies in Mutualist Political Economy, chapter 2 (after Meek & Oppenheimer) ISBN 1-4196-5869-7. As Jonathan Beecher puts it, Proudhon's aim was to, "emancipate labor from the constraints imposed by capital". Proudhon supported individual possession of land and argued that the "land is indispensable to our existence, consequently a common thing, consequently insusceptible of appropriation." He believed that an individual only had a right to land while he was using or occupying it. If the individual ceases doing so, it reverts to unowned land. Swartz, Clarence Lee. What is Mutualism? VI. Land and Rent Mutualists hold a labor theory of value, arguing that in exchange labor should always be worth "the amount of labor necessary to produce an article of exactly similar and equal utility," Tandy, Francis D., 1896, Voluntary Socialism, chapter 6, paragraph 15. and considering anything less to be exploitation, theft of labor, or usury. Mutualists oppose the institutions by which individuals gain income through loans, investments, and rent, as they believe the income received through these activities is not in direct accord with labor spent. Tandy, Francis D., 1896, Voluntary Socialism, chapter 6, paragraph 19. Carson, Kevin, 2004, Studies in Mutualist Political Economy, chapter 2 (after Ricardo, Dobb & Oppenheimer) ISBN 1-4196-5869-7. In place of these capitalist institutions they advocate labor-owned cooperative firms and associations. Hymans, E., Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, pp. 1901 Woodcock, pp. 110, 112 Mutualists advocate mutual banks, owned by the workers, that do not charge interest on secured loans. Most mutualists believe that anarchy should be achieved gradually rather than through revolution. Free Market Anti-Capitalism. Mutualist.Org. Retrieved on 2011-12-28. Some individualist anarchists, such as Benjamin Tucker, were influenced by Proudhon's Mutualism, but unlike Proudhon, they did not call for "association" in large enterprises. Woodcock, p. 20 

Mutualist ideas found a fertile ground in the XIX century in Spain. In Spain Ramn de la Sagra established anarchist journal El Porvenir in La Corua in 1845 which was inspired by Proudhons ideas. "Anarchism" at the Encyclopedia Britannica online. The catalan politician Francesc Pi i Margall became the principal translator of Proudhon's works into Spanish George Woodcock. Anarchism: a history of libertarian movements. Pg. 357 and later briefly became president of Spain in 1873 while being the leader of the Democratic Republican Federal Party. According to George Woodcock "These translations were to have a profound and lasting effect on the development of Spanish anarchism after 1870, but before that time Proudhonian ideas, as interpreted by Pi, already provided much of the inspiration for the federalist movement which sprang up in the early 1860's." George Woodcock. Anarchism: a history of libertarian movements. Pg. 357 According to the Encyclopedia Britannica "During the Spanish revolution of 1873, Pi y Margall attempted to establish a decentralized, or cantonalist, political system on Proudhonian lines." Kevin Carson is a contemporary mutualist theorist who is the author of Studies in Mutualist Political Economy. Kevin Carson. Studies in Mutualist Political Economy. 

====Collectivist anarchism====

Mikhail Bakunin
Collectivist anarchism (also known as anarcho-collectivism) is a revolutionary Patsouras, Louis. 2005. Marx in Context. iUniverse. p. 54 doctrine that advocates the abolition of the state and private ownership of the means of production. Instead, it envisions the means of production being owned collectively and controlled and managed by the producers themselves. For the collectivization of the means of production, it was originally envisaged that workers will revolt and forcibly collectivize the means of production Once collectivization takes place, workers' salaries would be determined in democratic organizations based on the amount of time they contributed to production. These salaries would be used to purchase goods in a communal market. Bakunin Mikail. Bakunin on Anarchism. Black Rose Books. 1980. p. 369 This contrasts with anarcho-communism where wages would be abolished, and where individuals would take freely from a storehouse of goods "to each according to his need." Thus, Bakunin's "Collectivist Anarchism", notwithstanding the title, is seen as a blend of individualism and collectivism. Morriss, Brian. Bakukunin: The Philosophy of Freedom. Black Rose Books Ltd., 1993. p. 115 Collectivist anarchism is most commonly associated with Mikhail Bakunin, the anti-authoritarian sections of the First International, and the early Spanish anarchist movement.

====Anarchist communism====

Errico Malatesta, 1891, influential italian activist and theorist of anarcho-communism
Anarchist communism (also known as anarcho-communism and occasionally as free communism) is a theory of anarchism which advocates the abolition of the state, markets, money, capitalism and private property (while retaining respect for personal property), in favor of common ownership of the means of production, direct democracy and a horizontal network of voluntary associations and workers' councils with production and consumption based on the guiding principle: "from each according to his ability, to each according to his need". Fabbri, Luigi. "Anarchism and Communism." Northeastern Anarchist #4. 1922. 13 October 2002. http://dwardmac.pitzer.edu/anarchist_archives/worldwidemovements/fabbrianarandcom.html Makhno, Mett, Arshinov, Valevski, Linski (Dielo Trouda). "The Organizational Platform of the Libertarian Communists". 1926. Constructive Section: available here http://www.nestormakhno.info/english/platform/constructive.htm 

Anarcho-communism developed out of radical socialist currents after the French revolution but was first formulated as such in the Italian section of the First International. Nunzio Pernicone, "Italian Anarchism 1864  1892", pp. 111113, AK Press 2009. The theoretical work of Peter Kropotkin took importance later as it expanded and developed pro-organizationalist and insurrectionary anti-organizationalist sections. Some forms of anarchist communism, such as insurrectionary anarchism, are strongly influenced by egoism and radical individualism, believing anarcho-communism is the best social system for the realization of individual freedom. Christopher Gray, Leaving the Twentieth Century, p. 88. Post-left anarcho-communist Bob Black after analysing insurrectionary anarcho-communist Luigi Galleani's view on anarcho-communism went as far as saying that "communism is the final fulfillment of individualism.... The apparent contradiction between individualism and communism rests on a misunderstanding of both.... Subjectivity is also objective: the individual really is subjective. It is nonsense to speak of emphatically prioritizing the social over the individual,... You may as well speak of prioritizing the chicken over the egg. Anarchy is a method of individualization. It aims to combine the greatest individual development with the greatest communal unity."Bob Black. Nightmares of Reason. "Modern Communists are more individualistic than Stirner. To them, not merely religion, morality, family and State are spooks, but property also is no more than a spook, in whose name the individual is enslaved  and how enslaved!...Communism thus creates a basis for the liberty and Eigenheit of the individual. I am a Communist because I am an Individualist. Fully as heartily the Communists concur with Stirner when he puts the word take in place of demand  that leads to the dissolution of property, to expropriation. Individualism and Communism go hand in hand."Max Baginski. "Stirner: The Ego and His Own" on Mother Earth. Vol. 2. No. 3 MAY, 1907 Most anarcho-communists view anarcho-communism as a way of reconciling the opposition between the individual and society. "Communism is the one which guarantees the greatest amount of individual liberty  provided that the idea that begets the community be Liberty, Anarchy...Communism guarantees economic freedom better than any other form of association, because it can guarantee wellbeing, even luxury, in return for a few hours of work instead of a day's work." "Communism and Anarchy" by Peter Kropotkin This other society will be libertarian communism, in which social solidarity and free individuality find their full expression, and in which these two ideas develop in perfect harmony.Organisational Platform of the Libertarian Communists by Dielo Truda (Workers' Cause) "I see the dichotomies made between individualism and communism, individual revolt and class struggle, the struggle against human exploitation and the exploitation of nature as false dichotomies and feel that those who accept them are impoverishing their own critique and struggle.""MY PERSPECTIVES" by Willful Disobedience Vol. 2, No. 12 

To date, the best known examples of an anarchist communist society (i.e., established around the ideas as they exist today and achieving worldwide attention and knowledge in the historical canon), are the anarchist territories during the Spanish Revolution "This process of education and class organization, more than any single factor in Spain, produced the collectives. And to the degree that the CNT-FAI (for the two organizations became fatally coupled after July 1936) exercised the major influence in an area, the collectives proved to be generally more durable, communist and resistant to Stalinist counterrevolution than other republican-held areas of Spain." Murray Bookchin. To Remember Spain: The Anarchist and Syndicalist Revolution of 1936 and the Free Territory during the Russian Revolution. Through the efforts and influence of the Spanish Anarchists during the Spanish Revolution within the Spanish Civil War, starting in 1936 anarchist communism existed in most of Aragon, parts of the Levante and Andalusia, and in the stronghold of Anarchist Catalonia before being crushed by the combined forces of Francoism, Adolf Hitler, Benito Mussolini, Spanish Communist Party repression (backed by the USSR) as well as economic and armaments blockades from the capitalist countries and the Spanish Republic itself. Murray Bookchin. To Remember Spain: The Anarchist and Syndicalist Revolution of 1936 During the Russian Revolution, anarchists such as Nestor Makhno worked to create and defendthrough the Revolutionary Insurrectionary Army of Ukraineanarchist communism in the Free Territory of the Ukraine from 1919 before being conquered by the Bolsheviks in 1921. Anarcho-communist currents include platformism and insurrectionary anarchism.

====Within individualist anarchism====

Individualist anarchism refers to several traditions of thought within the anarchist movement that emphasize the individual and his or her will over external determinants such as groups, society, traditions, and ideological systems. "What do I mean by individualism? I mean by individualism the moral doctrine which, relying on no dogma, no tradition, no external determination, appeals only to the individual conscience."Mini-Manual of Individualism by Han Ryner "I do not admit anything except the existence of the individual, as a condition of his sovereignty. To say that the sovereignty of the individual is conditioned by Liberty is simply another way of saying that it is conditioned by itself.""Anarchism and the State" in Individual Liberty 

Josiah Warren is widely regarded as the first American anarchist, Palmer, Brian (2010-12-29) What do anarchists want from us?, Slate.com and the four-page weekly paper he edited during 1833, The Peaceful Revolutionist, was the first anarchist periodical published. William Bailie, Josiah Warren: The First American Anarchist  A Sociological Study, Boston: Small, Maynard & Co., 1906, p. 20 For American anarchist historian Eunice Minette Schuster "It is apparent...that Proudhonian Anarchism was to be found in the United States at least as early as 1848 and that it was not conscious of its affinity to the Individualist Anarchism of Josiah Warren and Stephen Pearl Andrews...William B. Greene presented this Proudhonian Mutualism in its purest and most systematic form.". Later the american individualist anarchist Benjamin Tucker "was against both the state and capitalism, against both oppression and exploitation. While not against the market and property he was firmly against capitalism as it was, in his eyes, a state-supported monopoly of social capital (tools, machinery, etc.) which allows owners to exploit their employees, i.e., to avoid paying workers the full value of their labour. He thought that the "labouring classes are deprived of their earnings by usury in its three forms, interest, rent and profit."... Therefore "Liberty will abolish interest; it will abolish profit; it will abolish monopolistic rent; it will abolish taxation; it will abolish the exploitation of labour; it will abolish all means whereby any labourer can be deprived of any of his product."...This stance puts him squarely in the libertarian socialist tradition and, unsurprisingly, Tucker referred to himself many times as a socialist and considered his philosophy to be "Anarchistic socialism.". "Benjamin Tucker: Capitalist or Anarchist" in An Anarchist FAQby Various Authors "The economic principles of Modern Socialism are a logical deduction from the principle laid down by Adam Smith in the early chapters of his Wealth of Nations,  namely, that labor is the true measure of price...Half a century or more after Smith enunciated the principle above stated, Socialism picked it up where he had dropped it, and in following it to its logical conclusions, made it the basis of a new economic philosophy...This seems to have been done independently by three different men, of three different nationalities, in three different languages: Josiah Warren, an American; Pierre J. Proudhon, a Frenchman; Karl Marx, a German Jew...That the work of this interesting trio should have been done so nearly simultaneously would seem to indicate that Socialism was in the air, and that the time was ripe and the conditions favorable for the appearance of this new school of thought...So far as priority of time is concerned, the credit seems to belong to Warren, the American,  a fact which should be noted by the stump orators who are so fond of declaiming against Socialism as an imported article." Benjamin Tucker. Individual Liberty 

Oscar Wilde, famous anarchist Irish writer who published the libertarian socialist work titled The Soul of Man under Socialism
French individualist anarchist Emile Armand shows clearly opposition to capitalism and centralized economies when he said that the individualist anarchist "inwardly he remains refractory  fatally refractory  morally, intellectually, economically (The capitalist economy and the directed economy, the speculators and the fabricators of single are equally repugnant to him.)" The spanish individualist anarchist Miguel Gimenez Igualada thought that ""capitalism is an effect of government; the disappearance of government means capitalism falls from its pedestal vertiginously...That which we call capitalism is not something else but a product of the State, within which the only thing that is being pushed forward is profit, good or badly acquired. And so to fight against capitalism is a pointless task, since be it State capitalism or Enterprise capitalism, as long as Government exists, exploiting capital will exist. The fight, but of consciousness, is against the State." "el capitalismo es slo el efecto del gobierno; desaparecido el gobierno, el
capitalismo cae de su pedestal vertiginosamente.... Lo que llamamos capitalismo no es otra cosa que el producto del Estado, dentro del cual lo nico que se cultiva es
la ganancia, bien o mal habida. Luchar, pues, contra el capitalismo es tarea intil, porque sea Capitalismo de Estado
o Capitalismo de Empresa, mientras el Gobierno exista, existir el capital que explota. La lucha, pero de conciencias,
es contra el Estado."Anarquismo by Miguel Gimenez Igualada His view on class division and technocracy are as follows "Since when no one works for another, the profiteer from wealth disappears, just as government will disappear when no one pays attention to those who learned four things at universities and from that fact they pretend to govern men. Big industrial enterprises will be transformed by men in big associations in which everyone will work and enjoy the product of their work. And from those easy as well as beautiful problems anarchism deals with and he who puts them in practice and lives them are anarchists.... The priority which without rest an anarchist must make is that in which no one has to exploit anyone, no man to no man, since that non-exploitation will lead to the limitation of property to individual needs". "La propiedad? Bah! No es problema. Porque cuando nadie trabaje para nadie, el acaparador de la riqueza desaparece, como ha de desaparecer el gobierno cuando nadie haga caso a los que aprendieron cuatro cosas en las universidades y por ese slo hecho pretenden gobernar a los hombres. Porque si en la tierra de los ciegos el tuerto es rey, en donde todos ven y juzgan y disciernen, el rey estorba. Y de lo que se trata es de que no haya reyes porque todos sean hombres. Las grandes empresas industriales las transformarn los hombres en grandes asociaciones donde todos trabajen y disfruten del producto de su trabajo. Y de esos tan sencillos como hermosos problemas trata el anarquismo y al que lo cumple y vive es al que se le llama anarquista...El hincapi que sin cansancio debe hacer el anarquista es el de que nadie debe explotar a nadie, ningn hombre a ningn hombre, porque esa no-explotacin llevara consigo la limitacin de la propiedad a las necesidades individuales."Anarquismo by Miguel Gimenez Igualada 

The anarchist "The most ambitious contribution to literary anarchism during the 1890s was undoubtedly Oscar Wilde The Soul of Man under Socialism. Wilde, as we have seen, declared himself an anarchist on at least one occasion during the 1890s, and he greatly admired Kropotkin, whom he had met. Later, in De Profundis, he described Kropotkin's life as one "of the most perfect lives I have come across in my own experience" and talked of him as "a man with a soul of that beautiful white Christ that seems coming out of Russia." But in The Soul of Man Under Socialism, which appeared in 1890, it is Godwin rather than Kropotkin whose influence seems dominant." George Woodcock. Anarchism: A History of Libertarian Ideas and Movements. 1962. (pg. 447) writer and bohemian Oscar Wilde wrote in his famous essay The Soul of Man under Socialism that "Art is individualism, and individualism is a disturbing and disintegrating force. There lies its immense value. For what it seeks is to disturb monotony of type, slavery of custom, tyranny of habit, and the reduction of man to the level of a machine." For anarchist historian George Woodcock "Wilde's aim in The Soul of Man under Socialism is to seek the society most favorable to the artist... for Wilde art is the supreme end, containing within itself enlightenment and regeneration, to which all else in society must be subordinated.... Wilde represents the anarchist as aesthete." George Woodcock. Anarchism: A History of Libertarian Ideas and Movements. 1962. (pg. 447) In a socialist society, people will have the possibility to realise their talents; "each member of the society will share in the general prosperity and happiness of the society." Wilde added that "upon the other hand, Socialism itself will be of value simply because it will lead to individualism" since individuals will no longer need to fear poverty or starvation. This individualism would, in turn, protect against governments "armed with economic power as they are now with political power" over their citizens. However, Wilde advocated non-capitalist individualism: "of course, it might be said that the Individualism generated under conditions of private property is not always, or even as a rule, of a fine or wonderful type" a critique which is "quite true." In this way socialism, in Wilde's imagination, would free men from manual labour and allow them to devote their time to creative pursuits, thus developing their soul. He ended by declaring "The new individualism is the new hellenism". 

====Anarcho-syndicalism====

May day demonstration of Spanish anarcho-syndicalist trade union CNT in Bilbao, Basque Country in 2010. The red and black flag is often used by anarcho-syndicalists and anarcho-communists
Anarcho-syndicalism is a branch of anarchism that focuses on the labor movement. Sorel, Georges. 'Political Theorists in Context' Routledge (2004) p. 248 Anarcho-syndicalists view labor unions as a potential force for revolutionary social change, replacing capitalism and the state with a new society democratically self-managed by workers.

The basic principles of anarcho-syndicalism are Workers' solidarity, Direct action
and Workers' self-management. Workers' solidarity means that anarcho-syndicalists believe all workersno matter their race, gender, or ethnic groupare in a similar situation in regard to their boss (class consciousness). Furthermore, it means that, within capitalism, any gains or losses made by some workers from or to bosses will eventually affect all workers. Therefore, to liberate themselves, all workers must support one another in their class conflict. Anarcho-syndicalists believe that only direct actionthat is, action concentrated on directly attaining a goal, as opposed to indirect action, such as electing a representative to a government positionwill allow workers to liberate themselves. Rocker, Rudolf. 'Anarcho-Syndicalism: Theory and Practice' AK Press (2004) p. 73 
Moreover, anarcho-syndicalists believe that workers' organizations (the organizations that struggle against the wage system, which, in anarcho-syndicalist theory, will eventually form the basis of a new society) should be self-managing. They should not have bosses or "business agents"; rather, the workers should be able to make all the decisions that affect them themselves.

Rudolf Rocker was one of the most popular voices in the anarcho-syndicalist movement. He outlined a view of the origins of the movement, what it sought, and why it was important to the future of labor in his 1938 pamphlet Anarcho-Syndicalism. The International Workers Association is an international anarcho-syndicalist federation of various labor unions from different countries. The Spanish Confederacin Nacional del Trabajo played and still plays a major role in the Spanish labor movement. It was also an important force in the Spanish Civil War.

===Libertarian Marxist tendencies===

Libertarian Marxism refers to a broad scope of economic and political philosophies that emphasize the anti-authoritarian aspects of Marxism. Early currents of libertarian Marxism, known as left communism, Pierce, Wayne."Libertarian Marxism's Relation to Anarchism" "The Utopian" 7380. emerged in opposition to MarxismLeninism Herman Gorter, Anton Pannekoek, Sylvia Pankhurst, Otto Ruhl Non-Leninist Marxism: Writings on the Workers Councils. Red and Black, 2007. and its derivatives, such as Stalinism, Maoism, and Trotskyism. Marot, Eric. "Trotsky, the Left Opposition and the Rise of Stalinism: Theory and Practice" Libertarian Marxism is also critical of reformist positions, such as those held by social democrats. "The Retreat of Social Democracy ... Re-imposition of Work in Britain and the 'Social Europe'" "Aufheben" Issue #8 1999. Libertarian Marxist currents often draw from Marx and Engels' later works, specifically the Grundrisse and The Civil War in France; Ernesto Screpanti, Libertarian communism: Marx Engels and the Political Economy of Freedom, Palgrave Macmillan, London, 2007. emphasizing the Marxist belief in the ability of the working class to forge its own destiny without the need for a revolutionary party or state to mediate or aid its liberation. Draper, Hal. Principle of Self-Emancipation in Marx and Engels" "The Socialist Register." Vol 4. Along with anarchism, Libertarian Marxism is one of the main currents of libertarian socialism. Chomsky, Noam. "Government In The Future" Poetry Center of the New York YM-YWHA. Lecture. 

Libertarian Marxism includes such currents as Luxemburgism, council communism, left communism, Socialisme ou Barbarie, the JohnsonForest tendency, world socialism, Lettrism/Situationism and operaismo/autonomism, and New Left. A libertarian Marxist tendency map. libcom.org. Retrieved on 2011-12-28. Libertarian Marxism has often had a strong influence on both post-left and social anarchists. Notable theorists of libertarian Marxism have included Anton Pannekoek, Raya Dunayevskaya, CLR James, Antonio Negri, Cornelius Castoriadis, Maurice Brinton, Guy Debord, Daniel Gurin, Ernesto Screpanti and Raoul Vaneigem.

====De Leonism====

De Leonism, occasionally known as Marxism-Deleonism, is a form of syndicalist Marxism developed by Daniel De Leon. De Leon was an early leader of the first United States socialist political party, the Socialist Labor Party of America. De Leon combined the rising theories of syndicalism in his time with orthodox Marxism. According to De Leonist theory, militant industrial unions (specialized trade unions) are the vehicle of class struggle. Industrial Unions serving the interests of the proletariat will bring about the change needed to establish a socialist system. The only way this differs from some currents in anarcho-syndicalism is that, according to De Leonist thinking, a revolutionary political party is also necessary to fight for the proletariat on the political field. De Leonism lies outside the Leninist tradition of communism. It predates Leninism as De Leonism's principles developed in the early 1890s with De Leon's assuming leadership of the Socialist Labor Party; Leninism and its vanguard party idea took shape after the 1902 publication of Lenin's "What Is to Be Done?". The highly decentralized and democratic nature of the proposed De Leonist government is in contrast to the democratic centralism of MarxismLeninism and what they see as the dictatorial nature of the Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China and other "communist" states. The success of the De Leonist plan depends on achieving majority support among the people both in the workplaces and at the polls, in contrast to the Leninist notion that a small vanguard party should lead the working class to carry out the revolution.

====Council communism====

Antonie Pannekoek, one of the main theorists of council communismCouncil communism was a radical Left movement originating in Germany and the Netherlands in the 1920s. Its primary organization was the Communist Workers Party of Germany (KAPD). Council communism continues today as a theoretical and activist position within Marxism, and also within libertarian socialism. The central argument of council communism, in contrast to those of Social democracy and Leninist communism, is that workers' councils arising in the factories and municipalities are the natural and legitimate form of working class organisation and government power. This view is opposed to the reformist and Bolshevik stress on vanguard parties, parliaments, or the state. The core principle of council communism is that the state and the economy should be managed by workers' councils, composed of delegates elected at workplaces and recallable at any moment. As such, council communists oppose state-run "bureaucratic socialism". They also oppose the idea of a "revolutionary party", since council communists believe that a revolution led by a party will necessarily produce a party dictatorship. Council communists support a workers' democracy, which they want to produce through a federation of workers' councils.

The Russian word for council is "soviet", and during the early years of the revolution worker's councils were politically significant in Russia. It was to take advantage of the aura of workplace power that the word became used by Vladimir Lenin for various political organs. Indeed, the name "Supreme Soviet", by which the parliament was called; and that of the Soviet Union itself make use of this terminology, but they do not imply any decentralization. Furthermore, council communists held a critique of the Soviet Union as a capitalist state, believing that the Bolshevik revolution in Russia became a "bourgeois revolution" when a party bureaucracy replaced the old feudal aristocracy. Although most felt the Russian Revolution was working class in character, they believed that, since capitalist relations still existed (because the workers had no say in running the economy), the Soviet Union ended up as a state capitalist country, with the state replacing the individual capitalist. Thus, council communists support workers' revolutions, but oppose one-party dictatorships. Council communists also believed in diminishing the role of the party to one of agitation and propaganda, rejected all participation in elections or parliament, and argued that workers should leave the reactionary trade unions and form one big revolutionary union.

====Left communism====

"Left communism" is the range of communist viewpoints held by the communist left, which criticizes the political ideas of the Bolsheviks at certain periods, from a position that is asserted to be more authentically Marxist and proletarian than the views of Leninism held by the Communist International after its first and during its second congress. Left Communists see themselves to the left of Leninists (whom they tend to see as 'left of capital', not socialists), Anarchists (some of whom they consider internationalist socialists) as well as some other revolutionary socialist tendencies (for example De Leonists, who they tend to see as being internationalist socialists only in limited instances). Although she lived before left communism became a distinct tendency, Rosa Luxemburg has heavily influenced most left communists, both politically and theoretically. Proponents of left communism have included Amadeo Bordiga, Herman Gorter, Anton Pannekoek, Otto Rhle, Karl Korsch, Sylvia Pankhurst and Paul Mattick.

Prominent left communist groups existing today include the International Communist Current and the International Bureau for the Revolutionary Party. Also, different factions from the old Bordigist International Communist Party are considered left communist organizations.

====JohnsonForest tendency====

The JohnsonForest tendency, sometimes called the Johnsonites, refers to a radical left tendency in the United States associated with Marxist theorists C.L.R. James and Raya Dunayevskaya, who used the pseudonyms J.R. Johnson and Freddie Forest respectively. They were joined by Grace Lee Boggs, a Chinese-American woman who was considered the third founder. After leaving the trotskist Socialist Workers Party, JohnsonForest founded their own organization for the first time, called Correspondence. This group changed its named to the Correspondence Publishing Committee the next year. However, tensions that had surfaced earlier presaged a split, which took place in 1955. Through his theoretical and political work of the late 1940s, James had concluded that a vanguard party was no longer necessary, because its teachings had been absorbed in the masses. In 1956, James would see the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 as confirmation of this. Those who endorsed the politics of James took the name Facing Reality, after the 1958 book by James co-written with Grace Lee Boggs and Pierre Chaulieu, a pseudonym for Cornelius Castoriadis, on the Hungarian working class revolt of 1956.

====Socialisme ou Barbarie====

Cornelius Castoriadis, libertarian socialist theoristSocialisme ou Barbarie (Socialism or Barbarism) was a French-based radical libertarian socialist group of the post-World War II period (the name comes from a phrase Friedrich Engels used, and was cited by Rosa Luxemburg in a 1916 essay, 'The Junius Pamphlet' ). It existed from 1948 until 1965. The animating personality was Cornelius Castoriadis, also known as Pierre Chaulieu or Paul Cardan. Because he explicitly both rejected Leninist vanguardism and criticised spontaneism...(for) Cornelius Castoriadis the emancipation of the mass of people was the task of those people; however, the socialist thinker could not simply fold his or her arms. Castoriadis argued that the special place accorded to the intellectual should belong to each autonomous citizen. However, he rejected attentisme, maintaining that, in the struggle for a new society, intellectuals needed to place themselves at a distance from the everyday and from the real." Political philosopher Claude Lefort was impressed by Cornelius Castoriadis when he first met him. They published On the Regime and Against the Defence of the USSR, a critique of both the Soviet Union and its Trotskyist supporters. They suggested that the USSR was dominated by a social layer of bureaucrats, and that it consisted of a new kind of society as aggressive as Western European societies. Later he also published in Socialisme ou Barbarie.

====Situationist International====

The Situationist International was a restricted group of international revolutionaries founded in 1957, and which had its peak in its influence on the unprecedented general wildcat strikes of May 1968 in France.

With their ideas rooted in Marxism and the 20th century European artistic avant-gardes, they advocated experiences of life being alternative to those admitted by the capitalist order, for the fulfillment of human primitive desires and the pursuing of a superior passional quality. For this purpose they suggested and experimented with the construction of situations, namely the setting up of environments favorable for the fulfillment of such desires. Using methods drawn from the arts, they developed a series of experimental fields of study for the construction of such situations, like unitary urbanism and psychogeography. In this vein a major theorectical work which emerged from this group was Raoul Vaneigems The Revolution of Everyday Life. Raoul Vaneigem. The Revolution of Everyday Life 

They fought against the main obstacle on the fulfillment of such superior passional living, identified by them in advanced capitalism. Their critical theoretical work peaked on the highly influential book The Society of the Spectacle by Guy Debord. Debord argued in 1967 that spectacular features like mass media and advertising have a central role in an advanced capitalist society, which is to show a fake reality in order to mask the real capitalist degradation of human life. To overthrow such a system, the Situationist International supported the May '68 revolts, and asked the workers to occupy the factories and to run them with direct democracy, through workers' councils composed by instantly revocable delegates.

After publishing in the last issue of the magazine an analysis of the May 1968 revolts, and the strategies that will need to be adopted in future revolutions, The Beginning of an Era (part1, part 2) Situationist International #12, 1969 the SI was dissolved in 1972. 

====Autonomism====

Antonio Negri, main theorist of Italian autonomismAutonomism refers to a set of left-wing political and social movements and theories close to the socialist movement. As an identifiable theoretical system it first emerged in Italy in the 1960s from workerist (operaismo) communism. Through translations made available by Danilo Montaldi and others, the Italian autonomists drew upon previous activist research in the United States by the JohnsonForest Tendency and in France by the group Socialisme ou Barbarie. Later, post-Marxist and anarchist tendencies became significant after influence from the Situationists, the failure of Italian far-left movements in the 1970s, and the emergence of a number of important theorists including Antonio Negri, who had contributed to the 1969 founding of Potere Operaio as well as Mario Tronti, Paolo Virno, Franco Berardi "Bifo" etc.

Unlike other forms of Marxism, autonomist Marxism emphasises the ability of the working class to force changes to the organization of the capitalist system independent of the state, trade unions or political parties. Autonomists are less concerned with party political organization than other Marxists, focusing instead on self-organized action outside of traditional organizational structures. Autonomist Marxism is thus a "bottom up" theory: it draws attention to activities that autonomists see as everyday working class resistance to capitalism, for example absenteeism, slow working, and socialization in the workplace.

All this influenced the German and Dutch Autonomen, the worldwide Social Centre movement, and today is influential in Italy, France, and to a lesser extent the English-speaking countries. Those who describe themselves as autonomists now vary from Marxists to post-structuralists and anarchists. The Autonomist Marxist and Autonomen movements provided inspiration to some on the revolutionary left in English speaking countries, particularly among anarchists, many of whom have adopted autonomist tactics. Some English-speaking anarchists even describe themselves as Autonomists. The Italian operaismo movement also influenced Marxist academics such as Harry Cleaver, John Holloway, Steve Wright, and Nick Dyer-Witheford. Today it is associated also with the publication Multitudes. Webpage of Multitudes 

===Other tendencies===
This section is dedicated to post-classical anarchist tendencies as well as tendencies which cannot be easily classified within the anarchist/marxist division presented before.

====Within the labour movement and parliamentary politics====
Francesc Pi i Margall, catalan follower and translator of Proudhon and libertarian socialist theorist who briefly became President of Spain
Pierre-Joseph Proudhon ran for the french constituent assembly in April 1848, but was not elected, although his name appeared on the ballots in Paris, Lyon, Besanon, and Lille, France. He was successful, in the complementary elections of June 4. The catalan politician Francesc Pi i Margall became the principal translator of Proudhon's works into Spanish and later briefly became president of Spain in 1873 while being the leader of the Democratic Republican Federal Party. For prominent anarcho-syndicalist Rudolf Rocker: "The first movement of the Spanish workers was strongly influenced by the ideas of Pi y Margall, leader of the Spanish Federalists and disciple of Proudhon. Pi y Margall was one of the outstanding theorists of his time and had a powerful influence on the development of libertarian ideas in Spain. His political ideas had much in common with those of Richard Price, Joseph Priestly, Thomas Paine, Jefferson, and other representatives of the Anglo-American liberalism of the first period. He wanted to limit the power of the state to a minimum and gradually replace it by a Socialist economic order." "Anarchosyndicalism" by Rudolf Rocker Pi i Margall was a dedicated theorist in his own right especially through book lenght works such as La reaccin y la revolucin (en:"Reaction and revolution" from 1855), Las nacionalidades (en:"Nationalities" from 1877), and La Federacin from 1880.

There was a strong left-libertarian current in the British labour movement and the term libertarian socialist has been applied to a number of democratic socialists, including some prominent members of the British Labour Party. The Socialist League was formed in 1885 by William Morris and others critical of the authoritarian socialism of the Social Democratic Federation. It was involved in the New Unionism, the rank and file union militancy of the 1880s90s, which anticipated syndicalism in some key ways (Tom Mann, a New Unionist leader, was one of the first British syndicalists). The Socialist League was dominated by anarchists by the 1890s. John Quail, The Slow-Burning Fuse Paladin, 1978 ISBN 0-586-08225-5 

The Independent Labour Party, formed at that time, drew more on the Non-Conformist religious traditions in the British working class than on Marxist theory, and had a libertarian socialist strain. Others in the tradition of the ILP, and described as libertarian socialists Michael Foot and most importantly, G. D. H. Cole. Labour Party minister Peter Hain has written in support of libertarian socialism, identifying an axis involving a "bottom-up vision of socialism, with anarchists at the revolutionary end and democratic socialists as himself at its reformist end", as opposed to the axis of state socialism with Marxist-Leninists at the revolutionary end and social democrats at the reformist end. Another recent mainstream Labour politician who has been described as a libertarian socialist is Robin Cook. Chris Smith said in 2005 that in recent years Cook had been setting out a vision of "libertarian, democratic socialism that was beginning to break the sometimes sterile boundaries of 'old' and 'New' Labour labels.". In 1974 the journal Libertarian Communism was started in the United Kingdom by a group inside the Socialist Party of Great Britain. "papers relating to Libertarian Communism (a splinter group of the SPGB) including journals and miscellaneous correspondence, 1970-1980 (1 box)""Socialist Party of Great Britain" at Archives Hub at the Great Research Centre 

Defined in this way, libertarian socialism in the contemporary political mainstream is distinguished from modern social democracy and democratic socialism principally by its political decentralism rather than by its economics. The multi-tendency Socialist Party USA also has a strong libertarian socialist current.

Katja Kipping and Julia Bonk in Germany, Femke Halsema "Following Isaiah Berlin, Halsema distinguishes between positive and negative freedom. Negative freedom is according to Halsema the freedom citizens from government influence; she applies this concept especially to the multicultural society and the rechtsstaat, where the government should protect the rights of citizens and not limit them. Positive freedom is the emancipation of citizens from poverty and discrimination. Halsema wants to apply this concept to welfare state and the environment where government should take more action. According to Halsema, GreenLeft is undogmatic party, that has anarchist tendencies." in the Netherlands and Ufuk Uras and the Freedom and Solidarity Party in Turkey, are examples of a contemporary libertarian socialist politicians and parties operating within a mainstream government. In Chile the autonomist organization Izquierda Autonoma (Autonomous Left) in the Chilean general election, 2013 gained a seat in the Chilean Parliament through Gabriel Boric, ex leader of the 201113 Chilean student protests. 

====Georgism====

Georgism (also called Geoism or Geonomics) is an economic philosophy and ideology which holds that people own what they create, but that things found in nature, most importantly land, belong equally to all. The Georgist philosophy is based on the writings of the economist Henry George (18391897), and is usually associated with the idea of a single tax on the value of land. His most famous work, Progress and Poverty (1879), is a treatise on inequality, the cyclic nature of industrialized economies, and the use of the land value tax as a remedy. Georgists argue that a tax on land value is economically efficient, fair, and equitable; and that it can generate sufficient revenue so that other taxes (e.g. taxes on profits, sales or income), which are less fair and efficient, can be reduced or eliminated. A tax on land value has been described by many as a progressive tax, since it would be paid primarily by the wealthy, and would reduce economic inequality. 

Georgist ideas heavily influenced the politics of the early 20th century. Political parties that were formed based on Georgist ideas include the Commonwealth Land Party, the Justice Party of Denmark, the Henry George Justice Party, and the Single Tax League. Several communities were also initiated with Georgist principles during the height of the philosophy's popularity. Two such communities that still exist are Arden, Delaware, which was founded in 1900 by Frank Stephens and Will Price, and Fairhope, Alabama, which was founded in 1894 by the auspices of the Fairhope Single Tax Corporation. Christian anarchist Leo Tolstoy was enthused by the economic thinking of Henry George, incorporating it approvingly into later works such as Resurrection, the book that played a major factor in his excommunication. 

====Guild socialism====

G. D. H. Cole, theorist of guild socialism
Guild socialism is a political movement advocating workers' control of industry through the medium of trade-related guilds "in an implied contractual relationship with the public". It originated in the United Kingdom and was at its most influential in the first quarter of the 20th century. It was strongly associated with G. D. H. Cole and influenced by the ideas of William Morris.

Guild socialism was partly inspired by the guilds of craftsmen and other skilled workers which had existed in England during the Middle Ages. In 1906, Arthur Penty published Restoration of the Gild System in which he opposed factory production and advocated a return to an earlier period of artisanal production organised through guilds. The following year, the journal The New Age became an advocate of guild socialism, although in the context of modern industry rather than the medieval setting favoured by Penty. The Guild Socialists "stood for state ownership of industry, combined with workers control through delegation of authority to national guilds organized internally on democratic lines. About the state itself they differed, some believing it would remain more or less in its existing form and others that it would be transformed into a federal body representing the workers guilds, consumers organizations, local government bodies, and other social structures." In 1914, S. G. Hobson, a leading contributor to The New Age, published National Guilds: An Inquiry into the Wage System and the Way Out. In this work, guilds were presented as an alternative to state-control of industry or conventional trade union activity. Guilds, unlike the existing trade unions, would not confine their demands to matters of wages and conditions but would seek to obtain control of industry for the workers whom they represented. Ultimately, industrial guilds would serve as the organs through which industry would be organised in a future socialist society. The theory of guild socialism was developed and popularised by G. D. H. Cole who formed the National Guilds League in 1915 and published several books on guild socialism, including Self-Government in Industry (1917) and Guild Socialism Restated (1920).

====Revolutionary syndicalism====

Revolutionary syndicalism is a type of economic system proposed as a replacement for capitalism and an alternative to state socialism, which uses federations of collectivised trade unions or industrial unions. It is a form of socialist economic corporatism that advocates interest aggregation of multiple non-competitive categorised units to negotiate and manage an economy. Wiarda, Howard J. Corporatism and comparative politics. M.E. Sharpe, 1996. pp. 6566, 156. For adherents, labour unions are the potential means of both overcoming economic aristocracy and running society fairly in the interest of the majority, through union democracy. Industry in a syndicalist system would be run through co-operative confederations and mutual aid. Local syndicates would communicate with other syndicates through the Bourse du Travail (labor exchange) which would manage and transfer commodities.
Syndicalism is also used to refer to the tactic of bringing about this social arrangement, typically expounded by anarcho-syndicalism and De Leonism, in which a general strike begins and workers seize their means of production and organise in a federation of trade unionism, such as the CNT. Principles of Syndcicalism, Brown, Tom. Retrieved July 06, 2010: http://libcom.org/library/principles-of-syndicalism-tom-brown Throughout its history, the reformist section of syndicalism has been overshadowed by its revolutionary section, typified by the Confdration Gnrale du Travail (CGT) in France, IWW, the Federacin Anarquista Ibrica section of the CNT., info on the FAI http://www.iisg.nl/archives/en/files/f/10748453.php the Unione Sindacale Italiana and the Central Organisation of the Workers of Sweden (SAC).

====Christian anarchism====

Leo Tolstoy, important theorist of christian anarchism and anarcho-pacifismChristian anarchism is a movement in political theology that combines anarchism and Christianity. Christoyannopoulos, pp. 24: "Locating Christian anarchism.... In political theology" It is the belief that there is only one source of authority to which Christians are ultimately answerable, the authority of God as embodied in the teachings of Jesus. More than any other Bible source, the Sermon on the Mount and Jesus' call to not resist evil but turn the other cheek, are used as the basis for Christian anarchism. Christoyannopoulos, pp. 4380: "The Sermon on the Mount: A manifesto for Christian anarchism" 

Christian anarchists are pacifists and oppose the use of violence, such as war. The foundation of Christian anarchism is a rejection of violence, with Leo Tolstoy's The Kingdom of God Is Within You regarded as a key text. Christoyannopoulos, pp. 19 and 208: "Leo Tolstoy" Christian anarchists denounce the state as they claim it is violent, deceitful and, when glorified, a form of idolatry. Christoyannopoulos, p. 254: "The state as idolatry" 

The Tolstoyans were a small Christian anarchist group formed by Tolstoy's companion, Vladimir Chertkov (18541936), to spread Tolstoy's religious teachings. Prince Peter Kropotkin wrote of Tolstoy in the article on anarchism in the 1911 Encyclopdia Britannica while in hundreds of essays over the last twenty years of his life, Tolstoy reiterated the anarchist critique of the state and recommended books by Kropotkin and Proudhon to his readers, whilst rejecting anarchism's espousal of violent revolutionary means. In the 1900 essay, "On Anarchy", he wrote; "The Anarchists are right in everything; in the negation of the existing order, and in the assertion that, without Authority, there could not be worse violence than that of Authority under existing conditions. They are mistaken only in thinking that Anarchy can be instituted by a revolution. But it will be instituted only by there being more and more people who do not require the protection of governmental power ... There can be only one permanent revolutiona moral one: the regeneration of the inner man." Despite his misgivings about anarchist violence, Tolstoy took risks to circulate the prohibited publications of anarchist thinkers in Russia, and corrected the proofs of Kropotkin's "Words of a Rebel", illegally published in St Petersburg in 1906. Peter Kropotkin: from prince to rebel. G Woodcock, I Avakumovi.1990. Dorothy Day was an American journalist, social activist, devout Catholic convert; she advocated the Catholic economic theory of distributism. Day "believed all states were inherently totalitarian," Otterman, Sharon (2012-11-26) In Hero of the Catholic Left, a Conservative Cardinal Sees a Saint, New York Times and was a self-labeled anarchist. Day, Dorothy. On Pilgrimage - May 1974, "There was no time to answer the one great disagreement which was in their minds--how can you
reconcile your Faith in the monolithic, authoritarian Church which seems so far from Jesus who "had no place to lay his head," and who said "sell what you have and give to the poor,"--with your anarchism?
Because I have been behind bars in police stations, houses of detention, jails and prison farms, whatsoever they are called, eleven times, and have refused to pay Federal income taxes and have never voted, they accept me as an anarchist. And I in turn, can see Christ in them even though they deny Him, because they are giving themselves to working for a better social order for the wretched of the earth." Anarchist FAQ - A.3.7 Are there religious anarchists?, "Tolstoy's ideas had a strong influence on Gandhi, who inspired his fellow country people to use non-violent resistance to kick Britain out of India. Moreover, Gandhi's vision of a free India as a federation of peasant communes is similar to Tolstoy's anarchist vision of a free society (although we must stress that Gandhi was not an anarchist). The Catholic Worker Group in the United States was also heavily influenced by Tolstoy (and Proudhon), as was Dorothy Day a staunch Christian pacifist and anarchist who founded it in 1933." Reid, Stuart (2008-09-08) Day by the Pool, The American Conservative Day, Dorothy.On Pilgrimage - February 1974, "The blurb on the back of the book Small Is Beautiful lists fellow spokesmen for the ideas expressed, including "Alex Comfort, Paul Goodman and Murray Bookchin. It is the tradition we might call anarchism." We ourselves have never hesitated to use the word." In the 1930s, Day worked closely with fellow activist Peter Maurin to establish the Catholic Worker movement, a nonviolent, pacifist movement that continues to combine direct aid for the poor and homeless with nonviolent direct action on their behalf. The importance of Day within catholicism goes to the extent that the cause for Day's canonization is open in the Catholic Church, and she is thus formally referred to as a Servant of God. Ammon Hennacy was an Irish American pacifist, Christian, anarchist, social activist, member of the Catholic Worker Movement and a Wobbly. He established the "Joe Hill House of Hospitality" in Salt Lake City, Utah. 

====Gandhism====

Gandhism is the collection of inspirations, principles, beliefs and philosophy of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi (known as Mahatma Gandhi), who was a major political and spiritual leader of India and the Indian Independence Movement. It is a body of ideas and principles that describes the inspiration, vision and the life work of Gandhi. It is particularly associated with his contributions to the idea and practice of nonviolent resistance, sometimes also called civil resistance. Gandhian economics are the socio-economic principles expounded by Mohandas Gandhi. It is largely characterised by its affinity to the principles and objectives of nonviolent humanistic socialism, but with a rejection of violent class war and promotion of socio-economic harmony. Gandhi's economic ideas also aim to promote spiritual development and harmony with a rejection of materialism. The term "Gandhian economics" was coined by J. C. Kumarappa, a close supporter of Gandhi. Gandhian economics places importance to means of achieving the aim of development and this means must be non-violent, ethical and truthful in all economic spheres. In order to achieve this means he advocated trusteeship, decentralization of economic activities, labour intensive technology and priority to weaker sections. Gandhi also had letter communication with christian anarchist Leo Tolstoy and saw himself as his disciple. In 1908 Leo Tolstoy wrote A Letter to a Hindu, which said that only by using love as a weapon through passive resistance could the Indian people overthrow colonial rule. In 1909, Gandhi wrote to Tolstoy seeking advice and permission to republish A Letter to a Hindu in Gujarati. Tolstoy responded and the two continued a correspondence until Tolstoy's death in 1910. The letters concern practical and theological applications of non-violence. 
Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi

Gandhi challenged future Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru and the modernizers in the late 1930s who called for rapid industrialization on the Soviet model; Gandhi denounced that as dehumanizing and contrary to the needs of the villages where the great majority of the people lived. Bidyut Chakrabarty, "Jawaharlal Nehru and Planning, 19381941: India at the Crossroads", Modern Asian Studies (March 1992) 26#2 pp. 275287 After Gandhi's death Nehru led India to large-scale planning that emphasized modernization and heavy industry, while modernizing agriculture through irrigation. Historian Kuruvilla Pandikattu says "it was Nehru's vision, not Gandhi's, that was eventually preferred by the Indian State." Gandhi was a self-described philosophical anarchist, Snow, Edgar. The Message of Gandhi. 27 September March 1948. "Like Marx, Gandhi hated the state and wished to eliminate it, and he told me he considered himself 'a philosophical anarchist.'" and his vision of India meant an India without an underlying government. Jesudasan, Ignatius. A Gandhian theology of liberation. Gujarat Sahitya Prakash: Ananda India, 1987, pp. 236237 He once said that "the ideally nonviolent state would be an ordered anarchy." While political systems are largely hierarchical, with each layer of authority from the individual to the central government have increasing levels of authority over the layer below, Gandhi believed that society should be the exact opposite, where nothing is done without the consent of anyone, down to the individual. His idea was that true self-rule in a country means that every person rules his or herself and that there is no state which enforces laws upon the people. 

Gandhian activists such as Vinoba Bhave and Jayaprakash Narayan were involved in the Sarvodaya movement, which sought to promote self-sufficiency amidst India's rural population by encouraging land redistribution, socio-economic reforms and promoting cottage industries. The movement sought to combat the problems of class conflict, unemployment and poverty while attempting to preserve the lifestyle and values of rural Indians, which were eroding with industrialisation and modernisation. Sarvodaya also included Bhoodan, or the gifting of land and agricultural resources by the landlords (called zamindars) to their tenant farmers in a bid to end the medieval system of zamindari. The Conquest of Violence : an Essay on War and Revolution is a book written by dutch anarcho-pacifist Bart de Ligt which deals with non-violent resistance in part inspired by the ideas of Gandhi. "Gandhi's ideas were popularised in the West in books such as Richard Gregg's The Power of Nonviolence (1935), (34) and Bart de Ligt's The Conquest of Violence (1937)."Geoffrey Ostergaard. Resisting the Nation State. The pacifist and anarchist tradition Anarchist historian George Woodcock reports that The Conquest of Violence "was read widely by British and American pacifists during the 1930s and led many of them to adopt an anarchistic point of view". Anarchism: A History of Libertarian Ideas and Movements by George Woodcock 

====Platformism====

Platformism is a tendency within the wider anarchist movement based on the organisational theories in the tradition of Dielo Truda's Organizational Platform of the General Union of Anarchists (Draft). The document was based on the experiences of Russian anarchists in the 1917 October Revolution, which led eventually to the victory of the Bolsheviks over the anarchists and other groups. The Platform attempted to address and explain the anarchist movement's failures during the Russian Revolution. Today there are platformist groups in many countries including the Workers Solidarity Movement in Ireland,
North Eastern Federation of Anarchist Communists (NEFAC, or Fdration des Communistes Libertaires du Nord-Est) in the northeastern USA, the Union Communiste Libertaire in Quebec, Common Cause in Ontario, the Organizacin Comunista Libertaria (OCL) in Chile, the Federation of Anarchists of Greece (OAE) in Greece, Anarchist Communist Initiative (AKI) in Turkey, Organizacion Socialista Libertaria (OSL) in Argentina, the Federazione dei Comunisti Anarchici (FdCA) in Italy, the Coletivo pr Organizao Anarquista em Gois in Brazil, Grupo Qhispikay Llaqta in Peru, the Libertarian Communist Organization (France) in France, the Alianza de los Comunistas Libertarios (ACL) in Mexico, Melbourne Anarchist Communist Group (MACG) and Sydney Anarchist Communist Trajectory (SACT) in Australia, the Zabalaza Anarchist Communist Front (ZACF) in South Africa, and Revolutionary Confederation of Anarcho-syndicalists (RKAS) by the name of N.I. Makhno (  - . . . )  an international anarcho-syndicalist, platformist confederation (sections and individual members of RKAS exist in Ukraine, Russia, Georgia, Germany, Latvia, Bulgaria and Israel).

Platfomist organizations also founded the now defunct International Libertarian Solidarity. The website Anarkismo.net is run collaboratively by Platformist organisations from all over the world.

====Within the New Left====

Herbert Marcuse, associated with the Frankfurt School of critical theory, was an influential libertarian socialist philosopher of the New Left. 

The emergence of the New Left in the 1950s and 1960s led to a revival of interest in libertarian socialism. Robin Hahnel, Economic Justice and Democracy: From Competition to Cooperation Part II ISBN 0-415-93344-7 The New Left's critique of the Old Left's authoritarianism was associated with a strong interest in personal liberty, autonomy (see the thinking of Cornelius Castoriadis) and led to a rediscovery of older socialist traditions, such as left communism, council communism, and the Industrial Workers of the World. In the United States this was caused by a renewal of anarchism from the 1950s forward through writers such as Paul Goodman and anarcho-pacifism which became influential in the Anti-nuclear movement and anti war movements of the time and which incorporated both the influences of gandhism and toltoyan christian anarchism. . As such "In the forties and fifties, anarchism, in fact if not in name, began to reappear, often in alliance with pacifism, as the basis for a critique of militarism on both sides of the Cold War. The anarchist/pacifist wing of the peace movement was small in comparison with the wing of the movement that emphasized electoral work, but made an important contribution to the movement as a whole. Where the more conventional wing of the peace movement rejected militarism and war under all but the most dire circumstances, the anarchist/pacifist wing rejected these on principle.""Anarchism and the Anti-Globalization Movement" by Barbara Epstein "In the 1950s and 1960s anarcho-pacifism began to gel, tough-minded anarchists adding to the mixture their critique of the state, and tender-minded pacifists their critique of violence. Its first practical manifestation was at the level of method: nonviolent direct action, principled and pragmatic, was used widely in both the Civil Rights movement in the USA and the campaign against nuclear weapons in Britain and elsewhere."Geoffrey Ostergaard. Resisting the Nation State. The pacifist and anarchist tradition as can be seen in the activism and writings of the English anarchist member of Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament Alex Comfort or the similar activism of the American catholic anarcho-pacifists Ammon Hennacy and Dorothy Day. Anarcho-pacifism became a "basis for a critique of militarism on both sides of the Cold War.""Anarchism and the Anti-Globalization Movement" by Barbara Epstein 

In Australia the Sydney Push was a predominantly left-wing intellectual subculture in Sydney from the late 1940s to the early 1970s which became associated with the label "Sydney libertarianism". See Baker A J "Sydney Libertarianism and the Push" or at "Sydney Libertarians and the Push" on Prof. W L Morison memorial site The New Left also led to a revival of anarchism in the 1960s in the United States. Journals like Radical America and Black Mask in America, Solidarity, Big Flame and Democracy & Nature, succeeded by The International Journal of Inclusive Democracy, The International Journal of Inclusive Democracy. Inclusivedemocracy.org. Retrieved on 2011-12-28. in the UK, introduced a range of left-libertarian ideas to a new generation. Social ecology, autonomism and, more recently, participatory economics (parecon), and Inclusive Democracy emerged from this. The New Left in the United States also included anarchist, countercultural and hippie-related radical groups such as the Yippies who were led by Abbie Hoffman, The Diggers, Up Against the Wall Motherfuckers and the White Panther Party. By late 1966, the Diggers opened free stores which simply gave away their stock, provided free food, distributed free drugs, gave away money, organized free music concerts, and performed works of political art. . The Diggers took their name from the original English Diggers led by Gerrard Winstanley and sought to create a mini-society free of money and capitalism. 
 On the other hand the Yippies employed theatrical gestures, such as advancing a pig ("Pigasus the Immortal") as a candidate for President in 1968, to mock the social status quo. They have been described as a highly theatrical, anti-authoritarian and anarchist Abbie Hoffman, Soon to be a Major Motion Picture, page 128. Perigee Books, 1980. youth movement of "symbolic politics". Since they were well known for street theater and politically themed pranks, many of the "old school" political left either ignored or denounced them. According to ABC News, "The group was known for street theater pranks and was once referred to as the 'Groucho Marxists'." 

====Social ecology and Communalism====

Murray Bookchin

Social ecology is closely related to the work and ideas of Murray Bookchin and influenced by anarchist Peter Kropotkin. Social ecologists assert that the present ecological crisis has its roots in human social problems, and that the domination of human-over-nature stems from the domination of human-over-human. 

Bookchin later developed a political philosophy to complement social ecology which he called Communalism (spelled with a capital C to differentiate it from other forms of communalism). While originally conceived as a form of social anarchism, he later developed Communalism into a separate ideology which incorporates what he saw as the most beneficial elements of anarchism, Marxism, syndicalism, and radical ecology.

Politically, Communalists advocate a network of directly democratic citizens' assemblies in individual communities or cities organized in a confederated fashion. The method used to achieve this is called libertarian municipalism and involves the establishment of face-to-face democratic institutions which grow and expand confederally with the goal of eventually replacing the nation-state. Unlike anarchists, Communalists are not opposed to taking part in parliamentary politics&mdash;especially municipal elections&mdash;as long as candidates are libertarian socialist and anti-statist in outlook.

====Participism====

Michael Albert
Participism is a twenty-first century form of libertarian socialism. It comprises two related economic and political systems called Participatory economics or "Parecon" and Participatory politics or "Parpolity".

Parecon is an economic system proposed primarily by activist and political theorist Michael Albert and radical economist Robin Hahnel, among others. It uses participatory decision making as an economic mechanism to guide the production, consumption and allocation of resources in a given society. Proposed as an alternative to contemporary capitalist market economies and also an alternative to centrally planned socialism or coordinatorism, it is described as "an anarchistic economic vision", and it could be considered a form of socialism as under Parecon, the means of production are owned by the workers. It proposes to attain these ends mainly through the following principles and institutions: Workers' and consumers' councils utilizing self-managerial methods for decision making, balanced job complexes, remuneration according to effort and sacrifice, and Participatory Planning. Under Parecon, the current monetary system would be replaced with a system of non-transferable "credit" which would cease to exist upon purchase of a commodity.

Parpolity is a theoretical political system proposed by Stephen R. Shalom. It was developed as a political vision to accompany Parecon. Participism as a whole is critical of aspects of modern representative democracies and capitalism arguing that the level of political control by the people isnt sufficient. To address this problem Parpolity suggests a system of "Nested Councils", which would include every adult member of a given society. Under Participism, the state as such would dissolve into a mere coordinating body made up of delegates which would be recallable at any time by the nested council below them.

====Inclusive Democracy====

Inclusive Democracy is a political theory and political project that aim for direct democracy, economic democracy in a stateless, moneyless and marketless economy, self-management (democracy in the social realm) and ecological democracy. The theoretical project of Inclusive Democracy (ID)), as distinguished from the political project which is part of the democratic and autonomy traditions, emerged from the work of political philosopher, former academic and activist Takis Fotopoulos in Towards An Inclusive Democracy and was further developed by him and other writers in the journal Democracy & Nature and its successor The International Journal of Inclusive Democracy, an electronic journal freely available and published by the International Network for Inclusive Democracy.

According to Arran Gare, Towards an Inclusive Democracy "offers a powerful new interpretation of the history and destructive dynamics of the market and provides an inspiring new vision of the future in place of both neo-liberalism and existing forms of socialism". Arran Gare, "Beyond Social Democracy? Takis Fotopoulos' Vision of an Inclusive Democracy as a New Liberatory Project" Democracy & Nature, Vol. 9, No. 3 (November 2003), pp. 345358(14) Also, as David Freeman points out, although Fotopoulos' approach "is not openly anarchism, yet anarchism seems the formal category within which he works, given his commitment to direct democracy, municipalism and abolition of state, money and market economy". David Freeman, "Inclusive democracy and its prospects" review of book Towards An Inclusive Democracy: The Crisis of the Growth Economy and the Need For a New Liberatory Project, published in Thesis Eleven, Sage Publications, no. 69 (May 2002), pp. 103106. 

An artificial market is proposed by this tendency as a solution to the problem of maintaining freedom of choice for the consumer within a marketless and moneyless economy, an artificial market operates in much the same way as traditional markets, but uses labour vouchers or personal credit in place of traditional money. According to Takis Fotopoulos, an artificial market "secures real freedom of choice, without incurring the adverse effects associated with real markets". Takis Fotopoulos, Towards an Inclusive Democracy: the crisis of the growth economy and the need for a new liberatory project, (London & NY: Cassell, 1997), p. 255. 

====Insurrectionary anarchism====

Insurrectionary anarchism is a revolutionary theory, practice and tendency within the anarchist movement which emphasizes the theme of insurrection within anarchist practice. It is critical of formal organizations such as labor unions and federations that are based on a political programme and periodic congresses. Instead, insurrectionary anarchists advocate informal organization and small affinity group based organization. Insurrectionary anarchists put value in attack, permanent class conflict, and a refusal to negotiate or compromise with class enemies.

Contemporary insurrectionary anarchism inherits the views and tactics of anti-organizational anarcho-communism "Say you want an insurrection" by Crimethinc and illegalism. So, "between 1880 and 1890", with the "perspective of an immanent revolution," who was "opposed to the official workers' movement, which was then in the process of formation (general Social Democratisation). They were opposed not only to political (statist) struggles but also to strikes which put forward wage or other claims, or which were organised by trade unions." But "While they were not opposed to strikes as such, they were opposed to trade unions and the struggle for the eight-hour day. This anti-reformist tendency was accompanied by an anti-organisational tendency, and its partisans declared themselves in favour of agitation amongst the unemployed for the expropriation of foodstuffs and other articles, for the expropriatory strike and, in some cases, for 'individual recuperation' or acts of terrorism." A resurgence of such ideas happened "in the peculiar conditions of post war Italy and Greece." 

====Zapatismo and Magonism====

Subcomandante Marcos in 1996
The Zapatista Army of National Liberation (Ejrcito Zapatista de Liberacin Nacional, EZLN) often referred to as the Zapatistas is a revolutionary leftist group based in Chiapas, the southernmost state of Mexico. Since 1994, the group has been in a declared war "against the Mexican state," though this war has been primarily nonviolent and defensive against military, paramilitary, and corporate incursions into Chiapas. Their social base is mostly rural indigenous people but they have some supporters in urban areas and internationally. Their main spokesperson is Subcomandante Marcos (currently a.k.a. Delegate Zero in relation to "the Other Campaign"). Unlike other Zapatista spokespeople, Marcos is not an indigenous Maya. Since December 1994, the Zapatistas had been gradually forming several autonomous municipalities, called Rebel Zapatista Autonomous Municipalities (MAREZ). In these municipalities, an assembly of local representatives forms the Juntas de Buen Gobierno or Councils of Good Government (JBGs). These are not recognized by the federal or state governments; they oversee local community programs on food, health and education, as well as taxation. The EZLN political formations have happened in two phases generally called Aquascalientes and Caracoles.

The group takes its name from Emiliano Zapata, the agrarian reformer and commander of the Liberation Army of the South during the Mexican Revolution, and sees itself as his ideological heir. Zapatista originally referred to a member of the revolutionary guerrilla movement founded about 1910 by Zapata. His Liberation Army of the South (Ejrcito Libertador del Sur) fought during the Mexican Revolution for the redistribution of agricultural land. Zapata and his army and allies, including Pancho Villa, fought for agrarian reform in Mexico. Specifically, they wanted to establish communal land rights for Mexico's indigenous population, which had mostly lost its land to the wealthy elite of European descent. Zapata was partly influenced by an anarchist from Oaxaca named Ricardo Flores Magn. The influence of Flores Magn on Zapata can be seen in the Zapatistas' Plan de Ayala, but even more noticeably in their slogan (this slogan was never used by Zapata) "Tierra y libertad" or "land and liberty", the title and maxim of Flores Magn's most famous work. Zapata's introduction to anarchism came via a local schoolteacher, Otilio Montao Snchez  later a general in Zapata's army, executed on May 17, 1917  who exposed Zapata to the works of Peter Kropotkin and Flores Magn at the same time as Zapata was observing and beginning to participate in the struggles of the peasants for the land.

In reference to inspirational figures, in nearly all EZLN villages exist murals accompanying images of Zapata, Che Guevara, and Subcomandante Marcos. Baspineiro, Alex Contreras. "The Mysterious Silence of the Mexican Zapatistas." Narco News (May 7, 2004). The ideology of the Zapatista movement, Zapatismo, synthesizes traditional Mayan practices with elements of libertarian socialism, anarchism, and Marxism. "The Zapatista Effect: Information Communication Technology Activism and Marginalized Communities"
 The historical influence of Mexican Anarchists and various Latin-American Socialists is apparent on Zapatismo; with the positions of Subcomandante Marcos also adding a distinct Marxist (according to the New York Times) "The Zapatista's Return: A Masked Marxist on the Stump" element to the movement. A Zapatista slogan is in harmony with the concept of mutual aid: "For everyone, everything. For us, nothing" (Para todos todo, para nosotros nada).

====Left wing market anarchism====

Left wing market anarchism, a form of left-libertarianism, individualist anarchism Chartier, Gary; Johnson, Charles W. (2011). Markets Not Capitalism: Individualist Anarchism Against Bosses, Inequality, Corporate Power, and Structural Poverty. Brooklyn, NY:Minor Compositions/Autonomedia and libertarian socialism "It introduces an eye-opening approach to radical social thought, rooted equally in libertarian socialism and market anarchism." Chartier, Gary; Johnson, Charles W. (2011). Markets Not Capitalism: Individualist Anarchism Against Bosses, Inequality, Corporate Power, and Structural Poverty. Brooklyn, NY:Minor Compositions/Autonomedia. Pg. Back cover "But there has always been a market-oriented strand of libertarian socialism that emphasizes voluntary cooperation between producers. And markets, properly understood, have always been about cooperation. As a commenter at Reason magazines Hit&Run blog, remarking on Jesse Walkers link to the Kelly article, put it: every trade is a cooperative act. In fact, its a fairly common observation among market anarchists that genuinely free markets have the most legitimate claim to the label socialism."."Socialism: A Perfectly Good Word Rehabilitated" by Kevin Carson at website of Center for a Stateless Society is associated with scholars such as Kevin Carson, Carson, Kevin A. (2008). Organization Theory: A Libertarian Perspective. Charleston, SC:BookSurge. Carson, Kevin A. (2010). The Homebrew Industrial Revolution: A Low-Overhead Manifesto. Charleston, SC:BookSurge. Roderick T. Long, Long, Roderick T. (2000). Reason and Value: Aristotle versus Rand. Washington, DC:Objectivist Center Long, Roderick T. (2008). "An Interview With Roderick Long" Charles Johnson, Johnson, Charles W. (2008). "Liberty, Equality, Solidarity: Toward a Dialectical Anarchism." Anarchism/Minarchism: Is a Government Part of a Free Country? In Long, Roderick T. and Machan, Tibor Aldershot:Ashgate pp. 155-88. Brad Spangler, Spangler, Brad (15 September 2006). "Market Anarchism as Stigmergic Socialism." Samuel Edward Konkin III, Konkin III, Samuel Edward. The New Libertarian Manifesto. Sheldon Richman, Richman, Sheldon (23 June 2010). "Why Left-Libertarian?" The Freeman. Foundation for Economic Education. Richman, Sheldon (18 December 2009). "Workers of the World Unite for a Free Market." Foundation for Economic Education. Sheldon Richman (3 February 2011). "Libertarian Left: Free-market anti-capitalism, the unknown ideal." The American Conservative. Retrieved 5 March 2012. Chris Matthew Sciabarra, Sciabarra, Chris Matthew (2000). Total Freedom: Toward a Dialectical Libertarianism. University Park, PA:Pennsylvania State University Press. and Gary Chartier, Chartier, Gary (2009). Economic Justice and Natural Law. Cambridge:Cambridge University Press. who stress the value of radically free markets, termed freed markets to distinguish them from the common conception which these libertarians believe to be riddled with statist and capitalist privileges. Gillis, William (2011). "The Freed Market." In Chartier, Gary and Johnson, Charles. Markets Not Capitalism. Brooklyn, NY:Minor Compositions/Autonomedia. pp. 1920. Referred to as left-wing market anarchists Chartier, Gary; Johnson, Charles W. (2011). Markets Not Capitalism: Individualist Anarchism Against Bosses, Inequality, Corporate Power, and Structural Poverty. Brooklyn, NY:Minor Compositions/Autonomedia. pp. 116. or market-oriented left-libertarians, proponents of this approach strongly affirm the classical liberal ideas of self-ownership and free markets, while maintaining that, taken to their logical conclusions, these ideas support anti-capitalist, Gary Chartier and Charles W. Johnson (eds). Markets Not Capitalism: Individualist Anarchism Against Bosses, Inequality, Corporate Power, and Structural Poverty. Minor Compositions; 1st edition (November 5, 2011 Writing before the rise of the CarsonLong school of left-libertarianism, historian of American anarchism David DeLeon was disinclined to treat any market-oriented variant of libertarianism as leftist; see DeLeon, David (1978). The American as Anarchist: Reflections on Indigenous Radicalism. Baltimore, MD:Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 123. Gary Chartier has joined Kevin Carson, Charles Johnson, and others (echoing the language of Benjamin Tucker and Thomas Hodgskin) in maintaining that, because of its heritage and its emancipatory goals and potential, radical market anarchism should be seenby its proponents and by othersas part of the socialist tradition, and that market anarchists can and should call themselves "socialists." See Gary Chartier, "Advocates of Freed Markets Should Oppose Capitalism," "Free-Market Anti-Capitalism?" session, annual conference, Association of Private Enterprise Education (Csar's Palace, Las Vegas, NV, April 13, 2010); Gary Chartier, "Advocates of Freed Markets Should Embrace 'Anti-Capitalism'"; Gary Chartier, Socialist Ends, Market Means: Five Essays. Cp. Tucker, "Socialism." anti-corporatist, anti-hierarchical, pro-labor positions in economics; anti-imperialism in foreign policy; and thoroughly liberal or radical views regarding such cultural issues as gender, sexuality, and race.

The genealogy of contemporary market-oriented left-libertarianismsometimes labeled "left-wing market anarchism" Chris Sciabarra is the only scholar associated with this school of left-libertarianism who is skeptical about anarchism; see Sciabarra's Total Freedom overlaps to a significant degree with that of SteinerVallentyne left-libertarianism as the roots of that tradition are sketched in the book The Origins of Left-Libertarianism. Peter Vallentyne and Hillel Steiner. The origins of Left Libertarianism. Palgrave. 2000 CarsonLong-style left-libertarianism is rooted in 19th-century mutualism and in the work of figures such as Thomas Hodgskin and the individualist anarchists Benjamin Tucker and Lysander Spooner. While, with notable exceptions, market-oriented libertarians after Tucker tended to ally with the political right, relationships between such libertarians and the New Left thrived in the 1960s, laying the groundwork for modern left-wing market anarchism. Long, Roderick T. (2006). "Rothbard's 'Left and Right': Forty Years Later." Rothbard Memorial Lecture, Austrian Scholars Conference. Left wing market anarchism identifies with Left-libertarianism (or left-wing libertarianism) Related, arguably synonymous, terms include libertarianism, left-wing libertarianism, egalitarian-libertarianism, and libertarian socialism.
*Sundstrom, William A. "An Egalitarian-Libertarian Manifesto."
*Bookchin, Murray and Biehl, Janet (1997). The Murray Bookchin Reader. New York:Cassell. p. 170.
*Sullivan, Mark A. (July 2003). "Why the Georgist Movement Has Not Succeeded: A Personal Response to the Question Raised by Warren J. Samuels." American Journal of Economics and Sociology. 62:3. p. 612. which names several related but distinct approaches to politics, society, culture, and political and social theory, which stress both individual freedom and social justice. Unlike right-libertarians, they believe that neither claiming nor mixing one's labor with natural resources is enough to generate full private property rights, Hamowy, Ronald. "Left Libertarianism." The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism. p. 288 and maintain that natural resources (land, oil, gold, trees) ought to be held in some egalitarian manner, either unowned or owned collectively. Those left-libertarians who support private property do so under the condition that recompense is offered to the local community.

====Communization====

Communization mainly refers to a contemporary communist theory in which we find is a "mixing-up of insurrectionist anarchism, the communist ultra-left, post-autonomists, anti-political currents, groups like the Invisible Committee, as well as more explicitly communizing currents, such as Thorie Communiste and Endnotes. Obviously at the heart of the word is communism and, as the shift to communization suggests, communism as a particular activity and process...." Benjamin Noys (ed). Communization and its Discontents: Contestation, Critique, and Contemporary Struggles. Minor Compositions, Autonomedia. 2011. 1st ed. 

The association of the term communization with a self-identified "ultra-left" was cemented in France in the 1970s, where it came to describe not a transition to a higher phase of communism but a vision of communist revolution itself. Thus the 1975 Pamphlet A World Without Money states: insurrection and communisation are intimately linked. There would not be first a period of insurrection and then later, thanks to this insurrection, the transformation of social reality. The insurrectional process derives its force from communisation itself. "A World Without Money" by Les amis de 4 millions de jeunes travailleurs. (quoted passage not included in this English extract) The term is still used in this sense in France today and has spread into English usage as a result of the translation of texts by Gilles Dauv and Thorie Comuniste, two key figures in this tendency. In collaboration with other left communists such as Franois Martin and Karl Nesic, Dauv has attempted to fuse, critique, and develop different left communist currents, most notably the Italian movement associated with Amadeo Bordiga (and its heretical journal Invariance), German-Dutch council communism, and the French perspectives associated with Socialisme ou Barbarie and the Situationist International. "The text surveys the Italian and German lefts, Socialisme Ou Barbarie and the Situationist International and describes the theoretical development of the French ultra-left."Re-collecting our past - La Banquise 

In the late 1990s a close but not identical sense of "communization" was developed by the French post-situationist group Tiqqun. In keeping with their ultra-left predecessors, Tiqqun's predilection for the term seems to be its emphasis on communism as an immediate process rather than a far-off goal, but for Tiqqun it is no longer synonymous with "the revolution" considered as an historical event, but rather becomes identifiable with all sorts of activities  from squatting and setting up communes to simply "sharing"  that would typically be understood as "pre-revolutionary". "As we apprehend it, the process of instituting communism can only take the form of a collection of acts of communisation, of making common such-and-such space, such-and-such machine, such-and-such knowledge. That is to say, the elaboration of the mode of sharing that attaches to them. Insurrection itself is just an accelerator, a decisive moment in this process." Anonymous, Call From an ultra-left perspective such a politics of "dropping-out" or, as Tiqqun put it, "desertion"  setting up spaces and practices that are held to partially autonomous from capitalism  is typically dismissed as either naive or reactionary. For a critique of Tiqqun from an ultra-left perspective, as well as a description of the opposition between the two sense of "communization" see "Reflexions Around Call" Letters Journal #3. See also Dauv and Nesic, "Un Appel et une Invite". Due to the popularity of the Tiqqun-related works Call and The Coming Insurrection in US anarchist circles it tended to be this latter sense of "communization" that was employed in US anarchist and "insurrectionist" communiques, notably within the Californian student movement of 20092010. See e.g. "After the Fall: Communiqus from Occupied California" 

== References ==

==Contemporary libertarian socialism==
The global Occupy movement is noted to have distinct libertarian socialist principles.

A surge of popular interest in libertarian socialism occurred in western nations during the 1960s and 1970s. Anarchism was influential in the Counterculture of the 1960s "Farrell provides a detailed history of the Catholic Workers and their founders Dorothy Day and Peter Maurin. He explains that their pacifism, anarchism, and commitment to the downtrodden were one of the important models and inspirations for the 60s. As Farrell puts it, "Catholic Workers identified the issues of the sixties before the Sixties began, and they offered models of protest long before the protest decade.""The Spirit of the Sixties: The Making of Postwar Radicalism" by James J. Farrell "While not always formally recognized, much of the protest of the sixties was anarchist. Within the nascent women's movement, anarchist principles became so widespread that a political science professor denounced what she saw as "The Tyranny of Structurelessness." Several groups have called themselves "Amazon Anarchists." After the Stonewall Rebellion, the New York Gay Liberation Front based their organization in part on a reading of Murray Bookchin's anarchist writings." "Anarchism" by Charley Shively in Encyclopedia of Homosexuality. pg. 52 and anarchists actively participated in the late sixties students and workers revolts. "Within the movements of the sixties there was much more receptivity to anarchism-in-fact than had existed in the movements of the thirties...But the movements of the sixties were driven by concerns that were more compatible with an expressive style of politics, with hostility to authority in general and state power in particular...By the late sixties, political protest was intertwined with cultural radicalism based on a critique of all authority and all hierarchies of power. Anarchism circulated within the movement along with other radical ideologies. The influence of anarchism was strongest among radical feminists, in the commune movement, and probably in the Weather Underground and elsewhere in the violent fringe of the anti-war movement." "Anarchism and the Anti-Globalization Movement" by Barbara Epstein In 1968 in Carrara, Italy the International of Anarchist Federations was founded during an international anarchist conference held there in 1968 by the three existing European federations of France, the Italian and the Iberian Anarchist Federation as well as the Bulgarian federation in French exile. London Federation of Anarchists involvement in Carrara conference, 1968 International Institute of Social History, Accessed 19 January 2010 Short history of the IAF-IFA A-infos news project, Accessed 19 January 2010 The uprisings of May 1968 also led to a small resurgence of interest in left communist ideas. Various small left communist groups emerged around the world, predominantly in the leading capitalist countries. A series of conferences of the communist left began in 1976, with the aim of promoting international and cross-tendency discussion, but these petered out in the 1980s without having increased the profile of the movement or its unity of ideas. Prominent left communist groups existing today include the International Communist Party, International Communist Current and the Internationalist Communist Tendency.

The housing and employment crisis in most of Western Europe led to the formation of communes and squatter movements like that of Barcelona, Spain. In Denmark, squatters occupied a disused military base and declared the Freetown Christiania, an autonomous haven in central Copenhagen.

Around the turn of the 21st century, libertarian socialism grew in popularity and influence as part of the anti-war, anti-capitalist, and anti-globalisation movements. Anarchists became known for their involvement in protests against the meetings of the World Trade Organization (WTO), Group of Eight, and the World Economic Forum. Some anarchist factions at these protests engaged in rioting, property destruction, and violent confrontations with police. These actions were precipitated by ad hoc, leaderless, anonymous cadres known as black blocs; other organisational tactics pioneered in this time include security culture, affinity groups and the use of decentralised technologies such as the internet. A significant event of this period was the confrontations at WTO conference in Seattle in 1999. For english anarchist scholar Simon Critchley "contemporary anarchism can be seen as a powerful critique of the pseudo-libertarianism of contemporary neo-liberalism...One might say that contemporary anarchism is about responsibility, whether sexual, ecological or socio-economic; it flows from an experience of conscience about the manifold ways in which the West ravages the rest; it is an ethical outrage at the yawning inequality, impoverishment and disenfranchisment that is so palpable locally and globally." Infinitely Demanding by Simon Critchley. Verso. 2007. pg. 125 

International anarchist federations in existence include the International of Anarchist Federations, the International Workers' Association, and International Libertarian Solidarity.
The largest organised anarchist movement today is in Spain, in the form of the Confederacin General del Trabajo (CGT) and the Confederacin Nacional del Trabajo (CNT). CGT membership was estimated to be around 100,000 for 2003. Carley, Mark "Trade union membership 19932003" (International:SPIRE Associates 2004). Other active syndicalist movements include in Sweden the Central Organisation of the Workers of Sweden and the Swedish Anarcho-syndicalist Youth Federation; the CNT-AIT in France; http://www.cnt-ait-fr.org/CNT-AIT/ACCUEIL.html Website of the Confdration Nationale du Travail  Association Internationale des Travailleurs the Union Sindicale Italiana in Italy; in the US Workers Solidarity Alliance and the UK Solidarity Federation. The revolutionary industrial unionist Industrial Workers of the World, claiming 2,000 paying members, and the International Workers Association, an anarcho-syndicalist successor to the First International, also remain active.

Libertarian socialists in the early 21st century have been involved in the alter-globalization movement, squatter movement; social centers; infoshops; anti-poverty groups such as Ontario Coalition Against Poverty and Food Not Bombs; tenants' unions; housing cooperatives; intentional communities generally and egalitarian communities; anti-sexist organizing; grassroots media initiatives; digital media and computer activism; experiments in participatory economics; anti-racist and anti-fascist groups like Anti-Racist Action and Anti-Fascist Action; activist groups protecting the rights of immigrants and promoting the free movement of people, such as the No Border network; worker co-operatives, countercultural and artist groups; and the peace movement etc.

Libertarian socialism has also more recently played a large part in the global Occupy movement, "If any radical left tendency has been responsible for inspiring action, the palm should go to Marxisms historic antagonist on the Leftanarchism. Wherever movements have been provoked against neoliberalism, black flags have tended to outnumber red. Autonomista and other kinds of left-libertarian thought were major currents running through movements in Greece and Spain. The cornerstone for the occupation of Zuccotti Park was laid by anarchists, who also developed the consensus procedures by which the movement participants made (or occasionally failed to make) decisions." "Cheerleaders for Anarchism" by Nikil Saval in Dissent magazine In November 2011, Rolling Stone magazine credited American anarchist David Graeber with giving the Occupy Wall Street movement its theme: "We are the 99 percent". Rolling Stone says Graeber helped create the first New York City General Assembly, with only 60 participants, on August 2.Sharlet, Jeff (10 November 2011). "Inside Occupy Wall Street: How a bunch of anarchists and radicals with nothing but sleeping bags launched a nationwide movement". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 4 December 2011. in particular its focus on direct participatory democracy.

==Libertarian socialist periodicals==

* Against the Grain: a libertarian socialist newspaper (USA, 19761978) Priodiques en anglais  CIRA  Lausanne. Anarca-bolo.ch (2011-09-02). Retrieved on 2011-12-28. 
* Anarcho-Syndicalist Review (USA, 1986-)
* Big Flame (UK, 1960s70s)
* (USA, 1960s, edited by Murray Bookchin) Murray Bookchin communalism.org 
* Democracy & Nature (USA/UK)  succeeded by The International Journal of Inclusive Democracy (belongs to the direct democratic, libertarian socialist and autonomy traditions) The International Journal of Inclusive Democracy. Inclusivedemocracy.org. Retrieved on 2011-12-28. 
* Contemporary Issues-Dinge der Zeit (English and German language "magazine for a democracy of content, 19471997 published by Joseph Weber, Murray Bookchin's mentor) Murray Bookchin obituary. Times Online (2011-12-21). Retrieved on 2011-12-28. 
* Flash Point: a libertarian socialist newsjournal (Saskatoon, Canada, 1970s) 
* Freedom newspaper (UK)
* Heatwave (UK, 1960s) Heatwave Magazine  UK, 1960s. libcom.org. Retrieved on 2011-12-28. 
* Leeds Other Paper (UK, 19741991) Leeds other paper Leeds libertarian socialist newspaper. . Worldcatlibraries.org. Retrieved on 2011-12-28. 
* Libertarian Communism (UK, 19741976)
* Liberty (USA, 1881-1908)
* Mother Earth (USA, 1907-1915)
* New Internationalist (UK)
* Organized Thoughts (USA, 1990s) 
* Our Generation (originally Our Generation Against Nuclear War), 19611994; a historical and theoretical journal
* Rebelles (Quebec, 1990s) [http://struggle.ws/wsm/rbr/rbr8/summitlessons.html Lessons from the Summit Protest movement. Struggle.ws. Retrieved on 2011-12-28. 
* Red and Black Notes (Toronto, 1997 2006-, features Cajo Brendel, Cornelius Castoriadis, Martin Glaberman, CLR James, Larry Gambone and others) . geocities.com 
* Red & Black Revolution (Publication of The Workers Solidarity Movement, Ireland)
* ROAR Magazine (2010present)
* Root and Branch (Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA, 1970, featured work of Paul Mattick and others) Root And Branch. Webcitation.org. Retrieved on 2011-12-28. 
* Social Anarchism (journal), a Baltimore-based journal founded in 1981 and currently publishing.
* Socialisme ou Barbarie (France)
* Socialist Standard (UK, 1904present)
* Solidarity (UK, 1960s70s) Anderson, Paul. (2004-07-27) GAUCHE. Libsoc.blogspot.com. Retrieved on 2011-12-28. 
* Der Sozialist, (Germany, 1900s, co-edited by Gustav Landauer and Margarethe Hardegger) 
* Tegen de Stroom (1990s, Netherlands) 
* The Commune (UK, 2008) The Commune  for worker's self-management and communism 
* The Libertarian Communist (UK, 2008)
* Workers Solidarity (Publication of the Workers Solidarity Movement, Ireland)
* Zenit Sweden, 19581970 (Magazine by Syndikalistiska Grupprrelsen)
* Turnusol (Turkey, 2008) Baka Bir Sol Mmkn!. Turnusol.biz. Retrieved on 2011-12-28. 
* Z Magazine

==See also==
* Geolibertarianism
* Veganarchism

==References==

==Bibliography==
* . Robert Graham, editor.
** Volume One: From Anarchy to Anarchism (300CE to 1939) Black Rose Books, Montral and London 2005. ISBN 1-55164-250-6.
** Volume Two: The Anarchist Current (19392006) Black Rose Books, Montral 2007. ISBN 978-1-55164-311-3.
*
*An Anarchist FAQ by Iain McKay (ed.), Volume 1 (2008), see esp. section: A.1.3 Why is anarchism also called libertarian socialism? 
* Anarchy: A Graphic Guide, Clifford Harper (Camden Press, 1987): An overview, updating Woodcock's classic, and illustrated throughout by Harper's woodcut-style artwork.
* The Anarchist Reader, George Woodcock (ed.) (Fontana/Collins 1977; ISBN 0-00-634011-3): An anthology of writings from anarchist thinkers and activists including Proudhon, Kropotkin, Bakunin, Malatesta, Bookchin, Goldman, and many others.
* Anarchist Seeds beneath the Snow: Left-Libertarian Thought and British Writers from William Morris to Colin Ward. David Goodway. Liverpool University Press. 2006 ISBN 1-84631-025-3
* The Anarchist Turn. Edited by Jacob Blumenfeld, Chiara Bottici and Simon Critchley. Pluto Press. March 19, 2013. ISBN 9780745333427
* Anarchism: From Theory to Practice by Daniel Guerin. Monthly Review Press. 1970. ISBN 0-85345-175-3
* Anarchy through the times by Max Nettlau. Gordon Press. 1979. ISBN 0-8490-1397-6
* Autonomia: Post-Political Politics, ed. Sylvere Lotringer & Christian Marazzi. New York: Semiotext(e), 1980, 2007. ISBN 1-58435-053-9, ISBN 978-1-58435-053-8.
* LAutonomie. Le mouvement autonome en France et en Italie, ditions Spartacus 1978
* Demanding the Impossible: A History of Anarchism by Peter Marshall. PM Press. 2010. ISBN 1-60486-064-2
* People Without Government: An Anthropology of Anarchy (2nd ed.) by Harold Barclay, Left Bank Books, 1990 ISBN 1-871082-16-1
* Pioneers of Anti-Parliamentarism by Guy Aldred. Glasgow: Bakunin Press.
* The Political Theory of Anarchism by April Carter. Harper & Row. 1971. ISBN 978-0-06-136050-3
* 
* Libertarian Socialism: Politics in Black and Red Edited By Alex Prichard, Ruth Kinna, Saku Pinta and Dave Berry. Palgrave Macmillan, December 2012 ISBN 978-0-230-28037-3
* Otsuka, Michael. Libertarianism without Inequality, by (Oxford University Press 2003)
* Non-Leninist Marxism: Writings on the Workers Councils (a collection of writings by Gorter, Pannekoek, Pankhurst, and Ruhle). Red and Black Publishers, St Petersburg, Florida, 2007. ISBN 978-0-9791813-6-8
*The International Communist Current, itself a Left Communist grouping, has produced a series of studies of what it views as its own antecedents. The book on the German-Dutch current, which is by Philippe Bourrinet (who later left the ICC), in particular contains an exhaustive bibliography.
**The Italian Communist Left 19261945 (ISBN 1897980132)
**The Dutch-German Communist Left (ISBN 1899438378)
**The Russian Communist Left, 19181930 (ISBN 1897980108)
**The British Communist Left, 19141945 (ISBN 1897980116)
* Benjamin Noys (ed). Communization and its Discontents: Contestation, Critique, and Contemporary Struggles. Minor Compositions, Autonomedia. 2011. 1st ed.

==External links==

===Libertarian socialist general resources===
* Le Monde Libertaire Transcription of the first known publication to declare itself 'Libertarian' and socialist, in 1858 edited by Joseph Djacque.
* libcom.org the home of Libertarian Communism in Britain
** A libertarian Marxist tendency map
* Libertarian Socialist Alliance  International Global Network of Libertarian Socialist Organizations
* A People's Libertarian Index
* Libertarian socialism
* Collective Action Notes is a libertarian socialist publication whose website hosts an extensive collection of online anti-authoritarian texts. (link dead) .
* Anarchism and the left
* Infoshop's libertarian Marxism and libertarian socialism portal
* Left Communism collection on the Marxists Internet Archive
* The Anarchist Library large online library with texts from anarchist authors
* For Communism  John Gray WebSite: large online library of libertarian communist texts

===Introductory articles===
* "Libertarian Socialism" by spunk.org
* "What is Libertarian Socialism?" by Ulli Diemer
* "Libertarian Marxism's Relation to Anarchism" by Wayne Price
* "Libertarian Socialism: A Better Reconciliation Between Self-Ownership and Equality" by Nicholas Vrousalis
* "Libertarian Socialism" by Tom McLaughlin
* "The End of Traditional Antisystemic Movements and the Need for a New Type of Antisystemic Movements Today" by Takis Fotopoulos, Democracy & Nature, Vol. 7, no. 3, 2001.
*"Kropotkin, Self-valorization And The Crisis Of Marxism." by Harry Cleaver. Written for and presented to the Conference on Pyotr Alexeevich Kropotkin organized by the Russian Academy of Science in Moscow, St. Petersburg and Dimitrov on December 8  14, 1992
* "How a Libertarian Capitalist Became a Libertarian Socialist" by Chris Wilson 
* "The Crisis of Dialectical Materialism and Libertarian Socialism" by Mario Cutajar

===Libertarian socialist websites===
* The Red Menace Archive of The Red Menace, published by the Libertarian Socialist Collective
* Workers Solidarity Movement
* Industrial Workers of the World
* Professor Roger McCain's libertarian socialist economics page
* Social Ecology London, English libertarian socialist study/action group
* TURNUSOL, A Libertarian Socialist Internet Periodical, Turkey
* Liberty & Solidarity
* "An Anarchist FAQ Webpage" An Anarchist FAQ
* 
* Anarchism: A Bibliography
* Anarchy Archives  information relating to famous anarchists including their writings (see Anarchy Archives).
* Daily Bleed's Anarchist Encyclopedia 700+ entries, with short biographies, links and dedicated pages
* KateSharpleyLibrary.net website of the Kate Sharpley Library, containing many historical documents pertaining to anarchism

===Libertarian socialist history===
* "Socialism from below" by George Woodcock
* Anarchism and the Russian revolution
* The Bolshevik Counter-Revolution against the workers and popular soviet/council power was done with party dictatorship and massacre on the Kronstadt soviet in March 1921.
* Anarchist timeline includes libertarian socialists
* Anarchist Encyclopedia (from the Daily Bleed) includes libertarian socialists

===Film===
See List of films dealing with Anarchism for a list of nonfiction and fiction films dealing with anarchist movements both historical and contemporary.
*Noam Chomsky Discussion with Libertarian Socialists, Ireland 2006

 



[[Livy]]

Titus Livius Patavinus (64 or 59 BCAD 17)known as Livy in Englishwas a Roman historian who wrote a monumental history of Rome and the Roman people. Ab Urbe Condita Libri, "Books from the Foundation of the City," covering the period from the earliest legends of Rome well before the traditional foundation in 753 BC through the reign of Augustus in Livy's own time. He was on familiar terms with the Julio-Claudian family, advising Augustus's grandnephew, the future emperor Claudius, as a young man not long before 14 AD in a letter to take up the writing of history. Livy and Augustus's wife, Livia, were from the same clan in different locations, although not related by blood.

==Life==
Livy was born as Titus Livius in Patavium in northern Italy, now modern Padua. There is a debate about the year of Titus Livius' birth, 64 BC or more likely 59 BC. At the time of his birth, his home city of Patavium was the second wealthiest on the Italian peninsula. Patavium was a part of the province of Cisalpine Gaul at the time. In his works, Livy often expressed his deep affection and pride for Patavium, and the city was well known for its conservative values in morality and politics. "He was by nature a recluse, mild in temperament and averse to violence, the restorative peace of his time gave him the opportunity to turn all his imaginative passion to the legendary and historical past of the country he loved." 

Livys teen years were during the 40s BC, a time that coincided with the civil wars that were occurring throughout the Roman world. The governor of Cisalpine Gaul at the time, a man called Asinius Pollio, had tried to bring Patavium into the camp of Marcus Antonius (Mark Antony), who was one of the three men in the fight for control over Rome. The wealthier citizens of Patavium refused to contribute money and arms to Asinius Pollio and went into hiding. Pollio then attempted to bribe the slaves of the wealthy citizens of Patavium to expose the whereabouts of their masters; his bribery did not work, and the citizens pledged their allegiance to conservatism and the Senate instead. Therefore, Livy and the other residents of Patavium did not end up supporting Marcus Antonius in his campaign for control over Rome. It is likely, then, that the Roman civil wars prevented Livy from pursuing a higher education in Rome or going on a Grand Tour of Greece, which was common for adolescent males of the nobility at the time. Later on, Asinius Pollio made a jibe at Livy's "patavinity," saying that Livy's Latin showed certain "provincialisms" frowned on at Rome. His jibe at Livy and his "patavinity," however, may have been said because of the fact that the city of Patavium had rejected Asinius Pollio, and he still harboured harsh feelings toward the city as a whole.

Titus Livius probably went to Rome in the 30s BC, and it is likely that he spent a large amount of time in the city after this, although it may not have been his primary home. During his time in Rome, he was never a senator nor held any other governmental position. His elementary mistakes in military matters show that he was never a soldier. However, he was educated in philosophy and rhetoric. It seems that Livy had the financial resources and means to live an independent life. He devoted a large part of his life to his writings, which he was able to do because of his financial freedom.

Livy was known to give recitations to small audiences, but he was not heard of to engage in declamation, which was a common pastime. He was familiar with the emperor Augustus, formerly Octavian, and the imperial family. Octavian was one of the three men fighting for the control of Rome during the Civil Wars in the 40s BC. Octavian gained power after defeating Marcus Antonius and Cleopatra, and was later given the honorary name of Augustus. Considering that Augustus came to be known as the greatest Roman Emperor in the eyes of the Romans, being a historian under Augustus was very beneficial to Livys career even after his death. It is said that Livy was the one who encouraged the future emperor Claudius, who was born in 10 BC, to explore the writing of history during his childhood. Livy himself was married and had at least one daughter and one son.

Perhaps Livys most famous work was his history of Rome. In it he explains the complete history of the city of Rome, from its foundation to the death of Augustus. Because he was writing under the emperor Augustus, Livys history emphasizes the great triumphs of Rome. . He wrote his history with embellished accounts of Roman heroism in order to promote the new type of government implemented by Augustus when he became emperor. . In Livys preface to his history, he said that he did not care whether his personal fame remained in darkness, as long as his work helped to preserve the memory of the deeds of the worlds preeminent nation. . Because Livy was writing about events that had occurred hundreds of years earlier, the value of his history was questionable, although many Romans came to believe what he wrote to be the true history of Romes foundation. . He had also written other works, including an essay in the form of a letter to his son, and numerous dialogues, most likely using Cicero as a model.

Titus Livius is said to have died in the year AD 17 (three years after the death of the emperor Augustus) in his home city of Patavium.

==Works==

Bust of Caesar Augustus from the Musei Capitolini, Rome

Livy's only surviving work is the "History of Rome" (Ab urbe condita), which was his career from an age in middle life, probably 32, until he left Rome for Padua in old age, probably after the death of Augustus in the reign of Tiberius. When he began this work he was already past his youth; presumably, events in his life prior to that time had led to his intense activity as a historian. Seneca the Younger gives brief mention that he was also known as an orator and philosopher and had written some treatises in those fields from a historical point of view. (...scripsit enim et dialogos, quos non magis philosophiae adnumerare possis quam historiae, et ex professo philosophiam continentis libros) 

==Reception==
===In the Roman Empire===
Livy's History of Rome was in demand from the publication of the first packet. Livy became so famous that a man from Cadiz travelled to Rome just to see him, and once he had met with him, returned home. Pliny the Younger, Epistles, II.3. The popularity of the work continued through the entire classical period. A number of Roman authors used Livy, including Aurelius Victor, Cassiodorus, Eutropius, Festus, Florus, Granius Licinianus and Orosius. Julius Obsequens used Livy, or a source with access to Livy, to compose his De Prodigiis, an account of supernatural events in Rome, from the consulship of Scipio and Laelius to that of Paulus Fabius and Quintus Aelius.

Livy wrote during the reign of Augustus, who came to power after a civil war with generals and consuls claiming to be defending the Roman Republic, such as Pompey. Patavium had been pro-Pompey. To clarify his status, the victor of the civil war, Octavian Caesar, had wanted to take the title Romulus (the first king of Rome) but in the end accepted the senate proposal of Augustus. He did not abolish the republic de facto but adapted its institutions into the empire.

Livy's enthusiasm for the Republic is evident from the first pentade of his work, and yet the Julio-Claudian family (the imperial family) were as much fans of Livy as anyone. He could not have been an advocate of any sort of sedition in favor of restoring the Republic; he would have been put on trial for treason and executed, as many had been and would be. He must have been viewed as a harmless and relevant advocate of the ancient morality, which was a known public stance of the citizens of Patavium. His relationship to Augustus is defined primarily by a passage from Tacitus Annales IV.34. in which Cremutius Cordus is put on trial for his life for offenses no worse than Livy's and defends himself face-to-face with the frowning Tiberius as follows:

To avoid conviction, while waiting for a verdict, Cordus committed suicide by self-starvation. His worst fears were realized in absentia: his books were sentenced to be burned by the aediles, but the task was performed without zeal and many books escaped. Livy's reasons for returning to Padua after the death of Augustus (if he did) are unclear, but the circumstances of Tiberius' reign certainly allow for speculation.

===Later===
During the Middle Ages, interest in Livy declined. Due to the length of the work, the literate class was already reading summaries rather than the work itself, which was tedious to copy, expensive, and required a lot of storage space. It must have been during this period, if not before, that manuscripts began to be lost without replacement.

The Renaissance was a time of intense revival; the population discovered that Livy's work was being lost and large amounts of money changed hands in the rush to collect Livian manuscripts. The poet Beccadelli sold a country home for funding to purchase one manuscript copied by Poggio. Petrarch and Pope Nicholas V launched a search for the now missing books. Laurentius Valla published an amended text initiating the field of Livy scholarship. Dante speaks highly of him in his poetry, and Francis I of France commissioned extensive artwork treating Livian themes; Niccol Machiavelli's work on republics, the Discourses on Livy is presented as a commentary on the History of Rome. Respect for Livy rose to lofty heights.

After a few hundred years of Livy being studied by the youth of every Western population, moderns have developed their own views of Livy and his place in the ancient world, which were not current in ancient times. For example, one text on western civilization pronounces: "Livy was the prose counterpart of Vergil," as both have been standard in the study of Golden Age Latin literature. Golden Age Latin was not known as such in classical times and the ancient reader could choose from a vastly larger bibliography; but, in fact, private reading was a privilege of the literate few, who had the wealth to buy manuscripts or have them copied and had the time for library research. Public readings of works, however, were common and the usual method in which an author became known.

==Dates==
The authority supplying information from which possible vital data on Livy can be deduced is Eusebius of Caesarea, a bishop of the early Catholic Church. One of his works was a summary of world history in ancient Greek, termed the Chronikon, dating from the early 4th century AD. This work was lost except for fragments (mainly excerpts), but not before it had been translated in whole and in part by various authors such as St. Jerome. The entire work survives in Armenian. St. Jerome wrote in Latin. Fragments in Syriac exist.

Eusebius' work consists of two books: the Chronographia, a summary of history in annalist form, and the Chronikoi Kanones, tables of years and events. St. Jerome translated the tables into Latin as the Chronicon, probably adding some information of his own from unknown sources. Livy's dates appear in Jerome's Chronicon.

The main problem with the information given in the MSS is that, between them, they often give different dates for the same events or different events, do not include the same material entirely, and reformat what they do include. A date may be in Ab urbe condita or in Olympiads or in some other form, such as age. These variations may have occurred through scribal error or scribal license. Some material has been inserted under the aegis of Eusebius.

The topic of manuscript variants is a large and specialized one, on which authors of works on Livy seldom care to linger. As a result standard information in a standard rendition is used, which gives the impression of a standard set of dates for Livy. There are no such dates. A typical presumption is of a birth in the 2nd year of the 180th Olympiad and a death in the first year of the 199th Olympiad, which are coded 180.2 and 199.1 respectively. All sources use the same first Olympiad, 776/775773/772 BC by the modern calendar. By a complex formula (made so by the 0 reference point not falling on the border of an Olympiad), these codes correspond to 59 BC for the birth, 17 AD for the death. In another manuscript the birth is in 180.4, or 57 BC. 

Jerome says that Livy was born the same year as Marcus Valerius Messala Corvinus and died the same year as Ovid. Messala, however, was born earlier, in 64 BC, and Ovid's death, usually taken to be the same year as Livy's, is more uncertain. As an alternative view, Ronald Syme argues for 64 BC  12 AD as a range for Livy, setting the death of Ovid at 12. A death date of 12, however, removes Livy from Augustus' best years and makes him depart for Padua without the good reason of the second emperor, Tiberius, being not as tolerant of his republicanism. The contradiction remains.

==Notes==

==Bibliography==
* 
* .
* 

==Additional reading==
* .
* .
* .
* .
* Also in .
* .

==External links==

* 
* 



[[Labour Day]]

Labour Day (Labor Day in the United States) is an annual holiday to celebrate the achievements of workers. Labour Day has its origins in the labour union movement, specifically the eight-hour day movement, which advocated eight hours for work, eight hours for recreation, and eight hours for rest. For many countries, Labour Day is synonymous with, or linked with, International Workers' Day, which occurs on 1 May. For other countries, Labour Day is celebrated on a different date, often one with special significance for the labour movement in that country. In Canada and the United States, it is celebrated on the first Monday of September and considered the official end of the summer holiday for most of the respective countries, as public school and university students return to school that week or the following week. (Canadian Parliament normally also begins its new session after the holiday, except in cases of prorogation.)

==International Workers' Day==

For many countries, "Labour Day" is synonymous with, or linked with, International Workers' Day, which occurs on 1 May. Some countries vary the actual date of their celebrations so that the holiday occurs on a Monday close to 1 May. The remainder of this article addresses those countries for whom Labour Day is not linked to International Workers' Day.

==Other dates==

===Australia===
Celebrating the Australian labour movement and specifically the achievement of a working day limited to eight hours, the Labour Day public holiday is fixed by the various state and territory governments, and so varies considerably. It is the first Monday in October in the Australian Capital Territory, New South Wales, South Australia and, since 2013, Queensland. In both Victoria and Tasmania, it is the second Monday in March (though the latter calls it Eight Hours Day). In Western Australia, Labour Day is the first Monday in March. In the Northern Territory, it is called May Day and occurs on the first Monday in May.

===Bahamas===
Labor Day is a national holiday in the Bahamas, celebrated on the first Friday in June in order to create a long weekend for workers. The traditional date of Labor Day in the Bahamas, however, is June 7, in commemoration of a significant workers' strike that began on that day in 1942. Labor Day is meant to honor and celebrate workers and the importance of their contributions to the nation and society. In the capital city, Nassau, thousands of people come to watch a parade through the streets, which begins at mid-morning. Bands in colorful uniforms, traditional African junkanoo performers, and members of various labor unions and political parties are all part of the procession, which ends up at the Southern Recreation Grounds, where government officials make speeches for the occasion. For many residents and visitors to the Bahamas, the afternoon of Labor Day is a time to relax at home or perhaps visit the beach.

===Canada===
A Labour Day parade in Toronto, Canada in 1900
Labour Day (French: Fte du Travail) has been celebrated on the first Monday in September in Canada since the 1880s. The origins of Labour Day in Canada can be traced back to December 1872 when a parade was staged in support of the Toronto Typographical Union's strike for a 58-hour work-week. The Toronto Trades Assembly (TTA) called its 27 unions to demonstrate in support of the Typographical Union who had been on strike since March 25. George Brown, Canadian politician and editor of the Toronto Globe hit back at his striking employees, pressing police to charge the Typographical Union with "conspiracy." Although the laws criminalising union activity were outdated and had already been abolished in Great Britain, they were still on the books in Canada and police arrested 24 leaders of the Typographical Union. Labour leaders decided to call another similar demonstration on September 3 to protest the arrests. Seven unions marched in Ottawa, prompting a promise by Canadian Prime Minister Sir John A. Macdonald to repeal the "barbarous" anti-union laws. Parliament passed the Trade Union Act on June 14 the following year, and soon all unions were seeking a 54-hour work-week.

The Toronto Trades and Labour Council (successor to the TTA) held similar celebrations every spring. American Peter J. McGuire, co-founder of the American Federation of Labor, was asked to speak at a labour festival in Toronto, Canada on July 22, 1882. Returning to the United States, McGuire and the Knights of Labor organised a similar parade based on the Canadian event on September 5, 1882 in New York City, USA. On July 23, 1894, Canadian Prime Minister John Thompson and his government made Labour Day, to be held in September, an official holiday. In the United States, the New York parade became an annual event that year, and in 1894 was adopted by American president Grover Cleveland to compete with International Workers' Day (May Day).

While Labour Day parades and picnics are organised by unions, many Canadians regard Labour Day as the Monday of the last long weekend of summer. Non-union celebrations include picnics, fireworks displays, water activities, and public art events. Since the new school year generally starts right after Labour Day, families with school-age children take it as the last chance to travel before the end of summer.

An old fashioned tradition in Canada and the United States frowns upon the wearing of white after Labour Day. Explanations for this tradition vary; the most common is that white is a summer colour and Labour Day unofficially marks the end of summer. The rule may have been intended as a status symbol for new members of the upper and middle classes in the late 19th and early 20th century. 

A Labour Day tradition in Atlantic Canada is the Wharf Rat Rally in Digby, Nova Scotia, while the rest of Canada watches the Labour Day Classic, a Canadian Football League event where rivals like Calgary Stampeders and Edmonton Eskimos, Hamilton Tiger-Cats and Toronto Argonauts (except in 2011 and 2013, due to scheduling conflicts), and Saskatchewan Roughriders and Winnipeg Blue Bombers play on Labour Day weekend. Before the demise of the Ottawa Renegades after the 2005 season, that team played the nearby Montreal Alouettes on Labour Day weekend. From 2006 to 2013, the Alouettes played the remaining team in the league, the BC Lions. Starting in 2014, when the Ottawa RedBlacks begin play, the MontrealOttawa Labour Day tradition will be revived. Likewise, Ontario University Athletics has a long-established tradition to play university football on Labour Day.

The Labour Day parade in Grand Falls-Windsor, Newfoundland started in 1921 and still continues today, over 90 years later. The celebrations go on for three days with a parade on Labour Day Monday.

===Jamaica===
Before 1961, May 24 was celebrated in Jamaica as Empire Day in honour of the birthday of Queen Victoria and her emancipation of slaves in Jamaica. As its name suggests, the day was used to celebrate the British Empire, complete with flag-raising ceremonies and the singing of patriotic songs. In 1961, Jamaican Chief Minister Norman Washington Manley proposed the replacement of Empire Day with Labour Day, a celebration in commemoration of May 23, 1938, when Alexander Bustamante led a labour rebellion leading to Jamaican independence.

Until May 23, 1971, Jamaican Prime Minister Michael Manley promoted Labour Day as a showcase for the importance of labour to the development of Jamaica, and a day of voluntary community participation to beneficial projects. Since then, Labour Day has been not only a public holiday but also a day of mass community involvement around the country.

===Jordan===
In Jordan, Labour Day is celebrated on May 1. It is one of the 16 public holidays celebrated annually in the country.

===Lebanon===
In Lebanon, Labour Day is celebrated on May 1. It is one of the 16 public holidays celebrated annually in the country.

===New Zealand===
In New Zealand, Labour Day is a public holiday held on the fourth Monday in October. Its origins are traced back to the eight-hour working day movement that arose in the newly founded Wellington colony in 1840, primarily because of carpenter Samuel Parnell's refusal to work more than eight hours a day. He encouraged other tradesmen also to work for only eight hours a day and in October 1840, a workers' meeting passed a resolution supporting the idea. On October 28, 1890, the 50th anniversary of the eight-hour day was commemorated with a parade. The event was then celebrated annually in late October as either Labour Day or Eight-Hour Demonstration Day. In 1899 government legislated that the day be a public holiday from 1900. The day was celebrated on different days in different provinces. This led to ship owners complaining that seamen were taking excessive holidays by having one Labour Day in one port then another in their next port. In 1910 the government stipulated that the holiday would be observed on the same day throughout the nation.

===Trinidad and Tobago===
In Trinidad and Tobago, Labour Day is celebrated every June 19. This holiday was proposed in 1973 Trinidad and Tobago Labour Day to be commemorated on the anniversary of the 1937 Butler labour riots.

===United States===
Labor Day Parade, Union Square, New York, 1882
In the United States, Labor Day is a federal holiday observed on the first Monday of September. It is customarily viewed as the end of the summer vacation season. Yelena Johnson, Labor Day End of Summer White Party, Celebrations. Accessed 2009.10.05. Many schools open for the year on the day after Labor Day. Rosalind S. Helderman, "Issues That Matter to You: School Start After Labor Day "; The Washington Post, September 6, 2009. The holiday is shared with Canada, where it is known as Labour Day.

==References==



[[Bodyline]]

Bill Woodfull evades a bodyline ball

Bodyline, also known as fast leg theory bowling, was a cricketing tactic devised by the English cricket team for their 193233 Ashes tour of Australia, specifically to combat the extraordinary batting skill of Australia's Don Bradman. A bodyline delivery was one where the cricket ball was bowled towards the body of the batsman on the line of the leg stump, in the hope of creating leg-side deflections that could be caught by one of several fielders in the quadrant of the field behind square leg. This was considered by many to be intimidatory and physically threatening, to the point of being unfair in a game once supposed to have gentlemanly traditions, but commercialisation of the game had subsequently tended to elevate the principle of "win at all costs" above traditional ideals of sportsmanship. Unit 2  Managing the Match: Management issues and umpiring at International Institute of Cricket Umpiring and Scoring 

Although no serious injuries arose from any short-pitched deliveries while a leg theory field was set, the tactic still led to considerable ill feeling between the two teams, with the controversy eventually spilling into the diplomatic arena. Over the next two decades, several of the Laws of Cricket were changed to prevent this tactic being repeated. Law 41.5 states "At the instant of the bowler's delivery there shall not be more than two fielders, other than the wicket-keeper, behind the popping crease on the on side," Law 41 (The fielder). Retrieved 3 July 2010. commonly referred to as being "behind square leg". Additionally, Law 42.6(a) includes: "The bowling of fast short pitched balls is dangerous and unfair if the umpire at the bowler's end considers that by their repetition and taking into account their length, height and direction they are likely to inflict physical injury on the striker". Law 42 on fair and unfair play.. Retrieved 20 April 2008. 

The occasional short-pitched ball aimed at the batsman (a bouncer) has never been illegal and is still in widespread use as a tactic.

==Genesis==
The Australian cricket team toured England in 1930. Australia won the five-Test series 21, with Don Bradman scoring 974 runs at a batting average of 139.14, an aggregate record that still stands. 1930 England v Australia (Test Series): Batting & Bowling Analysis (Combined). HowStat. Retrieved 30 November 2006. Perry, p. 133. By the time of the next Ashes series of 193233, Bradman's average hovered around 100, approximately twice that of all other world-class batsmen. Cashman, pp. 3235. Piesse, p. 130. England feared that without resorting to drastic tactics, they might not be able to defeat Australia until Bradmanthen aged 24 retired, something that might be over a decade away. It was believed that something new was required to combat Bradman, Frith, pp. 4041. but it was believed more likely that Bradman could be dismissed by leg-spin as Walter Robins and Ian Peebles had supposedly caused him problems; two leg-spinners were included in the English touring party of 193233. Douglas, p. 121. This view gradually came to change leading up to 1932.

The idea of bodyline had originated in the Oval Test of the 1930 Ashes series. While Bradman was batting, the wicket became briefly difficult following rain. Bradman was seen to be uncomfortable facing deliveries which bounced higher than usual at a faster pace, being seen to step back out of the line of the ball. Former England and Surrey captain Percy Fender was one who noticed, and the incident was much discussed by cricketers. However, given that Bradman scored 232, it was not thought that a way to curb his prodigious scoring had been found. Frith, pp. 4243. Douglas, p. 111. When Douglas Jardine later saw film footage of the Oval incident and noticed Bradman's discomfort, he shouted, "I've got it! He's yellow!" Frith, p. 50 Further details adding to the plan came from letters Fender received from Australia in 1932, which described how Australian batsmen were increasingly moving across the stumps towards the off side to play the ball on the on side. Fender showed these letters to Jardine when it became clear that he was to captain the MCC in Australia during the 193233 tour, and he also discussed Bradman's discomfort at the Oval. It was also known in England that Bradman was dismissed for a four-ball duck by fast bowler Eddie Gilbert, and looked very uncomfortable. Bradman had also appeared uncomfortable against the pace of Sandy Bell in his innings of 299 not out, when the desperate bowler decided to bowl short to him, and South African Herbie Taylor, according to Jack Fingleton, may have mentioned this to English cricketers in 1932. Frith, pp. 3940; p. 48 Fender felt Bradman might be vulnerable to fast, short-pitched deliveries on the line of leg stump. Perry, p. 135. Pollard, p. 244. Jardine felt that Bradman was afraid to stand his ground against intimidatory bowling, citing instances in 1930 when he shuffled about, contrary to orthodox batting technique. Haigh and Frith, p. 70. 

 alt=A head shot of a man.
When Jardine was appointed England's captain for the 193233 English tour of Australia, a meeting was arranged with Nottinghamshire captain Arthur Carr and his two fast bowlers Harold Larwood and Bill Voce at London's Piccadilly Hotel to discuss a plan to combat Bradman's extraordinary skills. Perry, p. 134. Jardine asked Larwood and Voce if they could bowl on leg stump and make the ball come up into the body of the batsman. The bowlers agreed they could, and that it might prove effective. Frith, pp. 4344. Pollard, p. 242. Jardine also visited Frank Foster who had toured Australia in 191112 to discuss field-placing in Australia. Foster had bowled leg-theory on that tour with his fielders placed close in on the leg side, as had George Hirst in 190304. Frith, pp. 1819. 

A cordon of close-in fielders would be arrayed behind the wicket and on the leg side to exploit batting errors elicited by this bowling line. In these circumstances, a batsman can either duck and risk being hit, or play the ball. Defensive shots rarely score runs and risk being caught in the cordon, while the pull and hook shots can result in a catch on the boundary, for which two men were usually set in "leg-theory" bowling. Leg theory had been practised previously without resort to short-pitched bowling, usually by slow or medium-pace bowlers. This type of leg theory was aimed outside the line of leg stump; the object being to test the batsman's patience and force a rash stroke. It was occasionally an effective tactic, but was unattractive for spectators and never became widely used except by a handful of specialists such as Fred Root, the Worcestershire bowler and Warwick Armstrong, the former Australian captain. Frith, pp. 2226. 

However, there had been instances of what would later be recognised as bodyline prior to 1932. In 1925, Australian Jack Scott first bowled a form of bodyline in a state match for New South Wales, but his captain Herbie Collins disliked it and would not let him use it again when he was captain. Other Australian captains were less particular, including Vic Richardson who let him use those tactics when he moved to South Australia. He repeated them against the MCC in 192829. Douglas, pp. 7980. Frith, pp. 2829. In 1927, in a Test trial match, "Nobby" Clark bowled short to a leg-trap field. He was representing England in a side captained by Jardine. Douglas, pp. 5960. In 192829, Harry Alexander bowled an early form of bodyline at the MCC tourists. Douglas, p. 83. Larwood used a form of bodyline on that same tour, bowling fast leg theory to a leg-side field in two Test matches, although not with the same intensity and duration as came later. Bob Wyatt later claimed that Learie Constantine unsuccessfully used bodyline in 192930 in the West Indies. 

Larwood and Voce practised the plan over the remainder of the 1932 season with varying but increasing success and several injuries to batsmen. Frith, pp. 4548. Douglas, pp. 113117. Ken Farnes experimented with short-pitched, leg-theory bowling but was not selected for the tour. Bill Bowes also used short-pitched bowling, notably against Jack Hobbs. Frith, pp. 4950. 

==Antipathy between Australians and Jardine==
Jardine's first experience against Australia came when his Oxford University team played against the 1921 Australian touring side. In the second innings, Jardine was 96 not out when the game ended, having batted his team to safety. The tourists were criticised in the press for not allowing Jardine to reach his hundred, Fingleton, pp. 8182. but they had tried to help him with some easy bowling. There has been speculation that this incident helped develop Jardine's antipathy towards Australians, although Christopher Douglas denies this. Douglas, pp. 3031. Cricket historian David Frith believed it is possible that the abrasive Australian captain Warwick Armstrong could have addressed sarcastic comments to Jardine but Wisden believed his slow approach cost him his century. Frith, p. 70. 

Regardless of what happened in 1921, Jardine's conflicts with Australia solidified after he was selected to tour the country in 192829. Douglas, p. 64. He began the tour with three consecutive hundreds. Douglas, pp. 6869. During the first century, the crowd engaged in some good-natured joking at Jardine's expense, but he was jeered by the crowd during his second hundred for batting too slowly. Jardine accelerated after another slow start, during which he was again barracked to score his third century. Douglas, pp. 6667. The crowds took an increasing dislike to him, mainly for his superior attitude and bearing, his awkward fielding, and particularly his choice of headwear. His first public action in South Australia was to take out the members of the South Australian team who had been to Oxford or Cambridge universities. Then, he wore a Harlequin cap, given to successful cricketers at Oxford. It was not unusual for Oxford and Cambridge cricketers to wear similar caps while batting, as both Jardine and MCC captain Percy Chapman did so on this tour, although it was slightly unorthodox to wear them while fielding. However, this was neither understood nor acceptable to the Australian crowds. They quickly took exception to the importance he seemed to place on class distinction. Although Jardine may simply have worn the cap out of superstition, it conveyed a negative impression to the spectators; his general demeanour drew one comment of "Where's the butler to carry the bat for you?" Fingleton, pp. 8485. Jardine's cap became a focus for criticism and mockery from the crowds throughout the tour. Frith, p. 335. Douglas, pp. 66, 8182. Nevertheless, Jack Fingleton later claimed that Jardine could have won over the crowd by exchanging jokes or pleasantries with them. Fingleton, pp. 8990. It is certain that Jardine by this stage had developed an intense dislike for Australian crowds. During his third century at the start of the tour, during a period of abuse from the spectators, he observed to a sympathetic Hunter Hendry that "All Australians are uneducated, and an unruly mob". Frith, p. 71. After the innings, when teammate Patsy Hendren remarked that the Australian crowds did not like Jardine, he replied "It's fucking mutual". Douglas, p. 68. During the tour, Jardine fielded next to the crowd on the boundary. There, he was roundly abused and mocked for his awkward fielding, particularly when chasing the ball. Douglas, p. 82. On one occasion, he spat towards the crowd while fielding on the boundary as he changed position for the final time. 

During the journey to Australia, some players reported that Jardine told them to hate the Australians in order to defeat them, while instructing them to refer to Bradman as "the little bastard." Frith, pp. 61, 66. At this stage, he seemed to have settled on leg theory, if not full bodyline, as his main tactic. Douglas, pp. 12324. 

Once the team arrived in Australia, Jardine quickly alienated the press by refusing to give team details before a match and being uncooperative during interviews. The press printed some negative stories as a result and the crowds barracked as they had done on his previous tour, which made him angry. Frith, pp. 69, 9091. Douglas, p. 126. 

==In Australia==
alt=A cricket team arranged in three rows. Seventeen men are dressed as players, the other three men are in suits.

Although English bowlers did aim at the batsmen's body in the opening tour matches, they did not follow through by packing the leg-side field until Bill Woodfull led an Australian XI against the tourists in Melbourne on 1822 November, in what was effectively a Test rehearsal. Jardine was rested from that match and his deputy, Bob Wyatt, deployed the full bodyline tactics for the first time on the tour. Harte, p. 344. Pollard, p. 249. The match was drawn and Woodfull struggled, making 18 and a duck. Utilising his hopping technique and attempting to play unorthodox shots resembling overhead tennis smashes, Bradman failed to make an impact, and England were buoyed ahead of the Tests. Seeing the bruising balls hit the Australian batsmen on several occasions in this game and the next angered the spectators. Frith, pp. 98, 106. 

The English players and management were consistent in referring to their tactic as fast leg theory considering it to be a variant of the established and unobjectionable leg theory tactic. The inflammatory term "bodyline" was coined and perpetuated by the Australian press (see below). English writers used the term fast leg theory. The terminology reflected differences in understanding, as neither the English public nor the Board of the Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC)the governing body of English cricketcould understand why the Australians were complaining about what they perceived as a commonly used tactic. Some concluded that the Australian cricket authorities and public were sore losers. Frith, pp. 142, 222, 231238. Pollard, p. 258. Of the four fast bowlers in the tour party, Gubby Allen was a voice of dissent in the English camp, refusing to bowl short on the leg side, and writing several letters home to England critical of Jardine, although he did not express this in public in Australia. Frith, p. 116. A number of other players, while maintaining a united front in public, also deplored bodyline in private. The amateurs Bob Wyatt (the vice-captain), Freddie Brown and the Nawab of Pataudi opposed it, as did Walter Hammond and Les Ames among the professionals. E. W. Swanton. Sort of a Cricket Person, William Collins & Sons, 1972, p. 19. 

During the season, Woodfull's physical courage, stoic and dignified leadership won him many admirers. He flatly refused to employ retaliatory tactics and did not publicly complain even though he and his men were repeatedly hit. Cashman, pp. 322323. 

Australia lost heavily by ten wickets in the first Test at Sydney, when the bowling spearhead of bodyline, Harold Larwood, took ten wickets. Bradman missed the first Test due to illness, although Jardine refused to believe this and thought the real reason was that the batsman had suffered a nervous breakdown due to his tactical scheme. Haigh and Frith, p. 71. The only Australian batsman to make an impact was Stan McCabe, who resolutely stood his ground and impulsively hooked and pulled everything aimed at his upper body, Colman, p. 172. undeterred by the prospect of taking a potentially lethal blow to the head. He scored 187 not out in four hours, an innings described by leading historian David Frith as "among the most stirring innings Test cricket has ever produced". 

Before the second Test in Melbourne, Woodfull had to wait until minutes before the game before he was confirmed as captain by the selectors. This caused the toss to be delayed and fomented speculation that the Australian Board of Control was considering the possibility of removing Woodfull because of his absolute refusal to allow his bowlers to use retaliatory tactics. Haigh and Frith, p. 72. Harte, p. 346. His deputy Victor Richardson had advocated retaliation along with several other players. Colman, p. 181. Richardson recalled Woodfull's private response:

The media advocated the selection of Eddie Gilbert, an indigenous bowler of extreme pace, in order to return the bodyline barrage. In one tour match, Gilbert had bloodied Jardine and left a bruise the size of a saucer. Colman, pp. 172, 179. Another suggested means of retaliation was Laurie Nash, Whitington and Hele, p. 132. whose notoriously abrasive personality and aggression saw him regarded as a thug. Cashman, p. 221. However, Woodfull was totally unmoved by such suggestions. Colman, pp. 181182. 

 alt=Photograph shows telegrams describing the events of the first day of the second test. On the opening day, Bradman wildly hooked at Bill Bowes' first ball (a non-bodyline ball) and was dismissed for a golden duck, leaving the entire stadium in shock. Jardine, who was known for being extremely dour even by the standards of the day, Piesse, p. 132. openly exulted and danced wildly upon Bradman's demise. Australia's eventual victory was met by widespread public jubilation, as many believed that Australia had found a means of overcoming the tactics. Bradman scored a match-winning century in the second innings, Piesse, p. 133. but it turned out to be his only triple figure score for the series, Haigh and Frith, p. 76. while Larwood was hampered by a bloodied foot and a slow pitch. 

The controversy reached its peak during the second day of the Third Test. On 14 January, an all-time record Adelaide Oval crowd of 50,962 Haigh and Frith, p. 73. watched Australia finish off England's first innings. Shortly after the start of Australia's innings, Larwood, bowling to a conventional field setting, struck Woodfull an agonising blow under his heart with a short, lifting delivery. Frith, p. 179. Piesse, p. 126. Pollard, p. 255. Woodfull was struck when he was bent over his bat and wicket, and not when upright as often imagined. As Woodfull bent down over his bat in pain for several minutes, an image that became one of the defining symbols of the series, the huge crowd began jeering, hooting and verbally abusing the English team. Jardine reacted by saying "Well bowled, Harold." Le Quesne, p. 28. Tension and feelings ran so high that a riot was narrowly averted as police stationed themselves between the players and enraged spectators. Pollard, p. 255. Perry, p. 139. 

Jardine then ordered his team to move to bodyline positions immediately after Woodfull's injury. Frith, pp. 179181. Jardine wrote that Larwood had asked for the field, while Larwood said that it was Jardine's decision. Douglas, p.139. The capacity Saturday afternoon crowd viewed this as hitting a man when he was down. Piesse, p. 127. Journalistcricketer Dick Whitington wrote that Jardine's actions were seen as "an unforgivable crime in Australian eyes and certainly no part of cricket". Mass hooting and jeering occurred after almost every ball. Whitington noted that "George Hele believes that had what followed occurred in Melbourne the crowd would have leapt the fence and belaboured the English captain, Larwood, and possibly the entire side". Some English players later expressed fears that a large-scale riot could break out and that the police would not be able to stop the irate home crowd, who were worried that Woodfull or Bradman could be killed, from attacking them. Piesse, pp. 127128. 

During the over, another rising Larwood delivery knocked the bat out of Woodfull's hands. He battled it out for 89 minutes, collecting more bruises before Allen bowled him for 22. Frith, p. 182. Later in the day, the English team manager Pelham Warner visited the Australian dressing room to express his sympathies to Woodfull. Woodfull had remained calm in public, refusing to complain about Jardine's tactics. Woodfull's abrupt response was meant to be private, but it was leaked to the press - the Adelaide leak: Pollard, p. 257. Frith, p. 85. 

Woodfull reportedly added "This game is too good to be spoilt. It's time some people got out of it", Robinson, p. 163. hinting that he might withdraw his team from competition in protest. Perry, pp. 144146. Australia's Leo O'Brien later reported that Warner was close to tears following Woodfull's rebuke. 

The leaking to the press of Woodfull's comments to Warner angered the Australian captain. He had intended the comments to be private, and ill feeling grew in the Australian camp as speculation about who leaked the incident to the press grew and many of the team privately pointed the finger at Bradman. (Bradman strenuously denied to his dying day that he had been responsible; others, including Plum Warner, pointed the finger at Bradman's team-mate and journalist, Jack Fingleton. However, in his autobiography, Fingleton claimed that Sydney Sun reporter Claude Corbett had received the information from Bradman. )

The next day, Larwood fractured wicket-keeper Bert Oldfield's skull. This occurred when Oldfield mis-hit a hook, which flew from the top edge off a traditional non-bodyline ball; Oldfield later admitted it was his fault. Perry, p. 140. Pollard, p. 256. Frith, pp. 196197. As a result of the injuries, the costs of insurance cover for players doubled. Frith and Haigh, p. 77. At the end of the fourth day's play the Australian Board of Control for Cricket sent the following cable to the MCC in London:

Bert Oldfield staggers away with his skull fractured.
Jardine however insisted his tactic was not designed to cause injury and that he was leading his team in a sportsmanlike and gentlemanly manner, arguing that it was up to the Australian batsmen to play their way out of trouble. He also secretly sent a telegram of sympathy to Oldfield's wife and arranged for presents to be given to his young daughters. Frith, p. 201. 

The situation escalated into a diplomatic incident between the countries as the MCCsupported by the British public and still of the opinion that their fast leg theory tactic was harmlesstook serious offence at being branded "unsportsmanlike" and demanded a retraction. Many people saw bodyline as fracturing an international relationship that needed to remain strong. Frith, pp. 241259. Jardine, and by extension the entire English team, threatened to withdraw from the fourth and fifth Tests unless the Australian Board withdrew the accusation of unsporting behaviour. Pollard, p. 259. Frith, p. 222. Public reaction in both England and Australia was outrage directed at the other nation. The Governor of South Australia, Alexander Hore-Ruthven, who was in England at the time, expressed his concern to British Secretary of State for Dominion Affairs James Henry Thomas that this would cause a significant impact on trade between the nations. Frith, pp. 242248. The standoff was settled only when Australian Prime Minister Joseph Lyons met with members of the Australian Board and outlined to them the severe economic hardships that could be caused in Australia if the British public boycotted Australian trade. Given this understanding, the Board withdrew the allegation of unsportsmanlike behaviour two days before the fourth Test, thus saving the tour. Pollard, pp. 260261. Frith, pp. 255259. 

The English team continued to bowl bodyline in the remaining two Tests, but slower pitches meant the Australians, although frequently bruised, sustained no further serious injuries. England won the last three Tests to take the series 41.

Graph showing the batting averages of the frontline Australian batsmen in Tests in which bodyline was used, compared to the other Tests in their career. Cashman 

In the Test matches, Bradman countered bodyline by moving toward the leg side, away from the line of the ball, and cutting it into the vacant off side field. Perry, p. 138. While this was dubious in terms of batting technique, it seemed the best way to cope with the barrage, and Bradman averaged 56.57 in the series (an excellent average for most, but well short of his career average of 99.94), while being struck above the waist by the ball only once. Frith, p. 323. His team-mates fared worse, with only Stan McCabe scoring a century. 

==In England==
Bodyline continued to be bowled occasionally in the 1933 English seasonmost notably by Nottinghamshire, who had Carr, Voce and Larwood in their team. Perry, p. 141. This gave the English crowds their first chance to see what all the fuss was about. Ken Farnes, the Cambridge University fast bowler, also bowled it in the University Match, hitting a few Oxford batsmen.

Jardine himself had to face bodyline bowling in a Test match. The West Indian cricket team toured England in 1933, and, in the second Test at Old Trafford, Jackie Grant, their captain, decided to try bodyline. He had a couple of fast bowlers, Manny Martindale and Learie Constantine. Facing bodyline tactics for the first time, England first suffered, falling to 134 for 4, with Wally Hammond being hit on the chin, though he recovered to continue his innings. Then Jardine himself faced Martindale and Constantine. Jardine never flinched. With Les Ames finding himself in difficulties, Jardine said, "You get yourself down this end, Les. I'll take care of this bloody nonsense." Douglas, p.166. He played right back to the bouncers, standing on tiptoe, and played them with a dead bat, sometimes playing the ball one handed for more control. While the Old Trafford pitch was not as suited to bodyline as the hard Australian wickets, Martindale did take 5 for 73, but Constantine only took 1 for 55. Jardine himself made 127, his only Test century. In the West Indian second innings, Clark bowled bodyline back to the West Indians, taking 2 for 64. The match in the end was drawn but played a large part in turning English opinion against bodyline. The Times used the word bodyline, without using inverted commas or using the qualification so-called, for the first time. Douglas, p.168. Wisden also said that "most of those watching it for the first time must have come to the conclusion that, while strictly within the law, it was not nice." See Cricinfo for the scorecard of the second Test between England and West Indies in 1933. 

In 1934, Bill Woodfull led Australia back to England on a tour that had been under a cloud after the tempestuous cricket diplomacy of the previous bodyline series. Jardine had retired from International cricket in early 1934 after captaining a fraught tour of India and under England's new Captain, Bob Wyatt, agreements were put in place so that bodyline would not be used. Harte, p. 354. Robinson, p. 164. However, there were occasions when the Australians felt that their hosts had crossed the mark with tactics resembling bodyline. Haigh and Frith, p. 84. 

In a match between the Australians and Nottinghamshire, Voce, one of the bodyline practitioners of 193233, employed the strategy with the wicket-keeper standing to the leg side and took 8/66. In the second innings, Voce repeated the tactic late in the day, in fading light against Woodfull and Bill Brown. Of his 12 balls, 11 were no lower than head height. Woodfull told the Nottinghamshire administrators that, if Voce's leg-side bowling was repeated, his men would leave the field and return to London. He further said that Australia would not return to the country in the future. The following day, Voce was absent, ostensibly due to a leg injury. Haigh and Frith, p. 85. Perry, pp. 147148. Harte, p. 356. Already angered by the absence of Larwood, the Nottinghamshire faithful heckled the Australians all day. Australia had previously and privately complained that some pacemen had strayed past the agreement in the Tests. 

==Origin of the term==
Although Jack Worrall claimed that he had invented the term "bodyline", it is more likely that it was coined by Sydney journalist Hugh Buggy who worked for The Sun in 1932, and who happened to be a colleague of Jack Fingleton. Buggy sent a telegram to his newspaper from the Test after a day's play. As a substitute for "in the line of the body" he used the term "bodyline" to keep the cost down, and the new term quickly became established. Bodyline HistoryWhy was it named as such and by who? 334notout.com. Retrieved 30 November 2006. 

==Changes to the laws of cricket==
As a direct consequence of the 193233 tour, the MCC introduced a new rule to the laws of cricket for the 1935 English cricket season. Frith, p. 408. Originally, the MCC hoped that captains would ensure that the game was played in the correct spirit, and passed a resolution that bodyline bowling would breach this spirit. Frith, p. 374. When this proved to be insufficient, the MCC passed a law that "direct attack" bowling was unfair and became the responsibility of the umpires to identify and stop. In 1957, the laws were altered to prevent more than two fielders standing behind square on the leg side; the intention was to prevent negative bowling tactics whereby off spinners and slow inswing bowlers aimed at the leg stump of batsmen with fielders concentrated on the leg side. However, an indirect effect was to make bodyline fields impossible to implement. 

Later law changes, under the heading of "Intimidatory Short Pitched Bowling", also restricted the number of "bouncers" which may be bowled in an over. Nevertheless, the tactic of intimidating the batsman is still used to an extent that would have been shocking in 1933, although it is less dangerous now because today's players wear helmets and generally far more protective gear. Frith, pp. 1017. The West Indies teams of the 1980s, which regularly fielded a bowling attack comprising some of the best fast bowlers in cricket history, were perhaps the most feared exponents. 

==Legacy==
Following the 193233 series, several authors, including many of the players involved, released books expressing various points of view about bodyline. Many argued that it was a scourge on cricket and must be stamped out, while some did not see what all the fuss was about. Frith, pp. 378397. The series has been described as the most controversial period in Australian cricket history, Colman, p. 171. and voted the most important Australian moment by a panel of Australian cricket identities. Haigh and Frith, foreword. The MCC asked Harold Larwood to sign an apology to them for his bowling in Australia, making his selection for England again conditional upon it. Larwood was furious at the notion, pointing out that he had been following orders from his upper-class captain, and that was where any blame should lie. Frith, pp. 399401. Larwood refused, never played for England again, and became vilified in his own country. Frith, pp. 437441. Douglas Jardine always defended his tactics and in the book he wrote about the tour, In Quest of the Ashes, described allegations that the England bowlers directed their attack with the intention of causing physical harm as stupid and patently untruthful. Douglas, p. 157. The immediate effect of the law change which banned bodyline in 1935 was to make commentators and spectators sensitive to the use of short-pitched bowling; bouncers became exceedingly rare and bowlers who delivered them were practically ostracised. Frith, pp. 41017. This attitude ended after the Second World War, and among the first teams to make extensive use of short-pitched bowling was the Australian team captained by Bradman between 1946 and 1948. Other teams soon followed. Frith, pp. 41820. 

Outside the sport, there were significant consequences for Anglo-Australian relations, which remained strained until the outbreak of World War II made cooperation paramount. Business between the two countries was adversely affected as citizens of each country avoided goods manufactured in the other. Australian commerce also suffered in British colonies in Asia: the North China Daily News published a pro-bodyline editorial, denouncing Australians as sore losers. An Australian journalist reported that several business deals in Hong Kong and Shanghai were lost by Australians because of local reactions. Frith, p. 382. English immigrants in Australia found themselves shunned and persecuted by locals, and Australian visitors to England were treated similarly. Frith, p. 383. In 193435 a statue of Prince Albert in Sydney was vandalised, with an ear being knocked off and the word "BODYLINE" painted on it. Frith, p. 384. Both before and after World War II, numerous satirical cartoons and comedy skits were written, mostly in Australia, based on events of the bodyline tour. Generally, they poked fun at the English. Frith, pp. 381, 385. 

In 1984, Australia's Network Ten produced a television mini-series titled Bodyline, dramatising the events of the 193233 English tour of Australia. It starred Gary Sweet as Don Bradman, Hugo Weaving as Douglas Jardine, Jim Holt as Harold Larwood, Rhys McConnochie as Pelham Warner, and Frank Thring as Jardine's mentor Lord Harris. The series took some liberties with historical accuracy for the sake of drama, including a depiction of angry Australian fans burning a British flag at the Sydney Cricket Ground, an event which was never documented. Frith, p. 386. Larwood, having emigrated to Australia in 1950, received several threatening and obscene phone calls after the series aired. Frith, p. 387. The series was widely and strongly attacked by the surviving players for its inaccuracy and sensationalism. 

To this day, the bodyline tour remains one of the most significant events in the history of cricket, and strong in the consciousness of many cricket followers. In a poll of cricket journalists, commentators, and players in 2004, the bodyline tour was ranked the most important event in cricket history. 

==Notes==

==References==
*
*
* 
*
* 
*
*
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
*
* 
* Bodyline IMDB entry.. Retrieved 30 November 2006.
*

==External links==
* Footage of the 1933 Ashes test where bodyline bowling is used on Don Bradman
* The Bodyline Series Original reports from The Times
* Bodyline Series  State Library of NSW



[[Laws of infernal dynamics]]

The laws of infernal dynamics are an adage about the cursedness of the universe. Attributed to Science fiction author David Gerrold, the laws are as follows:

#An object in motion will be moving in the wrong direction.
#An object at rest will be in the wrong place.
#The energy required to move an object in the correct direction, or put it in the right place, will be more than you wish to expend but not so much as to make the task impossible.

The laws are a parody on the first and second of Newton's laws of motion in the spirit of Murphy's law. Newton's first law of motion has here been split into two parts, the first two laws. Newton's third law of motion is left unparodied, though a separate adage states that "for every action, there is an equal and opposite criticism."

==References==

*



[[Louise Erdrich]]

Louise Erdrich (born Karen Louise Erdrich, June 7, 1954, Little Falls, Minnesota, United States) is an American writer of novels, poetry, and children's books featuring Native American characters and settings. She is an enrolled member of the Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa Indians, a band of the Anishinaabe (also known as Ojibwa and Chippewa). 

Erdrich is widely acclaimed as one of the most significant writers of the second wave of the Native American Renaissance. In 2009, her novel The Plague of Doves was a finalist for the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction. In November 2012, she received the National Book Award for Fiction for her novel The Round House. She was married to author Michael Dorris and the two collaborated on a number of works.

She is also the owner of Birchbark Books, a small independent bookstore in Minneapolis that focuses on Native American literature and the Native community in the Twin Cities. 

==Early and personal life==
Erdrich was born in Little Falls, Minnesota, the first of seven children to Ralph Erdrich, a German-American, and his wife Rita (ne Gourneau), half French-American and half Ojibwe. Both parents taught at a boarding school in Wahpeton, North Dakota, set up by the Bureau of Indian Affairs, and her maternal grandfather, Patrick Gourneau, served as tribal chairman for the Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa Indians for many years. "Faces of America: Louise Erdrich", PBS, Faces of America series, with Professor Henry Louis Gates, Jr., 2010. As a child, Erdrich's father paid her a nickel for every story she wrote. Her sister Heidi is a poet who also lives in Minnesota and publishes under the name Heidi E. Erdrich. Another sister, Lise Erdrich, has written children's books and collections of fiction and essays.

Erdrich attended Dartmouth College from 1972 to 1976 as part of its first co-ed class, and earned the B.A. in English. There she met her future husband, anthropologist and writer Michael Dorris, then-director of the new Native American Studies program. Erdrich earned the Master of Arts in the Writing Seminars at Johns Hopkins University in 1979. 
Erdrich married Michael Dorris in 1981 and they raised three adopted children and three biological children until their separation in 1995 and Dorris' suicide in 1997. Erdrich lives in Minnesota.

She returned to Dartmouth in 2009 to receive an honorary Doctorate of Letters and to deliver the commencement address. 

Erdrich and her two sisters have hosted writers' workshops on the Turtle Mountain Indian Reservation in North Dakota. 

==Work==
Her heritage from both parents is not only influential to all aspects of her life, but prominent to her work. 

In 1979 she wrote "The World's Greatest Fisherman", a short story about June Kashpaw, a divorced Ojibwe woman whose death by hypothermia brought her relatives home to a fictional North Dakota reservation for her funeral. It won the Nelson Algren Short Fiction prize and eventually became the first chapter of her debut novel, Love Medicine, published by Holt, Rinehart, and Winston in 1984. 

Love Medicine won the 1984 National Book Critics Circle Award. It has also been featured on the National Advanced Placement Test for Literature. Erdrich followed Love Medicine with The Beet Queen (1986), which continued her technique of using multiple narrators, yet surprised many critics by expanding the fictional reservation universe of Love Medicine to include the nearby town of Argus, North Dakota. Native characters are very much kept in the background in The Beet Queen, while Erdrich focuses on the German-American community. The action of the novel takes place mostly before World War II. The Beet Queen was subject to a bitter attack from Native novelist Leslie Marmon Silko, who accused Erdrich of being more concerned with postmodern technique than with the political struggles of Native peoples. The controversy and fallout from this review, and some of its underlying themes, are reviewed in Susan Castillo's "Postmodernism, Native American Literature, and the Real: The Silko-Erdrich Controversy" in Notes from the Periphery: Marginality in North American Literature and Culture New York: Peter Lang, 1995. 179-190. However, Erdrich and Silko appear to have overcome that disagreement and are now on more friendly terms, possibly because Erdrich has more firmly cemented herself in the Native Community with her bookstore and printing press.

Tracks (1988) goes back to the early 20th century at the formation of the reservation and introduces the trickster figure of Nanapush, who owes a clear debt to Nanabozho. There are many studies of the trickster figure in Erdrich's novels: A recent study that makes the connection between Nanabozho and Nanpush is "The Trickster and World Maintenance: An Anishinaabe Reading of Louise Erdrich's Tracks" by Lawrence W. Gross Erdrich's novel most rooted in Anishinaabe culture (at least until Four Souls), Tracks shows early clashes between traditional ways and the Roman Catholic Church. The Bingo Palace (1994) updates, yet does not resolve, various conflicts from Love Medicine. Set in the 1980s, it describes the good and bad effects of a casino and a factory on the reservation community. Finally, Tales of Burning Love (1997) finishes the story of Sister Leopolda, a recurring character from all the previous books, and introduces a new set of white people into the reservation universe.
 
The Antelope Wife (1998), Erdrich's first novel after her divorce from Dorris, was the first of her novels to be set outside the continuity of the previous books. Lorena Laura Stookey, Louise Erdrich: A Critical Companion, Greenwood Publishing Group, 1999 ISBN 0-313-30612-5, ISBN 978-0-313-30612-9 She subsequently returned to the reservation and nearby towns, and has published five novels since 1998 dealing with events in that fictional area. Among these are The Last Report on the Miracles at Little No Horse (2001) and The Master Butchers Singing Club (2003), a macabre mystery that again draws on Erdrich's Native American and German-American heritage. Both novels have geographic and character connections with The Beet Queen. In 2009, Erdrich's novel The Plague of Doves was named a finalist for the Pulitzer Prize in Fiction. The narrative focuses on the historical lynching of four Native people wrongly accused of murdering a Caucasian family, and the effect of this injustice on the current generations. 
 
Erdrich's complexly interwoven series of novels have drawn comparisons with William Faulkner's Yoknapatawpha novels. Like Faulkner's, Erdrich's successive novels created multiple narratives in the same fictional area and combined the tapestry of local history with current themes and modern consciousness. See, e.g., Powell's Books (book review), Christian Science Monitor, August 2, 2004 

==Birchbark Books==
The bookstore hosts literary readings and other events, including the release of each of Erdrich's new works as well as the works and careers of other writers, particularly local Native writers. Erdrich and her staff consider Birchbark Books to be a teaching bookstore. In addition to books, the store sells Native art and traditional medicines, and Native American jewelry. A small nonprofit publisher founded by Erdrich and her sister, Wiigwaas Press, is affiliated with the store. 

==Works==

===Novels===
* Love Medicine (1984)
* The Beet Queen (1986)
* Tracks (1988)
* The Crown of Columbus with Michael Dorris (1991)
* The Bingo Palace (1994)
* Tales of Burning Love (1997)
* The Antelope Wife (1998)
* The Last Report on the Miracles at Little No Horse (2001)
* The Master Butchers Singing Club (2003)
* Four Souls (2004)
* The Painted Drum (2005)
* The Plague of Doves (Harper, 2008)
* Shadow Tag (Harper, 2010)
* The Round House (2012)

===Story collections===
* The Red Convertible: Collected and New Stories 1978-2008 (2009)

===Children's literature===
* Grandmother's Pigeon (1996)
* The Birchbark House (1999)
* The Range Eternal (2002)
* The Game of Silence (2005)
* The Porcupine Year (2008)
* Chickadee (2012)

===Poetry===
* Jacklight (1984)
* Baptism of Desire (1989)
* Original Fire: Selected and New Poems (2003)

===Non-fiction===
* Route Two with Michael Dorris (1990)
* The Blue Jay's Dance: A Birthyear (1995)
* Books and Islands in Ojibwe Country (2003)

===As editor or contributor===
* The Broken Cord by Michael Dorris (Foreword) (1989)
* The Best American Short Stories 1993 (Editor, with Katrina Kenison) (1993)

===Interviews===
* Conversations with Louise Erdrich and Michael Dorris, ed. Allan Chavkin and Nancy Feyl Chavkin (Mississippi UP, 1994)

==Awards==
*O. Henry Award, for the short story "Fleur" (published in Esquire, August 1986) (1987) 
*Pushcart Prize in Poetry (1983)
*Western Literacy Association Award
*Guggenheim Fellowship in Creative Arts (1985) 
*National Book Critics Circle Award for Fiction, for Love Medicine (1984) 
*World Fantasy Award, for The Antelope Wife (1999) 
*Lifetime Achievement Award from the Native Writers' Circle of the Americas (2000). 
*Associate Poet Laureate of North Dakota, 2005
*Scott O'Dell Award for Historical Fiction, for the children's book "The Game of Silence" (2006) 
*April 2007 honorary doctorate from the University of North Dakota; refused by Erdrich because of her opposition to the university's North Dakota Fighting Sioux mascot 
*June 2009, honorary doctorate (Doctor of Letters) from Dartmouth College 
* Anisfield-Wolf Book Award, for Plague of Doves (2009) 
*National Book Award for Fiction for The Round House (2012) 
*Rough Rider Award (April 19, 2013)

==See also==
 
*List of writers from peoples indigenous to the Americas

==Further reading==

===Monographs===
* Frances Washburn, Tracks on a Page: Louise Erdrich, Her Life and Works (Santa Barbara: Praeger, 2013).
* David Stirrup, Louise Erdrich (Manchester: Manchester UP, 2012)
* Peter Beidler and Gay Barton, A Reader's Guide to the Novels of Louise Erdrich (Columbia: Missouri UP, 2006)
* Connie A. Jacobs, The Novels of Louise Erdrich: Stories of Her People (Peter Lang, 2001)
* Lorena L. Stookey, Louise Erdrich: A Critical Companion (Westport: Greenwood, 1999)

===Essay collections===
* Louise Erdrich: Critical Insights, ed. Jane Hafen (Ipswich, MA: Salem Press, 2012)
* The Chippewa Landscape of Louise Erdrich, ed. Allan Chavkin (Birmingham: Alabama UP, 1999).

===Teaching Guides===
* Approaches To Teaching The Works Of Louise Erdrich, ed. Greg Sarris, Connie A. Jacobs and James Richard Giles (MLA, 2004)

==References==

==External links==
* Louise Erdrich's Birchbark Blog
* 
* 
* Louise Erdrich at Library of Congress Authorities  with 35 catalog records



[[Latin literature]]

Latin literature includes the essays, histories, poems, plays, and other writings written in the Latin language. Beginning around the 3rd century BC, it took two centuries to become a dominant literature of Ancient Rome, with many educated Romans still reading and writing in Ancient Greek, as late as Marcus Aurelius (121180 AD). Latin literature was in many ways a continuation of Greek literature, using many of the same forms.

Latin was the language of the ancient Romans, but it was also the lingua franca of Europe throughout the middle ages, so Latin literature includes not only Roman authors like Cicero, Vergil, Ovid and Horace, but also includes European writers after the fall of the Empire from religious writers like St. Augustine (354430 AD) and Aquinas (1225-1274), to secular writers like Francis Bacon (1561-1626) and Spinoza (16321677).

== History ==
=== Early Latin literature ===

Formal Latin literature began in 230 BC, when a Roman audience saw a Latin version of a Greek play. Duckworth, George Eckel. The nature of Roman comedy: a study in popular entertainment. University of Oklahoma Press, 1994. p. 3. Web. 15 October 2011. The adaptor was Livius Andronicus, a Greek who had been brought to Rome as a prisoner of war in 272 BC. Andronicus also translated Homer's Greek epic the Odyssey into an old type of Latin verse called Saturnian. The first Latin poet to write on a Roman theme was Gnaeus Naevius during the 200s BC. He composed an epic poem about the first Punic War, in which he had fought. Naevius's dramas were mainly reworkings of Greek originals, but he also created tragedies based on Roman myths and history.

Other epic poets followed Naevius. Quintus Ennius wrote a historical epic, the Annals (soon after 200 BC), describing Roman history from the founding of Rome to his own time. He adopted Greek dactylic hexameter, which became the standard verse form for Roman epics. He also became famous for his tragic dramas. In this field, his most distinguished successors were Marcus Pacuvius and Lucius Accius. These three writers rarely used episodes from Roman history. Instead, they wrote Latin versions of tragic themes that the Greeks had already handled. But even when they copied the Greeks, they did not translate slavishly. Only fragments of their plays have survived.

Cato the Elder

We know less about early Latin comedy, because we have 20 complete plays by Plautus and 6 by Terence. Shipley, Joseph Twadell. Dictionary of world literature: criticism, forms, technique. Taylor & Francis, 1964. p. 109. Web. 15 October 2011. These men modeled their comedies on Greek plays known as New Comedy. But they treated the plots and wording of the originals freely. Plautus scattered songs through his plays and increased the humor with puns and wisecracks, plus comic actions by the actors. Terence's plays were more polite in tone, dealing with domestic situations. His works provided the chief inspiration for French and English comedies of the 1600s, and even for modern American comedy.

The prose of the period is best known through On Agriculture (160 BC) by Cato the Elder. Cato also wrote the first Latin history of Rome and of other Italian cities. Mehl, Andreas. Roman Historiography. Wiley-Blackwell, 2010. p 52. Web. 18 October 2011. He was the first Roman statesman to put his political speeches in writing as a means of influencing public opinion.

Early Latin literature ended with Gaius Lucilius, who created a new kind of poetry in his 30 books of Satires (100s BC). He wrote in an easy, conversational tone about books, food, friends, and current events.

=== The Golden Age ===

Latin literature was at its height from 81 BC to AD 17. This period began with the first known speech of Cicero and ended with the death of Ovid.

==== The age of Cicero ====
Cicero has traditionally been considered the master of Latin prose. Eliot, Charles W. Letters of Marcus Tullius Cicero and Letters of Gaius Plinius Caecilius Secundus: Part 9 Harvard Classics. Kessinger Publishing, 2004. p. 3. Web. 15 October 2011. Nettleship, Henry; Haverfield, F. Lectures and Essays: Second Series. Cambridge University Press, 2010. p. 105. Web. 18 October 2011. The writing he produced from about 80 BC until his death in 43 BC exceeds that of any Latin author whose work survives in terms of quantity and variety of genre and subject matter, as well as possessing unsurpassed stylistic excellence. Cicero's many works can be divided into four groups: (1) letters, (2) rhetorical treatises, (3) philosophical works, and (4) orations. His letters provide detailed information about an important period in Roman history and offer a vivid picture of the public and private life among the Roman governing class. Cicero's works on oratory are our most valuable Latin sources for ancient theories on education and rhetoric. His philosophical works were the basis of moral philosophy during the Middle Ages. His speeches inspired many European political leaders and the founders of the United States.

Cicero

Julius Caesar and Sallust were outstanding historical writers of Cicero's time. Caesar wrote commentaries on the Gallic and civil wars in a straightforward style to justify his actions as a general. Sallust adopted an abrupt, pointed style in his historical works. He wrote brilliant descriptions of people and their motives.

The birth of lyric poetry in Latin occurred during the same period. The short love lyrics of Catullus have never been surpassed in emotional intensity. Catullus also wrote masterful poems that attacked his enemies. In his longer poems, he suggested beautiful images in rich, delicate language.

One of the most learned writers of the period was Marcus Terentius Varro. Called "the most learned of the Romans" by Quintillian, Institutio Oratoria by Quintillian he wrote about a remarkable variety of subjects, from religion to poetry. But only his writings on agriculture and the Latin language are extant in their complete form.

==== The Augustan Age ====

Virgil

The emperor Augustus took a personal interest in the literary works produced during his years of power from 27 BC to AD 14. This period is sometimes called the Augustan Age of Latin Literature. Virgil published his pastoral Eclogues; the Georgics, perhaps the most beautiful poem ever written about country life; and the Aeneid, an epic poem describing the events that led to the creation of Rome. Virgil told how the Trojan hero Aeneas became the ancestor of the Roman people. Virgil also provided divine justification for Roman rule over the world. Although Virgil died before he could put the finishing touches on his poem, it was soon recognized as the greatest work of Latin literature. Morton Braund, Susanna. Latin literature. Routledge, 2002. p. 1. Web. 15 October 2011. Colish, Marca L. The Stoic Tradition from Antiquity to the Early Middle Ages: Stoicism in classical Latin literature. BRILL, 1990. p. 226. Web. 18 October 2011. 

Virgil's friend Horace wrote Epodes, Odes, Satires, and Epistles. The perfection of the Odes in content, form, and style has charmed readers for hundreds of years. The Satires and Epistles discuss ethical and literary problems in an urbane, witty manner. Horace's Art of Poetry, probably published as a separate work, greatly influenced later poetic theories. It stated the basic rules of classical writing as the Romans understood and used them. After Virgil died, Horace was Rome's leading poet. Britannica Educational Publishing. Poetry and Drama: Literary Terms and Concepts. The Rosen Publishing Group, 2011. p. 39. Web. 18 October 2011. 

The Latin elegy reached its highest development in the works of Tibullus, Propertius, and Ovid. Most of this poetry is concerned with love. Ovid also wrote the Fasti, which describes Roman festivals and their legendary origins. Ovid's greatest work, the Metamorphoses weaves various myths into a fast-paced, fascinating story. Ovid was a witty writer who excelled in creating lively and passionate characters. The Metamorphoses was the best-known source of Roman mythology throughout the Middle Ages and the Renaissance. It inspired many poets, painters, and composers.

In prose, Livy produced a history of the Roman people in 142 books. Only 35 survive, but they are a major source of information on Rome. Cary, Max; Haarhoff, Theodore Johannes. Life and thought in the Greek and Roman world. Taylor & Francis, 1985. p. 268. Web. 15 October 2011. 

=== The Imperial Period ===
From the death of Augustus in AD 14 until about 200, Roman authors emphasized style and tried new and startling ways of expression. During the reign of Nero from 54 to 68, the Stoic philosopher Seneca wrote a number of dialogues and letters on such moral themes as mercy and generosity. In his Natural Questions, Seneca analyzed earthquakes, floods, and storms. Seneca's tragedies greatly influenced the growth of tragic drama in Europe. His nephew Lucan wrote the Pharsalia (about 60), an epic poem describing the civil war between Caesar and Pompey. The Satyricon (about 60) by Petronius was the first Latin novel. Grube, George Maximilian Antony. The Greek and Roman critics. Hackett Publishing, 1965. p. 261. Web. 15 October 2011. Only fragments of the complete work survive. It describes the adventures of various low-class characters in absurd, extravagant, and dangerous situations, often in the world of petty crime.

Epic poems included the Argonautica of Gaius Valerius Flaccus, the Thebaid of Statius, and the Punica of Silius Italicus. At the hands of Martial, the epigram achieved the stinging quality still associated with it. Juvenal brilliantly satirized vice.

The historian Tacitus painted an unforgettably dark picture of the early empire in his Histories and Annals, both written in the early 100s. His contemporary Suetonius wrote biographies of the 12 Roman rulers from Julius Caesar through Domitian. The letters of Pliny the Younger described Roman life of the period. Quintilian composed the most complete work on ancient education that we possess. Important works from the 100s include the Attic Nights of Aulus Gellius, a collection of anecdotes and reports of literary discussions among his friends; and the letters of the orator Marcus Cornelius Fronto to Marcus Aurelius. The most famous work of the period was Metamorphoses, also called The Golden Ass, by Apuleius. This novel concerns a young man who is accidentally changed into a donkey. The story is filled with colorful tales of love and witchcraft.

=== Latin in the Middle Ages and Renaissance ===
Pagan Latin literature showed a final burst of vitality in the late 200s and 400s. Ammianus Marcellinus in history, Quintus Aurelius Symmachus in oratory, and Ausonius and Rutilius Claudius Namatianus in poetry all wrote with great talent. The Mosella by Ausonius demonstrated a modernism of feeling that indicates the end of classical literature as such.

At the same time, other men laid the foundations of Christian Latin literature during the 300s and 400s. They included the church fathers Augustine of Hippo, Jerome, and Ambrose, and the first great Christian poet, Prudentius.

Latin continued to be used as a lingua franca throughout Europe, with some of the latest great works in Latin being composed by Francis Bacon (1561-1626) and Spinoza (16321677).

== Characteristics of Latin literature ==
Much Latin writing reflects the Romans' interest in rhetoric, the art of speaking and persuading. Public speaking had great importance for educated Romans because most of them wanted successful political careers. When Rome was a republic, effective speaking often determined who would be elected or what bills would pass. After Rome became an empire, the ability to impress and persuade people by the spoken word lost much of its importance. But training in rhetoric continued to flourish and to affect styles of writing. A large part of rhetoric consists of the ability to present a familiar idea in a striking new manner that attracts attention. Latin authors became masters of this art of variety.

=== Language and form ===
Latin is a highly inflected language, with many grammatical forms for various words. As a result, it can be used with a pithiness and brevity unknown in English. It also lends itself to elaboration, because its tight syntax holds even the longest and most complex sentence together as a logical unit. Latin can be used with striking conciseness, as in the works of Sallust and Tacitus. Or it can have wide, sweeping phrases, as in the works of Livy and the speeches of Cicero.

Latin lacks the rich poetic vocabulary that marks Greek poetry. Some earlier Latin poets tried to make up for this deficiency by creating new compound words, as the Greeks had done. But Roman writers seldom invented words. Except in epic poetry, they tended to use a familiar vocabulary, giving it poetic value by imaginative combinations of words and by rich sound effects. Rome's leading poets had great technical skill in the choice and arrangement of language. They also had an intimate knowledge of the Greek poets, whose themes appear in almost all Roman literature.

Latin moves with impressive dignity in the writings of Ovid, Cicero, or Virgil. It reflects the seriousness and sense of responsibility that characterized the ruling class of Rome during the great years of the republic. But the Romans could also relax and allow what Horace called the "Italian vinegar" in their systems to pour forth in wit and satire.

== See also ==

* Medieval Latin
* Renaissance Latin
* New Latin
* Contemporary Latin
* Prosody (Latin)

==References and sources==
;References

;Sources
* Elaine Fantham, Ph.D., Giger Professor of Latin Emerita, Department of Classics, Princeton University.
* Fantham, Elaine. "Latin literature." World Book Advanced. World Book, 2011. Web. 18 October 2011.

== External links ==
* Corpus Scriptorum Latinorum.
* The Latin Library.
* Bibilotheca Augustana.
* Latinitas in tela totius terrae.
* Corpus Grammaticorum Latinorum: complete texts and full bibliography.

 
Latin



[[Leonard Bloomfield]]

::Not to be confused with the English naturalist Leonard Blomefield (18001893)

Leonard Bloomfield (April 1, 1887  April 18, 1949) was an American linguist who led the development of structural linguistics in the United States during the 1930s and the 1940s. His influential textbook Language, published in 1933, presented a comprehensive description of American structural linguistics. Bloomfield, Leonard, 1933 He made significant contributions to Indo-European historical linguistics, the description of Austronesian languages, and description of languages of the Algonquian family.

Bloomfield's approach to linguistics was characterized by its emphasis on the scientific basis of linguistics, adherence to behaviorism especially in his later work, and emphasis on formal procedures for the analysis of linguistic data. The influence of Bloomfieldian structural linguistics declined in the late 1950s and 1960s as the theory of Generative Grammar developed by Noam Chomsky came to predominate.

==Early life and education==
Bloomfield was born in Chicago, Illinois on April 1, 1887 to Jewish parents. His father Sigmund Bloomfield immigrated to the United States as a child in 1868; the original family name Blumenfeld was changed to Bloomfield after their arrival. Depres, Leon, 1987, p. 11, Fn. 1 In 1896 his family moved to Elkhart Lake, Wisconsin, where he attended elementary school, but returned to Chicago for secondary school. Hall, Robert, 1990, pp. 5-6 His uncle Maurice Bloomfield was a prominent linguist at Johns Hopkins University, Despres, Leon, 1987, p. 4 Bloch, Bernard, 1949, p. 87 and his aunt Fannie Bloomfield Zeisler was a well-known concert pianist. 

Bloomfield attended Harvard College from 1903 to 1906, graduating with the A.B. degree. He subsequently began graduate work at the University of WisconsinMadison, taking courses in German and Germanic philology, in addition to courses in other Indo-European languages. Hall, Robert, 1990, pp. 7-8 A meeting with Indo-Europeanist Eduard Prokosch, a faculty member at the University of Wisconsin, convinced Bloomfield to pursue a career in linguistics. In 1908 Bloomfield moved to the University of Chicago where he took courses in German and Indo-European philology with Frances A. Wood and Carl Darling Buck. His doctoral dissertation in Germanic historical linguistics was supervised by Wood, and he graduated in 1909. He undertook further studies at the University of Leipzig and the University of Gttingen in 1913 and 1914 with leading Indo-Europeanists August Leskien, Karl Brugmann, as well as Hermann Oldenberg, a specialist in Vedic Sanskrit. Bloomfield also studied at Gttingen with Sanskrit specialist Jacob Wackernagel, and considered both Wackernagel and the Sanskrit grammatical tradition of rigorous grammatical analysis associated with Pini as important influences on both his historical and descriptive work. Hall, Robert, 1990, p. 16 Rogers, David, 1987 Further training in Europe was a condition for promotion at the University of Illinois from Instructor to the rank of Assistant Professor. Hall, Robert, 1990, pp. 13-14 

==Career==
Bloomfield was Instructor in German at the University of Cincinnati, 19091910; Instructor in German at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 19101913; Assistant Professor of Comparative Philology and German, also University of Illinois, 19131921; Professor of German and Linguistics at the Ohio State University, 19211927; Professor of Germanic Philology at the University of Chicago, 19271940; Sterling Professor of Linguistics at Yale University, 1940-1949. During the summer of 1925 Bloomfield worked as Assistant Ethnologist with the Geological Survey of Canada in the Canadian Department of Mines, undertaking linguistic field work on Plains Cree; this position was arranged by Edward Sapir, who was then Chief of the Division of Anthropology, Victoria Museum, Geological Survey of Canada, Canadian Department of Mines. Bloch, Bernard, 1949, p. 88 Hockett, Charles, 1987, p. 40 

Bloomfield was one of the founding members of the Linguistic Society of America. In 1924, along with George M. Bolling (Ohio State University) and Edgar Sturtevant (Yale University) he formed a committee to organize the creation of the Society, and drafted the call for the Society's foundation. Anonymous, 1925 Hall, Robert, 1990, p. 27 He contributed the lead article to the inaugural issue of the Society's journal Language, Bloomfield, Leonard, 1925 and was President of the Society in 1935. Hockett, Charles, 1970, 323 He taught in the Society's summer Linguistic Institute in 1938-1941, with the 1938-1940 Institutes being held in Ann Arbor, Michigan, and the 1941 Institute in Chapel Hill, North Carolina. Bloch lists only 1938-40, but Hall lists 1938-1941; Bloch, Bernard, 1949, 88; Hall, Robert, 1990, p. 52 

==Indo-European linguistics==
Bloomfield's earliest work was in historical Germanic studies, beginning with his dissertation, and continuing with a number of papers on Indo-European and Germanic phonology and morphology. Bloomfield, Leonard, 1909/1910 Bloch, Bernard, 1949, 88 His post-doctoral studies in Germany further strengthened his expertise in the Neogrammarian tradition, which still dominated Indo-European historical studies. Lehman, Winfred, 1987, p. 163-164 Bloomfield throughout his career, but particularly during his early career, emphasized the Neogrammarian principle of regular sound change as a foundational concept in historical linguistics. Bloomfield, Leonard, 1928a 

Bloomfield's work in Indo-European beyond his dissertation was limited to an article on palatal consonants in Sanskrit Bloomfield, Leonard, 1911 and one article on the Sanskrit grammatical tradition associated with Pini, Bloomfield, Leonard, 1927 in addition to a number of book reviews. Bloomfield made extensive use of Indo-European materials to explain historical and comparative principles in both of his textbooks, An introduction to language (1914), and his seminal Language (1933). Lehmann, Winfred, 1987, 164-165 In his textbooks he selected Indo-European examples that supported the key Neogrammarian hypothesis of the regularity of sound change, and emphasized a sequence of steps essential to success in comparative work: (a) appropriate data in the form of texts which must be studied intensively and analysed; (b) application of the comparative method; (c) reconstruction of proto-forms. He further emphasized the importance of dialect studies where appropriate, and noted the significance of sociological factors such as prestige, and the impact of meaning. Lehmann, Winfred, 1987, 165 In addition to regular linguistic change, Bloomfield also allowed for borrowing and analogy. Lehman, Winfred, 1987, 167 

It is argued that Bloomfield's Indo-European work had two broad implications: "He stated clearly the theoretical bases for Indo-European linguistics" and "he established the study of Indo-European languages firmly within general linguistics." Lehmann, Winfred, 1987, 167-168 

===Sanskrit studies===
As part of his training with leading Indo-Europeanists in Germany in 1913 and 1914 Bloomfield studied the Sanskrit grammatical tradition originating with Pini, who lived in northwestern India during the sixth century B.C. Rogers, David, 1987, 89 Pini's grammar is characterized by its extreme thoroughness and explicitness in accounting for Sanskrit linguistic forms. Bloomfield noted that "Pini gives the formation of every inflected, compounded, or derived word, with an exact statement of the sound-variations (including accent) and of the meaning." Bloomfield, Leonard, 1929, 274; cited in Rogers, David, 1987, 88 In a letter to Algonquianist Truman Michelson, Bloomfield noted "My models are Pini and the kind of work done in Indo-European by my teacher, Professor Wackernagel of Basle." Hockett, Charles, 1987, 41 

Pini's systematic approach to analysis includes components for: (a) forming grammatical rules, (b) an inventory of sounds, (c) a list of verbal roots organized into sublists, and (d) a list of classes of morphs. Rogers, David, 1987, 90 Bloomfield's approach to key linguistic ideas in his textbook Language reflect the influence of Pini in his treatment of basic concepts such as linguistic form, free form, and others. Similarly, Pini is the source for Bloomfield's use of the terms exocentric and endocentric used to describe compound words. Rogers, David, 1987, 103-114 Concepts from Pini are found in Eastern Ojibwa, published posthumously in 1958, in particular his use of the concept of a morphological zero, a morpheme that has no overt realization. Rogers, David, 1987, 120-122 Pini's influence is also present in Bloomfield's approach to determining parts of speech (Bloomfield uses the term 'form-classes') in both Eastern Ojibwa and in the later Menomini language, published posthumously in 1962. Rogers, David, 1987, 126-128 

==Austronesian linguistics==
While at the University of Illinois Bloomfield undertook research on Tagalog, an Austronesian language spoken in the Philippines. He carried out linguistic field work with Alfredo Viola Santiago, who was an engineering student at the university from 1914 to 1917. The results were published as Tagalog texts with grammatical analysis, which includes a series of texts dictated by Santiago in addition to an extensive grammatical description and analysis of every word in the texts. Hockett, Charles F., 1970, pp 78-79 Bloomfield's work on Tagalog, from the beginning of field research to publication, took no more than two years. Wolff, John, 1987, p. 174 His study of Tagalog has been described as the best treatment of any Austronesian language...The result is a description of Tagalog which has never been surpassed for completeness, accuracy, and wealth of exemplification. Wolff, John, 1987, p. 173 

Bloomfield's only other publication on an Austronesian language was an article on the syntax of Ilocano, based upon research undertaken with a native speaker of Ilocano who was a student at Yale University. This article has been described as a "tour de force, for it covers in less than seven pages the entire taxonomic syntax of Ilocano." Wolff, John, 1987, p. 176 Bloomfield, Leonard, 1942 

==Algonquian linguistics==
Bloomfields work on Algonquian languages had both descriptive and comparative components. He published extensively on four Algonquian languages: Fox, Cree, Menominee, and Ojibwe, publishing grammars, lexicons, and text collections. Bloomfield used the materials collected in his descriptive work to undertake comparative studies leading to the reconstruction of Proto-Algonquian, with an early study reconstructing the sound system of Proto-Algonqian, Bloomfield, Leonard, 1925a and a subsequent more extensive paper refining his phonological analysis and adding extensive historical information on general features of Algonquian grammar. Bloomfield, Leonard, 1946 

Bloomfield undertook field research on Cree, Menominee, and Ojibwe, and analysed the material in previously published Fox text collections. His first Algonquian research, beginning around 1919, involved study of text collections in the Fox language that had been published by William Jones and Truman Michelson. Jones, William, 1907 Michelson, Truman, 1921 Working through the texts in these collections, Bloomfield excerpted grammatical information to create a grammatical sketch of Fox. Bloomfield, Leonard, 1925-1927 A lexicon of Fox based on his excerpted material was published posthumously. Bloomfield, Leonard, 1984b 

Bloomfield undertook field research on Menominee in the summers of 1920 and 1921, with further brief field research in September 1939 and intermittent visits from Menominee speakers in Chicago in the late 1930s, in addition to correspondence with speakers during the same period. Goddard, Ives, 1987, pp. 179, 187-188 Material collected by Morris Swadesh in 1937 and 1938, often in response to specific queries from Bloomfield, supplemented his information. Goddard, Ives, 1987, pp. 179-180 Significant publications include a collection of texts, Bloomfield, Leonard, 1928 a grammar and a lexicon (both published posthumously), Bloomfield, Leonard, 1962 Bloomfield, Leonard, 1975 in addition to a theoretically significant article on Menomini phonological alternations. Bloomfield, Leonard, 1939 

Bloomfield undertook field research in 1925 among Plains Cree speakers in Saskatchewan at the Sweet Grass reserve, and also at the Star Blanket reserve, resulting in two volumes of texts and a posthumous lexicon. Bloomfield, Leonard, 1930 Bloomfield, Leonard, 1934 Bloomfield, Leonard, 1984 He also undertook brief field work on Swampy Cree at The Pas, Manitoba. Bloomfield's work on Swampy Cree provided data to support the predictive power of the hypothesis of exceptionless phonological change. 

Bloomfield's initial research on Ojibwe was through study of texts collected by William Jones, in addition to nineteenth century grammars and dictionaries. Jones, William, 1917, 1919 Goddard, Ives, 1987 During the 1938 Linguistic Society of America Linguistic Institute held at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, Michigan, he taught a field methods class with Andrew Medler, a speaker of the Ottawa dialect who was born in Saginaw, Michigan but spent most of his life on Walpole Island, Ontario. The resulting grammatical description, transcribed sentences, texts, and lexicon were published posthumously in a single volume. Bloomfield, Leonard, 1958 In 1941 Bloomfield worked with Ottawa dialect speaker Angeline Williams at the 1941 Linguistic Institute held at the University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill, North Carolina, resulting in a posthumously published volume of texts. Nichols, John and Leonard Bloomfield, eds., 1991 

==Notes==

==References==

*
*
*Despres, Leon M. 1987. My recollections of Leonard Bloomfield. Robert A. Hall, Jr., ed., Leonard Bloomfield: Essays on his life and work, 3-14. Philadelphia: John Benjamins. ISBN 90-272-4530-4
*Fought, John G. 1999 "Leonard Bloomfields linguistic legacy: Later uses of some technical features." Historiographica linguistica 26/3: 313-332. 
*Goddard, Ives. 1987. Leonard Bloomfield's descriptive and comparative studies of Algonquian. Robert A. Hall, Jr., ed., Leonard Bloomfield: Essays on his life and work, 179-217. Philadelphia: John Benjamins. ISBN 90-272-4530-4
*Hall, Robert A. Jr. 1987. Leonard Bloomfield: Essays on his life and work. Amsterdam: Benjamins. ISBN 90-272-4530-4
*Hall, Robert A. 1987. Bloomfield and semantics. Robert A. Hall, Jr., ed., Leonard Bloomfield: Essays on his life and work, 155-160. Philadelphia: John Benjamins. ISBN 90-272-4530-4
*Hall, Robert A. Jr. 1990. A life for language: A biographical memoir of Leonard Bloomfield. Philadelphia: John Benjamins. ISBN 1-55619-350-5
*Hockett, Charles F., ed., 1970. A Leonard Bloomfield Anthology. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. ISBN 0-226-06071-3
*Hockett, Charles F. 1987. Letters from Bloomfield to Michelson and Sapir. Robert A. Hall, Jr., ed., Leonard Bloomfield: Essays on his life and work, 39-60. Philadelphia: John Benjamins. ISBN 90-272-4530-4
*Hockett, Charles F. 1999. "Leonard Bloomfield: After fifty years." Historiographica linguistica 26/3: 295-311. 
*Hoenigswald, Henry M. 1987. Bloomfield and historical linguistics. Robert A. Hall, Jr., ed., Leonard Bloomfield: Essays on his life and work, 73-88. Philadelphia: John Benjamins. ISBN 90-272-4530-4
*Jones, William. 1907. "Fox texts." American Ethnological Society Publications 1. Leiden. 1974, New York: AMS Press
*Jones, William. 1911. "Algonquian (Fox)." posthumously by Truman Michelson Franz Boas, ed., Handbook of American Indian languages, Part I, 735-873. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 40. Washington: Smithsonian Institution.
*Jones, William. 1917. Ojibwa texts. Volume 1. Ed. Truman Michelson. Leiden: American Ethnological Society Publications 7.1 (Vol. 1
*Jones, William. 1919. Ojibwa texts. Volume 2. Ed. Truman Michelson. New York: G. Stechert.
*Lehmann, Winfred P. 1987. Bloomfield as an Indo-Europeanists. Robert A. Hall, Jr., ed., Leonard Bloomfield: Essays on his life and work, 163-172. Philadelphia: John Benjamins. ISBN 90-272-4530-4
*Manaster Ramer, Alexis. 1992-1993. "Ever since Bloomfield." in: Proceedings of the international congress of linguists 15/1: 308-310. 
*Michelson, Truman. 1921. "The Owl sacred pack of the Fox Indians." Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 72. Washington: Smithsonian Institution.
*Michelson, Truman. 1925. "Accompanying papers." Bureau of American Ethnology Annual Report 40: 21-658. Washington: Smithsonian Institution.
*Nichols, John D. and Leonard Bloomfield, eds. 1991. The dogs children. Anishinaabe texts told by Angeline Williams. Winnipeg: Publications of the Algonquian Text Society, University of Manitoba. ISBN 0-88755-148-3
*Robins, R.H. Leonard Bloomfield: The man and the man of science. Transactions of the Philological Society 86: 63-87.
*Rogers, David E. 1987. The influence of Pini on Leonard Bloomfield. Robert A. Hall, Jr., ed., Leonard Bloomfield: Essays on his life and work, 89-138. Philadelphia: John Benjamins. ISBN 90-272-4530-4
*Sayers, Frances Clarke. 1987. The small mythologies of Leonard Bloomfield. Robert A. Hall, Jr., ed., Leonard Bloomfield: Essays on his life and work, 16-21. Philadelphia: John Benjamins. ISBN 90-272-4530-4
*Wolff, John U. 1987. Bloomfield as an Austronesianist. Robert A. Hall, Jr., ed., Leonard Bloomfield: Essays on his life and work, pp. 173-178. Philadelphia: John Benjamins. ISBN 90-272-4530-4

==Selected publications==
*Bloomfield, Leonard. 1909/1910. "A semasiological differentiation in Germanic secondary ablaut." Modern Philology 7:245-288; 345-382.
*
* Bloomfield, Leonard. 1914. Introduction to the Study of Language. New York: Henry Holt. Reprinted 1983, John Benjamins. Retrieved April 19, 2009. ISBN 90-272-1892-7.
* 
* 
*Bloomfield, Leonard. 1917. Tagalog texts with grammatical analysis. University of Illinois studies in language and literature, 3.2-4. Urbana, Illinois.
*
*
*Bloomfield, Leonard. 1925-1927. "Notes on the Fox language." International Journal of American Linguistics 3:219-232; 4: 181-219
* (reprinted in: Martin Joos, ed., Readings in Linguistics I, Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press 1957, 26-31).
* 
* 
*Bloomfield, Leonard. 1928. Menomini texts. Publications of the American Ethnological Society 12. New York: G.E. Stechert, Agents. 1974. New York: AMS Press ISBN 0-404-58162-5
* 
* Bloomfield, Leondard. 1929. Review of Bruno Liebich, 1928, Konkordanz Pini-Candra, Breslau: M. & H. Marcus. Language 5:267-76. Reprinted in Hockett, Charles. 1970, 219-226.
*Bloomfield, Leonard. 1930. Sacred stories of the Sweet Grass Cree. National Museum of Canada Bulletin, 60 (Anthropological Series 11). Ottawa. 1993, Saskatoon, SK: Fifth House. ISBN 1-895618-27-4
*Bloomfield, Leonard. 1933. Language. New York: Henry Holt. ISBN 0-226-06067-5, ISBN 90-272-1892-7
*Bloomfield, Leonard. 1934. Plains Cree texts. American Ethnological Society Publications 16. New York. 1974, New York: AMS Press
* Bloomfield, Leonard. 1935. "Linguistic aspects of science." Philosophy of Science 2/4:499-517.
*Bloomfield, Leonard. 1939. "Menomini morphophonemics." Etudes phonologiques ddies  la mmoire de M. le prince N.S. Trubetzkoy, 105-115. Travaux du Cercle Linguistique de Prague 8. Prague.
* Bloomfield, Leonard. 1939a. Linguistic aspects of science. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-57579-9
*
* Bloomfield, Leonard. 1942a. Outline guide for the practical study of foreign languages. Baltimore: Linguistic Society of America.
*Bloomfield, Leonard. 1946. "Algonquian." Harry Hoijer et al., eds., Linguistic structures of native America, 85-129. Viking Fund Publications in Anthropology 6. New York: Wenner-Gren Foundation.
*Bloomfield, Leonard. 1958. Eastern Ojibwa. Ed. Charles F. Hockett. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
*Bloomfield, Leonard. 1962. The Menomini language. Ed. Charles F. Hockett. New Haven: Yale University Press.
*Bloomfield, Leonard. 1975. Menomini lexicon. Ed. Charles F. Hockett. Milwaukee Public Museum Publications in Anthropology and History. Milwaukee: Milwaukee Public Museum.
*Bloomfield, Leonard. 1984. Cree-English lexicon. Ed. Charles F. Hockett. New Haven: Human Relations Area Files. ISBN 99954-923-9-3
*Bloomfield, Leonard. 1984b. Fox-English lexicon. Ed. Charles F. Hockett. New Haven: Human Relations Area Files. ISBN 99954-923-7-7

==External links==
* A biography
* A bibliographic list about Bloomfield's reputation as a linguist in Linguist List website.
* Leonard Bloomfield "Linguistics and Mathematics" (Marcus Tomalin)
* Finding Aid to the Papers of Leonard Bloomfield, National Anthropological Archives, Smithsonian Institution
* Leonard Bloomfield Book Award, Linguistic Society of America



[[Leather]]

Modern leather-working tools
Leather is a durable and flexible material created by the tanning of animal rawhide and skin, often cattle hide. It can be produced through manufacturing processes ranging from cottage industry to heavy industry.

Leather is used for various purposes including clothing, bookbinding, leather wallpaper, and as a furniture covering. It is produced in a wide variety of types and styles and is decorated by a wide range of techniques.

==Forms==
Several tanning processes transform hides and skins into leather:
* Vegetable-tanned leather is tanned using tannins and other ingredients found in different vegetable matter, such as tree bark prepared in bark mills, wood, leaves, fruits and roots and other similar sources. It is supple and brown in color, with the exact shade depending on the mix of chemicals and the color of the skin. It is the only form of leather suitable for use in leather carving or stamping. Vegetable-tanned leather is not stable in water; it tends to discolor, so if left to soak and then dry it will shrink and become less supple, and harder. In hot water, it will shrink drastically and partly gelatinize, becoming rigid and eventually brittle. Boiled leather is an example of this, where the leather has been hardened by being immersed in hot water, or in boiled wax or similar substances. Historically, it was occasionally used as armor after hardening, and it has also been used for book binding. 
* Chrome-tanned leather, invented in 1858, is tanned using chromium sulfate and other salts of chromium. It is more supple and pliable than vegetable-tanned leather and does not discolor or lose shape as drastically in water as vegetable-tanned. It is also known as wet-blue for its color derived from the chromium. More esoteric colors are possible using chrome tanning.
* Aldehyde-tanned leather is tanned using glutaraldehyde or oxazolidine compounds. This is the leather that most tanners refer to as wet-white leather due to its pale cream or white color. It is the main type of "chrome-free" leather, often seen in automobiles and shoes for infants.
* Formaldehyde tanning (being phased out due to its danger to workers and the sensitivity of many people to formaldehyde) is another method of aldehyde tanning. Brain-tanned leathers fall into this category and are exceptionally water absorbent.
* Brain tanned leathers are made by a labor-intensive process which uses emulsified oils, often those of animal brains. They are known for their exceptional softness and their ability to be washed.
* Chamois leather also falls into the category of aldehyde tanning and, like brain tanning, produces a highly water-absorbent leather. Chamois leather is made by using oils (traditionally cod oil) that oxidize easily to produce the aldehydes that tan the leather to make the fabric the color it is.
* Rose tanned leather is a variation of vegetable oil tanning and brain tanning, where pure rose otto replaces the vegetable oil and emulsified oils. It has been called the most valuable leather on earth, but this is mostly due to the high cost of rose otto and its labor-intensive tanning process.

* Synthetic-tanned leather is tanned using aromatic polymers such as the Novolac or Neradol types (syntans, contraction for synthetic tannins). This leather is white in color and was invented when vegetable tannins were in short supply during the Second World War. Melamine and other amino-functional resins fall into this category as well, and they provide the filling that modern leathers often require. Urea-formaldehyde resins were also used in this tanning method until dissatisfaction about the formation of free formaldehyde was realized.
* Alum-tanned leather is transformed using aluminium salts mixed with a variety of binders and protein sources, such as flour and egg yolk. Alum-tawed leather is technically not tanned, as tannic acid is not used, and the resulting material will revert to rawhide if soaked in water long enough to remove the alum salts. 
* Rawhide is made by scraping the skin thin, soaking it in lime, and then stretching it while it dries. Like alum-tawing, rawhide is not technically "leather", but is usually lumped in with the other forms. Rawhide is stiffer and more brittle than other forms of leather; it's primarily found in uses such as drum heads and parchment where it does not need to flex significantly; it is also cut up into cords for use in lacing or stitching and for making many varieties of dog chews.

Leather&mdash;usually vegetable-tanned&mdash;can be oiled to improve its water resistance. This supplements the natural oils remaining in the leather itself, which can be washed out through repeated exposure to water. Frequent oiling of leather, with mink oil, neatsfoot oil, or a similar material keeps it supple and improves its lifespan dramatically.

Leather with the hair still attached is called hair-on.

==Types==
In general, leather is sold in four forms:

* Full-grain leather refers to hides that have not been sanded, buffed, or snuffed (as opposed to top-grain or corrected leather) to remove imperfections (or natural marks) on the surface of the hide. The grain remains allowing the fiber strength and durability. The grain also has breathability, resulting in less moisture from prolonged contact. Rather than wearing out, it will develop a patina over time. High quality leather furniture and footwear are often made from full-grain leather. Full-grain leathers are typically available in two finish types: aniline and semi-aniline.

* Top-grain leather (the most common type used in high-end leather products) is the second-highest quality. It has had the "split" layer separated away, making it thinner and more pliable than full-grain. Its surface has been sanded and a finish coat added to the surface which results in a colder, plastic feel with less breathability, and it will not develop a natural patina. It is typically less expensive and has greater resistance to stains than full-grain leather, so long as the finish remains unbroken.

* Corrected-grain leather is any leather that has had an artificial grain applied to its surface. The hides used to create corrected leather do not meet the standards for use in creating vegetable-tanned or aniline leather. The imperfections are corrected or sanded off, and an artificial grain impressed into the surface and dressed with stain or dyes. Most corrected-grain leather is used to make pigmented leather as the solid pigment helps hide the corrections or imperfections. Corrected grain leathers can mainly be bought as two finish types: semi-aniline and pigmented.

* Split leather is leather created from the fibrous part of the hide left once the top-grain of the rawhide has been separated from the hide. During the splitting operation, the top-grain and drop split are separated. The drop split can be further split (thickness allowing) into a middle split and a flesh split. In very thick hides, the middle split can be separated into multiple layers until the thickness prevents further splitting. Split leather then has an artificial layer applied to the surface of the split and is embossed with a leather grain (bycast leather). Splits are also used to create suede. The strongest suedes are usually made from grain splits (that have the grain completely removed) or from the flesh split that has been shaved to the correct thickness. Suede is "fuzzy" on both sides. Manufacturers use a variety of techniques to make suede from full-grain. A reversed suede is a grained leather that has been designed into the leather article with the grain facing away from the visible surface. It is not considered to be a true form of suede. 

Less-common leathers include:
* Buckskin or brained leather is a tanning process that uses animal brains or other fatty materials to alter the leather. The resulting supple, suede-like hide is usually smoked heavily to prevent it from returning to a rawhide state, if wetted. It will be easier to soften, and will help keep leather eating bugs away.
* Patent leather is leather that has been given a high-gloss finish. The original process was developed in Newark, New Jersey, by inventor Seth Boyden in 1818. Patent leather usually has a plastic coating.
* Fish Leather : leather popular for its motifs and its pigmentation. Mainly used for making shoes and bags, the fish skin is tanned like other animal skins. http://www.dailymotion.com/video/xrwvtf_rtl-tvi-i-comme-islande-processus-de-fabrication-du-cuir-de-poisson_shortfilms?search_algo=1 The species used include salmon, perch, sturgeon, etc.
# Salmon : farmed in Iceland and Norway, salmon skin has fine scales. Its strength and elegant look make it the most popular fish leather.
# Perch : coming from Nile, its skin is recognizable with its large, round and soft scales.
# Wolffish : its skin is smooth because without scales. We recognize it thanks to its dark spots, and the 'stripes' which are due to the friction of marine rocks.
# Cod : its skin has finer scales than salmon, but its texture is more varied, sometimes smooth and sometimes rough.
# Sturgeon : fish well known for its eggs (caviar), which make it rare. Its leather is thus quite expensive.
# Eel : fish without scales, its skin has a shiny appearance.
# Tilapia : compared with salmon skins the patterns of tilapia leather is more beautiful, but the skins are smaller. The leather has resistant qualities similar to salmon and perch. Tilapia originate from Africa, and are farmed in many tropical countries. It is a popular food fish and is considered an invasive species in much of the United States. 
# Shagreen is also known as stingray skin/leather. Applications used in furniture production date as far back as the art deco period. The word "shagreen" originates from France. It's known as the most difficult leather to work due to dished scales of the animal, and it is one of the most expensive leathers.
# Shark : its skin is covered with small, close-set tubercles, making it very tough. The handbags made of shark skin used to be in vogue but this keen interest has since fallen as the costs of production and of the leather itself are very high. Moreover, this skin is more difficult to work. Should not be confused with traditional "sharkskin", a woven textile product.

* Vachetta leather is used in the trimmings of luggage and handbags. The leather is left untreated and is therefore susceptible to water and stains. Sunlight will cause the natural leather to darken in shade, called a patina.
* Slink is leather made from the skin of unborn calves. It is particularly soft and is valued for use in making gloves.
* Deerskin is a tough leather, possibly due to the animal's adaptations to its thorny and thicket-filled habitats. Deerskin has been used by many societies, including indigenous Americans. Most modern deerskin is no longer procured from the wild, with deer farms breeding the animals specifically for the purpose of their skins. Large quantities are still tanned from wild deer hides in historic tanning towns such as Gloversville and Johnstown in upstate New York. Deerskin is used in jackets and overcoats, martial arts equipment such as kendo and bogu, as well as personal accessories such as handbags and wallets.
* Nubuck is top-grain cattle hide leather that has been sanded or buffed on the grain side, or outside, to give a slight nap of short protein fibers, producing a velvet-like surface.
* Russia leather is a particular form of bark-tanned cow leather. It is distinguished by an oiling step, after tanning, where birch oil is worked into the leather to make it particularly hard-wearing, flexible and resistant to water.

There are two other types of leather commonly used in specialty products, such as briefcases, wallets, and luggage:

* Belting leather is a full-grain leather that was originally used in driving pulley belts and other machinery. It is found on the surface of briefcases, portfolios, and wallets, and can be identified by its thick, firm feel and smooth finish. Belting leather is generally a heavy-weight of full-grain, vegetable-tanned leather.
* Napa leather is chrome-tanned and is soft and supple. It is commonly found in wallets, toiletry kits, and other personal leather goods.

The following are not "true" organic leathers, but are materials that contain leather fiber. Depending on jurisdiction, they may still be labeled as "Genuine Leather", even though the consumer generally can only see the outer layer of the material and can't actually see any of the leather content:
* Bonded leather or "Reconstituted leather" is an economical type that uses leftovers of organic leather (often from leather tanneries or leather workshops) which are shredded and then bonded together with polyurethane binders or latex on top of a fiber sheet. The varying degree of organic leather in the mix (between 10% and 90%) affects the smell and the texture of such product. Due to its reduced cost it is becoming a popular choice for furniture upholstery, especially for commercial use, where durability is needed; however durability can vary widely, depending on the formulation.

* Bycast leather is a split leather with a layer of polyurethane laminated to the surface and then embossed. Bycast was originally made for the shoe industry and later adopted by the furniture industry. The original formula created by Bayer was strong but expensive. The result is a material that is slightly stiffer but cheaper than top-grain leather but has a much more consistent texture. Because its surface is completely covered in plastic, is easier to clean and maintain, but is not easily repaired.

==From other animals==
Phone cases in Ostrich leather

Today most leather is made of cattle skin but many exceptions exist. Lamb and deerskin are used for soft leather in more expensive apparel. Deer and elkskin are widely used in work gloves and indoor shoes. Pigskin is used in apparel and on seats of saddles. Buffalo, goats, alligators, dogs, snakes, ostriches, kangaroos, oxen, and yaks may also be used for leather.

Kangaroo skin is used to make items which need to be strong but flexible&mdash;it is the material most commonly used in bullwhips. Kangaroo leather is favored by some motorcyclists for use in motorcycle leathers specifically because of its light weight and abrasion resistance. Kangaroo leather is also used for falconry jesses, soccer footwear, and boxing speed bags. 
At different times in history, leather made from more exotic skins has been considered desirable. For this reason certain species of snakes and crocodiles have been hunted.

Although originally raised for their feathers in the 19th century, ostriches are now more popular for both meat and leather. Henrylito Tacio,"Why You Should Raise Ostrich," Sun.Star 18 January 2010. There are different processes to produce different finishes for many applications, i.e., upholstery, footwear, automotive products, accessories, and clothing. Ostrich leather is currently used by many major fashion houses such as Herms, Prada, Gucci, and Louis Vuitton. Ostrich leather has a characteristic "goose bump" look because of the large follicles from which the feathers grew.

In Thailand sting ray leather is used in wallets and belts. Sting ray leather is tough and durable. The leather is often dyed black and covered with tiny round bumps in the natural pattern of the back ridge of an animal. These bumps are then usually dyed white to highlight the decoration. Sting ray rawhide is also used as grips on Chinese swords, Scottish basket hilted swords and Japanese katanas.

==Production processes==
Drying of leather in East Timor
Leather tanning in Fes, Morocco
Tanned leather in Marrakech

The leather manufacturing process is divided into three fundamental sub-processes: preparatory stages, tanning, and crusting. All true leathers will undergo these sub-processes. A further sub-process, surface coating, can be added into the leather process sequence, but not all leathers receive surface treatment. Since many types of leather exist, it is difficult to create a list of operations that all leathers must undergo.

The preparatory stages are when the hide/skin is prepared for tanning. Preparatory stages may include: preservation, soaking, liming, unhairing, fleshing, splitting, reliming, deliming, bating, degreasing, frizing, bleaching, pickling, and depickling.

Tanning is the process which matches the protein of the raw hide or skin into a stable material which will not putrefy and is suitable for a wide variety of end applications. The principal difference between raw hides and tanned hides is that raw hides dry out to form a hard inflexible material that when re-wetted (or wetted back) putrefy, while tanned material dries out to a flexible form that does not become putrid when wetted back. Many different tanning methods and materials can be used; the choice is ultimately dependent on the end application of the leather. The most commonly used tanning material is chromium, which leaves the leather, once tanned, a pale blue color (due to the chromium); this product is commonly called "wet blue". The hides once they have finished pickling will typically be between pH 2.8 and 3.2. At this point, the hides would be loaded in a drum and immersed in a float containing the tanning liquor. The hides are allowed to soak (while the drum slowly rotates about its axle) and the tanning liquor slowly penetrates through the full substance of the hide. Regular checks will be made to see the penetration by cutting the cross-section of a hide and observing the degree of penetration. Once an even degree of penetration exists, the pH of the float is slowly raised in a process called basification. This basification process fixes the tanning material to the leather and the more tanning material fixed, the higher the hydrothermal stability and increased shrinkage temperature resistance of the leather. The pH of the leather when chrome tanned would typically finish somewhere between 3.8 and 4.2.

Crusting is the process by which the hide/skin is thinned, retanned, and lubricated. Often a coloring operation is included in the crusting subprocess. The chemicals added during crusting must be fixed in place. The culmination of the crusting subprocess is the drying and softening operations. Crusting may include the following operations: wetting back, sammying, splitting, shaving, rechroming, neutralization, retanning, dyeing, fatliquoring, filling, stuffing, stripping, whitening, fixating, setting, drying, conditioning, milling, staking, and buffing.

For some leathers, a surface coating is applied. Tanners refer to this as finishing. Finishing operations may include: oiling, brushing, padding, impregnation, buffing, spraying, roller coating, curtain coating, polishing, plating, embossing, ironing, ironing/combing (for hair-on), glazing, and tumbling.

==Environmental impact==
Leather is a product with some environmental impact, most notably due to:
* the use of chemicals in the tanning process (e.g. chromium, formic acid, mercury and solvents, ...)
* air pollution due to the transformation process (hydrogen sulfide during dehairing and ammonia during deliming, solvent vapors).
* Leather biodegrades slowly; it takes 25&ndash;40 years to decompose. However, vinyl and petro-chemical derived materials will take 500 or more years to break down and return to the earth.

One ton of hide or skin generally leads to the production of 20 to 80 m3 of wastewater including chromium levels of 100400 mg/L, sulfide levels of
200800 mg/L and high levels of fat and other solid wastes, as well as notable pathogen contamination. Pesticides are also often added for hide conservation during transport. With solid wastes representing up to 70% of the wet weight of the original hides, the tanning process comes at a considerable strain on water treatment installations. 

Tanning is especially polluting in countries where environmental regulations are lax, such as in India, the world's third-largest producer and exporter of leather. To give an example of an efficient pollution prevention system, chromium loads per produced tonne are generally abated from 8 kg to 1.5 kg. VOC emissions are typically reduced from 30 kg/t to 2 kg/t in a properly managed facility. A review of the total pollution load decrease achievable according to the United Nations Industrial Development Organization posts precise data on the abatement achievable through industrially proven low-waste advanced methods, while noting that "even though the chrome pollution load can be decreased by 94% on introducing advanced technologies, the minimum residual load 0.15 kg/t raw hide can still cause difficulties when using landfills and composting sludge from wastewater treatment on account of the regulations currently in force in some countries."

In Kanpur, the self-proclaimed "Leather City of World" with 10,000 tanneries as of 2011 and a city of 3 million people on the banks of the river Ganges, pollution levels were so high that despite an industry crisis, the pollution control board has decided to seal 49 high-polluting tanneries out of 404 in July 2009. In 2003 for instance, the main tanneries' effluent disposal unit was dumping 22 tonnes of chromium-laden solid waste per day in the open. Scientists at the Central Leather Research Institute in India have developed biological methods for pretanning as well as better chromium management.

In the Hazaribagh neighborhood of Dhaka in Bangladesh, chemicals from tanneries end up in Dhaka's main river. Besides the environmental damage, the health of both local factory workers and the end consumer is also negatively affected. Besides local sales of products made with leather from the Hazaribagh neighborhood of Dhaka, the leather is also bought by huge Western companies and sold in the developed world. Hazaribagh neighborhood of Dhaka poisoning staff, local villagers and planet Documentary by Upside Tlvision 

The higher cost associated to the treatment of effluents that to untreated effluent discharging leads to illegal dumping to save on costs. For instance, in Croatia in 2001, proper pollution abatement cost 70-100 USD/t of raw hides processed against 43 USD/t for irresponsible behavior. 

No general study seems to exist but the current news is rife with documented examples. In November 2009 for instance, it was discovered that one of Uganda's main leather producing companies directly dumped its waste water in a wetland adjacent to Lake Victoria. 

==Role of enzymes==
Enzymes like proteases, lipases, and amylases have an important role in the soaking, dehairing, degreasing, and bating operations of leather manufacturing.

Proteases are the most commonly used enzymes in leather production. The enzyme used should not damage or dissolve collagen or keratin, but should be able to hydrolyze casein, elastin, albumin, and globulin-like proteins, as well as non-structured proteins which are not essential for leather making. This process is called bating. 

Lipases are used in the degreasing operation to hydrolyze fat particles embedded in the skin. 

Amylases are used to soften skin, to bring out the grain, and to impart strength and flexibility to the skin. These enzymes are rarely used.

==Preservation and conditioning==
The natural fibers of leather will break down with the passage of time. Acidic leathers are particularly vulnerable to red rot, which causes powdering of the surface and a change in consistency. Damage from red rot is aggravated by high temperatures and relative humidities and is irreversible.

Exposure to long periods of low relative humidities (below 40%) can cause leather to become desiccated, irreversibly changing the fibrous structure of the leather. Chemical damage can also occur from exposure to environmental factors, including ultraviolet light, ozone, acid from sulfurous and nitrous pollutants in the air, or through a chemical action following any treatment with tallow or oil compounds. Both oxidation and chemical damage occur faster at higher temperatures.

Various treatments are available such as conditioners, but these are not recommended by conservators since they impregnate the structure of the leather artifact with active chemicals, are sticky, and attract stains. Saddle soap is used for cleaning, conditioning and softening leather. Leather shoes are widely conditioned with shoe polish.

===Book binding===
A set of leather bound books
Leather used in book binding has many of the same preservation needs: protection from high temperatures, high relative humidity, low relative humidity, fluctuations in relative humidity, light exposure, dust buildup, pollution, mold, and bug infestation. 

For books with red rot, acid-free phase boxes and/or polyester dust jackets (Dupont Mylar Type D or ICI Mellinex 516) are recommended to protect the leather from further handling damage and as well as to prevent the residues from getting on hands, clothes, the text block, and nearby books. 

The debate on the use of dressings for preservation of book bindings has spanned several decades as research and experimental evidence have slowly accumulated. The main argument is that, done incorrectly, there are multiple disadvantages and that, done correctly, there is little to no preservation advantage. Pamphlets and guidelines give numerous downsides to dressings use, including: the dressing becoming increasingly acidic and will discolor and stain the leather, oxidize (penetration and expansion of oils including displacement and weakening of fibers) and stiffen, leave a sticky surface, collect dust, wick into adjacent materials, form unstable surface spews, encourage biological deterioration and mold growth, block surface porosity, impede further treatment, wet and swell the leather, affect surface finishes, and desiccate or dry out the leather. Meanwhile, scientific experiments have shown no substantial benefits. The main authorities on the subject therefore discourage it, with a caveat for special cases done under the direction of a conservator. 

==Leathercrafting==

Leather can be decorated by a variety of methods, including pyrography and beading.

==Cordwain and Cuir de Cordoue==
Fragment of Cuir de Cordoue
Cordwain, once a synonym of cordovan (through Old French cordewan) meaning "from Crdoba" describes a certain kind of fine leather, originally from Crdoba. Cordwainer is still used to describe someone in the profession of shoemaking.

The related term Cuir de Cordoue refers to painted and gilded (and sometimes embossed) leather hangings manufactured in panels and assembled for covering walls as an alternative to tapestry.

==In modern culture==
A motorcycle-style leather jacket.
Due to its excellent resistance to abrasion and wind, leather found a use in rugged occupations. The enduring image of a cowboy in leather chaps gave way to the leather-jacketed and leather-helmeted aviator. When motorcycles were invented, some riders took to wearing heavy leather jackets to protect from road rash and wind blast; some also wear chaps or full leather pants to protect the lower body. Top-quality motorcycle leather is superior to any practical man-made fabric for abrasion protection and is still used in racing. Many sports still use leather to help in playing the game or protecting players; its flexibility allows it to be formed and flexed.

The term leathering is sometimes used in the sense of a physical punishment (such as a severe spanking) applied with a leather whip, martinet, etc.

Leather fetishism is the name popularly used to describe a fetishistic attraction to people wearing leather, or in certain cases, to the garments themselves.

Many rock groups (particularly heavy metal and punk groups in the 1980s) are well known for wearing leather clothing. Leather clothing, particularly jackets, are common in the heavy metal and Punk subculture. Extreme metal bands (especially black metal bands) and Goth rock groups have extensive leather clothing, i.e. leather pants, accessories, etc.

Many cars and trucks come with optional or standard "leather" seating. These days most car manufacturers due to consideration of durability and cost use synthetic PU leather, including luxury car brands like Mercedes-Benz, BMW, and Audi.

Leather is used exclusively by publishers like The Easton Press to bind books, for both practical and aesthetic purposes.

==Religious sensitivities==
In religiously diverse countries, leather vendors are typically careful to clarify the kinds of leather used in their products. For example, leather shoes will bear a label identifying the animal from which the leather was taken. In this way, a Muslim would not accidentally purchase pigskin leather, and a Hindu could avoid cow leather. Many Hindus who are vegetarians will not use any kind of leather.

Such taboos increase the demand for religiously neutral leathers like ostrich and deer.

Judaism forbids the comfort of wearing shoes made with leather on Yom Kippur, Tisha B'Av, and during mourning. 

Jainism prohibits the use of leather since it is obtained by killing animals.

==Alternatives==

Some vegetarians, vegans and animal rights activists boycott the use of all items made from leather, since the practice of wearing leather is unnecessary and synthetic alternatives exist. Animal rights groups such as PETA have called for boycotts and encourage the use of alternative materials such as synthetic leathers.

Many pseudo-leather materials have been developed, allowing those who wish to wear leather-like garments to do so without actually wearing leather. One example of this is vegan microfiber, which claims to be stronger than leather when manufactured with strength in mind. Polyurethane materials, pleather, Naugahyde, Durabuck, NuSuede, Hydrolite, and other alternatives exist, providing some features similar to leather.

==See also==

;Types
* Aniline leather, a leather treated with aniline as a dye
* Boiled leather, a historical construction material
* Bonded Leather, man-made material composed of leather fibers
* Chamois leather, leather made from the skin of the mountain antelope or Chamois
* Composition leather, man-made leather made from recycled leather offcuts, trimmings, or shavings
* Corinthian leather, a marketing term used by Chrysler in the 1970s
* Crocodile leather, leather from a crocodile
* Morocco leather, traditionally this is goatskin leather prepared for softness and decorative finish
* Ostrich leather, leather from an ostrich
* Patent leather, leather with a high gloss and shiny finish

;Substitutes
* Artificial leather, a fabric of finish intended to substitute for leather
* Bicast leather, a synthetic upholstery product
* Kirza, developed in the Soviet Union
* Pleather, a term for artificial leather
* Poromeric imitation leather, a group of synthetic leather substitutes
* Vegan leather, an artificial alternative to traditional leather

;Fabrication
* British Museum leather dressing, a conservator's treatment for display items
* Leather carving, a process of cutting and stamping to give a three-dimensional appearance
* Leather crafting, the practice of making leather into crafts or pieces of art
* Liming (leather processing), a process of treating leather
* Tanning

;Other
* Adarga, a hard leather shield
* Henry Burk &ndash; inventor of the alum and sumac tanning process
* Horse tack, various equipment and accessories worn by horses, much of which is made of leather
* Leather skirt
* Leather subculture
* Mink oil, leather treatment
* Neatsfoot oil, leather treatment
* Saddle soap, leather cleaning and conditioning

==References==

==External links==
* 

 


[[Long Parliament]]

The Long Parliament of England, after the fiasco of the Short Parliament followed its 12 year abeyance, was established on 3 November 1640 This article uses the Julian calendar with the start of year adjusted to 1 January (For a more detailed explanation, see Style and New Style dates#Differences between the start of the year|Old Style and New Style dates: Differences between the start of the year]) to pass financial bills, following the Bishops' Wars. It received its name from the fact that through an Act of Parliament, it could be dissolved only with the agreement of the members, and those members did not agree to its dissolution until after the English Civil War and close to the end of Interregnum on 16 March 1660. . It sat from 1640 until 1648, when it was purged by the New Model Army. In the chaos following the death of Oliver Cromwell in 1658, General George Monck allowed the members barred in 1648 to retake their seats, so that they could pass the necessary legislation to allow the Restoration and dissolve the Long Parliament. This cleared the way for a new Parliament to be elected, which was known as the Convention Parliament. But, many of these original members of Long Parliament, such as were barred from the final acts of the Long Parliament, claimed that the Long Parliament was never legally dissolved.

The Long Parliament comprised "a set of the greatest geniuses for government, that the world ever saw embarked together in one common cause" and whose actions produced an effect, which, at the time, made their country the wonder and admiration of the world, and is still felt and exhibited far beyond the borders of that country, in the progress of reform, and the advancement of popular liberty. The Long Parliament and the republican views of many of the members of the Long Parliament are believed by some Whig historians, such as Charles Upham, as a precursor to the American Revolutionary War, based on the same republican principles.

== Establishment, Trial of Strafford, Implicating the King, Reconciliation== 
Charles signed a bill agreeing that the present Parliament should not be dissolved without its own consent.
The sole reason Charles I assembled Parliament in 1640 was to ask it to pass finance bills, since the controverted taxation of ship money was unpopular, and since the Bishops' Wars had bankrupted him. Instead, the Parliament quickly proceeded to impeach William Laud, the Archbishop of Canterbury, of high treason, on 18 December. John Finch was impeached the following day, and he consequently fled to The Hague with Charles's permission on 21 December.

The Parliament was initially influenced by John Pym (15841643) and his supporters. Pym rose in his place and entered into a particular enumeration of the troubles of the kingdom. Early in the Long Parliament's proceedings, the house unanimously accused the Earl of Strafford of high treason, and other crimes and misdemeanors. The incident provided a new departure for Irish politics, whereby Old English, Gaelic Irish and New English settlers joined together in a legal body to present evidence against Strafford. However, the evidence supplied indirectly by Henry Vane the Elder through his son in relation to Strafford's alleged improper use and threat to England via the Irish army was not corroborated by Vane. Vane the Elder was on the King's Privy council and completely loyal to the King. On 10 April, Pym's case collapsed, but Pym made a direct appeal to the Younger Vane to produce a copy of the notes from the King's Privy council, discovered by the younger Vane and secretly turned over to Pym, to the great anguish of the Elder Vane. These notes obtained by Henry Vane the Younger, written in the King's Privy Council by the elder Vane, were confirmed by independent testimony. Lord Stafford had told the King, 
"Sir, you have done your duty, and your subjects have failed in theirs; and therefore you are absolved from the rules of government, and may supply yourself by extraordinary ways; you have an army in Ireland, with which you may reduce the kingdom". Parliament, as representatives of the people, felt betrayed.

Strafford was considered guilty of raising an Irish army to reduce England for the purpose of generating revenues and abolishing English freedoms. Pym immediately launched a Bill of Attainder, asserting Strafford's guilt and that the Earl be put to death. Charles, however, guaranteed Strafford that he would not sign the attainder, without which the bill could not be passed. The Lords were opposed to the severity of the sentence of death imposed upon Strafford. But increased tensions and an attempted coup by the army in support of Strafford began to sway the issue. On 21 April, in the Commons the Bill went virtually unopposed (204 in favour, 59 opposed, and 250 abstained), the Lords acquiesced, and Charles, fearing for the safety of his family, signed on 10 May. The Earl of Strafford was beheaded two days later.

With the King having been implicated, the Long Parliament passed the Triennial Act, also known as the Dissolution Act, in May 1641, to which the Royal Assent was readily granted. In the meantime both Parliament and the King agreed to an independent investigation of the king's involvement in Strafford's plot. This Triennial Act required Parliament to be summoned at least once every three years, and stipulated that when the King failed to issue proper summons, the members could assemble on their own. This act also forbade ship money without Parliament's consent, fines in destraint of knighthood and forced loans were declared unlawful, monopolies were cut back severely, and the Courts of Star Chamber and High Commission were abolished by the Habeas Corpus Act 1640 and the Triennial Act 1641.

The very doctrine of modern freedoms have, to some degree, their origins in these acts. All remaining forms of taxation were legalised and regulated by the Tonnage and Poundage Act, British History Online: "Charles I, 1640: A Subsidy granted to the King of Tonnage and Poundage and other sums of money paiable uppon Merchandizes exported & imported." the billetting of soldiers was funded, whereas it had not been under Charles; British History Online: "Charles I, 1640: An Act for the securing of such moneys as are or shall be due to the Inhabitants of the Countie of Yorke and the other adjoyning Counties wherein his Majesties Army is or hath beene billetted for the billet of the Souldiers of the said Army as also to certein Officers of the said Army who do forbear part of theire pay according to an Order in that behalfe made in the Commons House of Parliament this present Session for such part of theire pay as they shall so forbeare." and the contentious ship money issue was vacated by the Ship Money Act 1640. British History Online: "Charles I, 1640: An Act for the declaring unlawfull and void the late proceedings touching Ship money and for the vacating of all Records and Processe concerning the same." On 3 May, Parliament decreed The Protestation, attacking the 'wicked counsels' of Charles's government, whereby those who signed the petition undertook to defend 'the true reformed religion', parliament, and the king's person, honour and estate. Throughout May, the House of Commons launched several bills attacking bishops and episcopalianism in general, each time defeated in the Lords.

Although he made several important concessions, Charles improved his own military position by securing the favour of the Scots that summer by promising the official establishment of Presbyterianism. In return, he was able to enlist considerable anti-parliamentary support. But, following the attempted coup of 'The Incident' in Scotland, Charles's credibility was significantly undermined.

The Irish Rebellion, which started in October 1641, brought the control of the army back into the discussions between King and Parliament. Led by John Pym, Parliament presented the King with the Grand Remonstrance, which was passed in the House of Commons by 11 votes (159148) on 22 November 1641. It listed over 150 perceived "misdeeds" of Charles' reign, including the Church (under the influence of foreign papists) and royal advisers (also "have engaged themselves to further the interests of some foreign powers"); the second half of the Remonstrance proposed solutions to the "misdeeds," including church reform and Parliamentary influence over the appointment of royal ministers. December 1641 Parliament asserted that it wanted control over the appointment of the commanders of the Army and Navy in the Militia Ordinance. The king rejected the Grand Remonstrance and refused to give royal assent to the militia bill.

The King believed that Puritans (or Dissenters) encouraged by five vociferous Members of the House of Commons, known thenceforth in history as the Five Members, namely John Pym, John Hampden, Denzil Holles, Arthur Haselrig and William Strode along with the peer Viscount Mandeville (the future Earl of Manchester) who sat in the House of Lords, had encouraged the Scots to invade England in the recent Bishops' Wars; and that they were intent on turning the London mob against him. When rumours reached the court that they were also planning to impeach the Queen for alleged involvement in Catholic plots, Charles decided to arrest them for treason. The counterclaim was that the King had an Irish army set to reduce the kingdom.

Lenthall kneels to Charles during the attempted arrest of the Five Members (painting by Charles West Cope in the Houses of Parliament)
The Speaker of the House during the Long Parliament was William Lenthall. On Tuesday, 4 January 1642, the King entered the House of Commons to seize the Five Members and took the speaker's chair. Having looked around in vain for the Five Members and commenting, "I see the birds have flown", Charles turned to Lenthall, who stood below and demanded of him whether any of those persons were in the House, whether he saw any of them and where they were. Lenthall fell on his knees and replied: "May it please your Majesty, I have neither eyes to see nor tongue to speak in this place but as the House is pleased to direct me, whose servant I am here". By the time he consented to appear as a witness against the regicide Thomas Scot, Lenthall seems to have forgotten the resolve he possessed whilst Speaker. 

After his failure to capture the Five Members and fearing for his family's lives, Charles left London for Oxford. Most of the royalist members of Parliament joined him there, where they formed the Oxford Parliament. The Long Parliament continued to sit during and beyond the Civil War without its royalist members, because of the Dissolution Act.

In March 1642, with the King absent from London and war clouds gathering, Parliament decreed that its own Parliamentary Ordinances were valid laws, even without royal assent. The Militia Ordinance was passed on 5 March by Parliament and gave Parliament control of the local militia called Trained Bands. Control of the London trained bands was the most strategically critical, because they could protect the radical members of Parliament from armed intervention against them by any soldiers which Charles had near the capital. In response to the Militia Ordinance, Charles revived the Commissions of Array as a means of summoning an army instead.

For events between 1642 and 1648, See First English Civil War

In 1645 Parliament reaffirmed its determination to fight the war to a finish. It passed the Self-denying Ordinance, by which all members of either House of Parliament laid down their commands, and re-organized its main forces into the New Model Army ("Army"), under the command of Thomas Fairfax, with Cromwell as his second-in-command and Lieutenant-General of Horse. . In two decisive engagementsthe Battle of Naseby on 14 June and the Battle of Langport on 10 Julythe Parliamentarians effectively destroyed Charles' armies. . 

In the remains of his English realm, Charles tried to recover a stable base of support by consolidating the Midlands. He began to form an axis between Oxford and Newark on Trent in Nottinghamshire. Those towns had become fortresses and showed more reliable loyalty to him than to others. He took Leicester, which lies between them, but found his resources exhausted. Having little opportunity to replenish them, in May 1646 he sought shelter with a Presbyterian Scottish army at Southwell in Nottinghamshire. . Charles was eventually handed over to the English Parliament by the Scots and was imprisoned. . This marked the end of the First English Civil War.

Eventually King Charles I did cooperate with the independent investigation made by the house on the policies of his administration and a political stalemate was essentially determined. In 1648, Parliament determined that it was not to abjure the King's person. "During the negotiations with the King, he manifested a fixed resolution to do all that could be done to make the best of the opportunity the country then enjoyed, of securing to itself the blessings of liberty". Eventually King Charles I's terms of reforming the government as proposed by the Long Parliament were accepted by the House at a vote of 129 to 83 on 1 December 1648, allowing for the King's restoration and the end of the stalemate between Parliament and the King. Legally, this should have ended the Civil War and restored the King with limited powers.

==Rump Parliament (6 December 1648  20 April 1653)==
Oliver Cromwell dissolving the Long Parliament.

Divisions emerged between various factions, culminating in Pride's Purge on 7 December 1648, when, under the orders of Oliver Cromwell's son-in-law Henry Ireton, Colonel Pride physically barred and arrested 41 of the members of Parliament. Many of the excluded members were Presbyterians. Henry Vane the younger removed himself from Parliament in protest of this unlawful action by Ireton. He was not party to the execution of Charles I, although Cromwell was. In the wake of the ejections, the remnant, the Rump Parliament, arranged for the trial and execution of Charles I on 30 January 1649. It was also responsible for the setting up of the Commonwealth of England in 1649.

Henry Vane the Younger, was persuaded to rejoin Parliament on 17 February 1649 and a Council of state was installed, into whose hands the executive government of the nation was committed. Sir Henry Vane was appointed a member of the Council. Cromwell used great pains to induce Vane to accept the appointment, and after many consultations, he so far prevailed in satisfying Vane of the purity of his principles in reference to the Commonwealth, as to overcome his reluctance again to enter the public service. Sir Henry Vane was for some time President of the Council, and, as Treasurer and Commissioner for the Navy, he had almost the exclusive direction of that branch of public service.

Cromwell "well knew that while the Long Parliament, that noble company, who had fought the great battle of liberty from the beginning, remained in session, and such men as Vane were enabled to mingle in its deliberations, it would be utterly useless for him to think of executing his purposes (to set up a Protectorate or Dictatorship). Henry Vane was working on a Reform Bill. Cromwell knew "that if the Reform Bill should be suffered to pass, and a House of Commons be convened, freely elected on popular principles, and constituting a full and fair and equal representation, it would be impossible ever after to overthrow the liberties of the people, or break down the government of the country". According to General Edmund Ludlow (an unapologetic supporter of the Good Old Cause who lived in exile after the Restoration), this reform bill provided for an equal representation of the people, disfranchised several boroughs which had ceased to have a population in proportion to representation, fixed the number of the House at four hundred". It would have "secured to England and to the rest of the world the blessings of republican institutions, two centuries earlier than can now be expected".

"Harrison, who was in Cromwell's confidence on this occasion, rose to debate the motion, merely in order to gain time. Word was carried to Cromwell, that the House were on the point of putting the final motion; and Colonel Ingoldby hastened to Whitehall to tell him, that, if he intended to do anything decisive, he had no time to lose". Once the troops were in place Cromwell entered the assembly. He was dressed in a suit of plain black; with grey worsted stockings. He took his seat; and appeared to be listening to the debate. As the Speaker was about to rise to put the question, Cromwell whispered to Harrison, "Now is the time; I must do it". As he rose, his countenance became flushed and blacked by the terrific passions, which the crisis awakened. With the most reckless violence of manner and language, he abused the character of the House; and, after the first burst of his denunciations had passed, suddenly changing his tone, he exclaimed, "You think, perhaps, this is not parliamentary language; I know it; nor are you to expect such from me". He then advanced out into the middle of the hall, and walked to and fro, like a man beside himself. In a few moments he stamped upon the floor, the doors flew open and a file of musketeers entered. As they advance, Cromwell exclaimed, looking over the House, "You are no Parliament; I say you are no Parliament; begone, and give place to honester men".

"While this extraordinary scene was transacting, the members, hardly believing their own ears and eyes, sat in mute amazement, horror, and pity of the maniac traitor who was storming and raving before them. At length Vane rose to remonstrate, and call him to his senses; but Cromwell, instead of listening to him, drowned his voice, repeating with great vehemence, and as though with the desperate excitement of the moment, "Sir Harry Vane! Sir Harry Vane! Good Lord deliver me from Sir Harry Vane!" He then seized the records, snatched the bill from the hands of the clerk, drove the members out at the point of the bayonet, locked the doors, put the key in his pocket, and returned to Whitehall.

Oliver Cromwell forcibly disbanded the Rump in 1653 when it seemed to be planning to perpetuate itself rather than call new elections as had been agreed. It was followed by the Barebones Parliament and then the First, Second and Third Protectorate Parliament

==Recall of the Rump (21 April 1653  30 September 1659)==
After Richard Cromwell, who had succeeded his father Oliver as Lord Protector in 1658, was effectively deposed by an officers' coup in April 1659, the officers re-summoned the Rump Parliament to sit. It convened on 7 May 1659, but after five months in power it again clashed with the army (led by John Lambert) and was again forcibly dissolved on 13 October 1659. Once again, Sir Henry Vane was the leading catalyst for the republican cause in opposition to force by the military.

The persons connected with the administration as it existed at the death of Oliver, were of course interested in keeping things as they were; and, as it was necessary for some one to assume the reins of government until the public will could be ascertained and brought into exercise. Henry Vane was elected to Parliament at Kingston upon Hull, but the certificate was given to another. Vane proceeded to Bristol, entered the canvass, and received the majority. Again the certificate was given to another. Finally Vane proceeded to Whitechurch in Hampshire and was elected a third time and was this time seated in Parliament. Vane managed the debates on behalf of the House of Commons. One of Vane's speeches effectively ended Richard Cromwell's career:

This speech swept everything before it. The Rump Parliament which Oliver Cromwell had dispersed in 1653 was once more summoned to assemble, by a declaration from the Council of Officers dated on 6 May 1659.

===Disruption (1 October 1659  1 January 1660)===

Edmond Ludlow made several attempts to reconcile the army and parliament in this time period but was ultimately unsuccessful. Parliament ordered the regiments of Colonel Morley and Colonel Moss to march to Westminster for their security, and sent for the rest of the troops that were about the London to draw down to them also with all speed. cites Weekly Intelligencer, 1118 October 1659; Declaration of the officers of the army 27 October 1659; Crate, Original Letters, ii.247 

In October 1659, Colonel Lambert and various subordinate members of the army, and acting in the military interest, resisted Colonel Morley and others who were defending rump Parliament. Colonel Lambert, Major Grimes, and Colonel Sydenham eventually gained their points, and placed guards both by land and water, to hinder the members of Parliament from approaching the House. Though Colonel Lambert subsequently acquitted himself to Henry Vane the Younger and Edmond Ludlow and the "Committee on Safety" an instrument of the Wallingford House party acting under their miss-direction.

Nevertheless, Parliament was closed once again by military force until such time that the army and leaders of Parliament could effect a resolution. Rule then passed to an unelected Committee of Safety, including Lambert and Vane; pending a resolution or compromise with the Army.

During these disorders, the Council of State still assembled at the usual place and

The Council of Officers at first attempted to come to some agreement with the leaders of Parliament. cites: Guizot, Richard Cromwell, ii. 267, and the proceedings of the Council of officers on 15 October On 15 October 1659, the Council of Officers appointed ten persons to "consider of fit ways and means to carry on the affairs and government of the Commonwealth". On 26 October 1659 the Council of Officers appointed a new Committee of Safety of twenty-three members. cites: A True Narrative, pp. 21, 41; Guizot Cromwell, ii. 272. 

On 1 November 1659, the Committee of Safety nominated a committee "to consider of and prepare a form of government to be settled over the three nations in the way of a free state and Commonwealth, and afterwards to present it to the Committee of Safety for their further considerations". cites: Guizot, Richard Cromwell, ii. 284 

The designs of General Fleetwood of the army and the Wallingford House party were now suspected as being in a possible alliance with Charles II. According to Edmond Ludlow: 

Edmond Ludlow warned both the Army and key members of Parliament that unless a compromise could be made it would "render all the blood and treasure that had been spent in asserting our liberties of no use to us, but also force us under such a yoke of servitude, that neither we nor our posterity should be able to bear".

Starting on 17 December 1659, Henry Vane representing the Parliament, Major Saloway and Colonel Salmon with powers from the officers of the army to treat with the fleet, and Vice-Admiral Lawson met in negotiating a compromise. The navy was very adverse to any proposal of terms to be made with the Parliament before Parliament's readmission, insisting upon the absolute submission of the army to the authority of Parliament. cites Narrative of the Proceedings of the Fleet, published in 1659, and reprinted in Penn's Memorials of Sir William Penn, ii. 186 A plan was then put in place declaring a resolution to join with the Generals at Portsmouth, Colonel Monck, and Vice-Admiral Lawson, but it was still unknown to the republican party that Colonel Monck was in league with King Charles II.

Colonel Monck, though a hero to the restoration of King Charles II, was also treacherously disloyal to the Long Parliament, to his oath to the present Parliament, and to the Good Old Cause. Ludlow stated in early January 1660 when in conversation with several key officers of the army:

This statement may be verified by the many executions of key Parliament members and Generals after the restoration of King Charles II. Therefore the restoration of King Charles II could not be an act of the Long Parliament acting freely under its own authority, but only under the influence of the sword by Colonel Monck, who traded his loyalties for the present Long Parliament, in preference to a reformed Long Parliament and to the restoration of King Charles II.

Finally, on 22 April 1660, "Major-General Lambert's party was dispersed" and General Lambert taken prisoner by Colonel Ingoldsby.

==Restoration and dissolution of the Long Parliament (21 February 1660  16 March 1660)==
General George Monck, who had been Cromwell's viceroy in Scotland, feared that the military stood to lose power and secretly shifted his loyalty to the Crown. As he began to march south, Lambert, who had ridden out to face him, lost support in London. However, the Navy declared for Parliament, and on 26 December 1659 the Rump was restored to power.

On 9 January 1660, Monk arrived in London and his plans were communicated. Whereupon Henry Vane the Younger was discharged from being a member of the Long Parliament; and Major Saloway was reproved for his role and committed to the Tower during the pleasure of the house. Lieutenant-General Fleetwood, Col. Sydenham, Lord Commissioner Whitlock, Cornelius Holland, and Mr. Strickland were required to clear themselves touching their deportment in that affair. High treason was also declared against Miles Corbet, Cor. John Jones, Col. Thomlinson, and Edmond Ludlow on 19 January 1660. 1,500 other Officers were removed from their command and "scarce one of ten of the old officers of the army were continued". Any known Anabaptists in the army were specifically discharged. So tame was the Parliament grown, that though it was most visible that Monk's letters and Arthur Haslerig's instructions were designed for the dissolution of the Long Parliament, they were obeyed by the remainder of the members and all these designs were to be put into execution. Though named by Parliament for treason, Miles Corbet and Edmond Ludlow were for a while were permitted to continue to sit with Parliament, and for a time the charges against these men were dropped. cites: Price, 
and Method of his Majesty's happy restoration, reprinted by Maseres, p.751; cf. Guizot, Richard Cromwell, ii. 371; Carte Ormonde, iv. 51 

After this initial show of deference to the Rump, Monck quickly found them unwilling to continue in cooperation with his plan for an election of a new parliament (the Rump Parliament believed Monck was accountable to them and had its own plan for free elections); so on 21 February 1660 he forcibly reinstated the members 'secluded' by Pride's purge in 1648, so that they could prepare legislation for the Convention Parliament. Some of the Rump Parliament were opposed and refused to sit with the Secluded Members.

On 27 February 1660, "the new Council of State being informed of some designs against the usurped power, issued out warrants for apprehending divers officers of the army; and having some jealousy of others that were members of Parliament, they procured an order of their House to authorize them to seize any member who had not sat since the coming in of the Secluded Members, if there should be occasion.

When the house was ready to pass the Act for dissolution, Mr. Crew who had been as forward as any man in beginning and carrying on the war against the last King, moved, that before they dissolved themselves, they would bear their witness against the horrid murder, as he called it, of the King. "Mr. Thomas Scott, who had been so much deluded by the hypocrisy of Monk...said: 'That though he knew not where to hide his head at that time, yet he durst not refuse to own, that not only his hand, but his heart also was in it' and after he had produced divers reasons to prove the justice of it, he concluded, 'that he should desire no greater honor in this world, than that the following inscription might be engraved on his tomb; "Here lies one who had a hand and a heart in the execution of Charles Stuart late King of England.' Having said this, he and most of the members who had a right to sit in Parliament, withdrew from the House; so that there was not the fourth part of a quorum of lawful members present in the House when the Secluded Members, who had been voted out of the Parliament by those that had an undisputed authority over their own members, undertook to dissolve the Parliament, which was not to be done, unless by their own consent; and whether that consent was ever given, is submitted to the judgment of all impartial men".

Having called for elections for a new Parliament to meet on 25 April, the Long Parliament was dissolved on 16 March 1660.

==After effects, Royalist and Republican Theories==

"Hitherto Monk had continued to make solemn protestations of his affection and fidelity to the Commonwealth interest, against a King and House of Lords; but the new militia being settled, and a Convention, calling themselves a Parliament and fit for his purpose, being met at Westminster, he sent to such lords as had sat with the Parliament till 1648, to return to the place where they used to sit, which they did, upon assurance from him, that no others should be permitted to sit with them; which promise he also broke, and let in not only such as had deserted to Oxford, but the late created lords. And Charles Stuart, eldest son of the late King, being informed of these transactions, left the Spanish territories where he then resided, and by the advise of Monk went to Breda, a town belonging to the States of Holland: from when he sent his letters and a declaration to the two House by Sir John Greenvil; whereupon the nominal House of Commons, though called by a Commonwealth writ in the name of the Keepers of the Liberties of England, passed a vote about April 25, 1660, 'That the government of the nation should be by a King, Lords and Commons, and that Charles Stuart should be proclamed King of England'".

"The Lord Mayor, Sheriffs and Aldermen of the City, treated their King with a collation under a tent, placed in St. George's Fields; and five or six hundred citizens cloathed in coats of black velvet, and (not improperly) wearing chains about their necks, by an order of the Common Council, attended on the triumph of that day;...and those who had been so often defeated in the field, and had contributed nothing either of bravery or policy to this change, in ordering the souldiery to ride with swords drawn through the city of London to White Hall, the Duke of York and Monk leading the way; and intimating (as was supposed) a resolution to maintain that by force which had been obtained by fraud".

Initially seven individual, and later 'twenty persons were put to death for life and estate.' These included: Chief Justice Coke, who had been Solicitor to the High Court of Justice, Major-General Harrison, Col. John Jones (also a member of the High Court of Justice), Mr. Thomas Scot, Sir. Henry Vane, Sir. Arthur Haslerig, Sir. Henry Mildmay, Mr. Robert Wallop, the Lord Mounson, Sir. James Harrington, Mr. James Challoner, Mr. John Phelps, Mr. John Carew, Mr. Hugh Peters, Mr. Gregory Clement, Colonel Adrian Scroop, Col. Francis Hacker, Col. Daniel Axtel. Among those who appeared the most basely subservient to these 'exorbitancies' of the Court, 'Mr. William Prynn was singularly remarkable' and attempted to add to these all who 'abjured the family of the Stuarts' previously, though this motion failed. cites: Mercurius Publicus, 31 May  7 June 1660 

"John Finch who had been accused of high treason twenty years before, by a full Parliament, and who by flying from their justice had saved his life, was appointed to judge some of those who should have been his judges; and Sir. Orlando Bridgman, who upon his submission to Cromwell had been permitted to practice the law in a private manner, and under that colour had served both as spy and agent for his master, was entrusted with the principal management of this tragic scene; and in his charge to the Grand Jury, had the assurance to tell them 'That no authority, no single person, or community of men; not the people collectively or representatively, had any coercive power over the King of England'".

In framing the Act of Indemnity and Oblivion, the House of Commons were unwilling to except Sir Henry Vane, Sir. Arthur Haslerig, and Major-General Lambert as they had no immediate hand in the death of the King, and there was as much reason to except them as most of the members of Parliament from its benefits. In Henry Vane's case the House of Lords were desirous of having him specifically excepted, so as to leave him at the mercy of the government and thus restrain him from the exercise of his great talents in promoting his favourite republican principles at any time during the remainder of his life. At a conference between the two Houses, it was concluded that the Commons should consent to except him from the act of indemnity, the Lords agreeing, on their part, to concur with the other House in petitioning the King, in case of the condemnation of Vane, not to carry the sentence into execution. General Edmond Ludlow, still loyal to the Rump Parliament was also excepted. cites Old Parliamentary History, xxii. 419 

According to contemporary royalist legal theory, the Long Parliament was regarded as having been automatically dissolved from the moment of Charles I's execution on 30 January 1649. This view was confirmed by a court ruling during the treason trial of Henry Vane the Younger. A ruling that Henry Vane himself had concurred with in opposition to Oliver Cromwell years earlier.

However it is a well known fact that the trial given to Henry Vane as to his own person, and defence of his own part played for the Long Parliament was a forgone conclusion. It was not a fair trial as both his defence, and deportment at the time of defence bears out. He was not given legal council (other than the judges that sat at his trial); and was left to conduct his own defence after years in prison. Sir Henry Vane maintained the following at his trial:
# Whether the collective body of the Parliament can be impeached of high treason?
# Whether any person, acting by authority of Parliament, can (so long as he acting by that authority) commit treason?
# Whether matters, acted by that authority, can be called in question in an inferior court?
# Whether a king de jure, and out of possession, can have treason committed against him?

King Charles II did not keep the promise made to the house but executed the sentence of death on Sir Henry Vane the Younger. The solicitor, openly declared in his speech afterwards "that he (Henry Vane) must be made a public sacrifice". One of his judges stated: "We knew not how to answer him, but we know what to do with him".

Edmond Ludlow one of the members of Parliament excepted by the act of indemnity, fled to Switzerland after the restoration of King Charles II, where he wrote his memoirs of these events.

The Long Parliament began with the execution of Lord Stafford, and effectively ended with the execution of Henry Vane the Younger.

The republican theory is that the goal and aim of the Long Parliament was to institute a constitutional, balanced, and equally representative form of government along similar lines as were later accomplished in America by the American Revolution. It is clear from the writings of both Ludlow, Vane, and historians of the early American period such as Upham, that this is what they were striving for and why they were excepted from the acts of indemnity. The republican theory also suggests that the Long Parliament would have been successful in these necessary reforms except through the forceful intervention of Oliver Cromwell (and others) in removing the loyalists party, the unlawful execution of King Charles I, later dissolving the Rump Parliament; and finally the forceful dissolution of the reconvened Rump Parliament by Monck when less than a fourth of the required members were present. It is believed that in many ways this struggle was but a precursor to the American Revolution.

==Notable members of the Long Parliament==
*Sir John Coolepeper
*Oliver Cromwell
*Sir Simonds D'Ewes
*George Digby, 2nd Earl of Bristol
*Lucius Cary, 2nd Viscount Falkland
*John Hampden
*Sir Robert Harley
*Major-General Harrison
*Sir Arthur Haselrig
*Denzil Holles, 1st Baron Holles
*Edward Hyde, 1st Earl of Clarendon
*William Lenthall
*Edmond Ludlow
*John Pym
*Sir Benjamin Rudyerd
*William Russell, 1st Duke of Bedford
*Oliver St John
*Sir Francis Seymour, 1st Baron Seymour of Trowbridge
*Sir Nicholas Slanning
*William Strode
*James Temple
*Sir Henry Vane the Elder
*Sir Henry Vane the Younger
*Sir Nicholas Crisp

==Time line==
* Triennial Act, passed 15 February 1641
* Archbishop William Laud imprisoned 26 February 1641
* Act against Dissolving the Long Parliament without its own Consent 11 May 1641
* Thomas Wentworth, 1st Earl of Strafford executed 12 May 1641
* Abolition of the Star Chamber 5 July 1641
* Ship Money declared illegal 7 August 1641
* Grand Remonstrance 22 November 1641
* Militia Bill December 1641
* The Kings answer to the petition accompanying the Grand Remonstrance 23 December 1641
* The King's attempt to seize the Five Members 4 January 1642
* The King and Royal Family leave Whitehall for Hampton Court. January 1642
* The King leaves Hampton Court for the North 2 March 1642 
* Militia Ordinance agreed by Lords and Commons 5 March 1642
* Parliament decreed that Parliamentary Ordinances were valid without royal assent following the King's refusal to assent to the Militia Ordinance 15 March 1642
* Adventurers Act to raise money to suppress the Irish Rebellion of 1641 19 March 1642
* The Solemn League and Covenant 25 September 1643
* Ordinance appointing the First Committee of both Kingdoms 16 February 1644
* The Self-denying Ordinance 4 April 1645
* Parliament accepts the King's terms 1 December 1648
* Pride's Purge (Start of the Rump Parliament) 7 December 1648
* Excluded members of the Long Parliament reinstated by George Monck 21 February 1660
* Having called for elections for a Parliament to meet on 25 April, the Long Parliament dissolved itself on 16 March 1660

==See also==
*List of MPs elected to the English parliament in 1640 (November)
*List of MPs in the English parliament in 1645 and after
*List of Parliaments of England

==Notes==

==References==
* 
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

==Further reading==
* British Civil Wars: The Long Parliament
* British Civil Wars: 1641 Time Line
* British Civil Wars: 1642 Time Line
* Full text of The Triennial Act. 15 February 1641
* Full text of the Act against Dissolving the Long Parliament without its own Consent 11 May 1641
* Full text of the act Abolishing the Star Chamber 5 July 1641
* Full text of the Act Declaring the Illegality of Ship-money 7 August 1641
* Full Text of the Grand Remonstrance, with the Petition accompanying it. 22 November 1641
* Full text of the Kings Answer to the Petition Accompanying the Grand Remonstrance 23 December 1641
* Full text of The Solemn League and Covenant 25 September 1643
* Full text of the Ordinance appointing the First Committee of both Kingdoms 16 February 1644
* Full text of the Self-denying Ordinance 4 April 1645
* List of members and their allegiance in the Civil War



[[Lubricant]]

A lubricant is a substance introduced to reduce friction between moving surfaces. It may also have the function of transporting foreign particles. The property of reducing friction is known as lubricity (or slipperiness).

In addition to industrial applications, lubricants are used for many other purposes. Other uses include cooking (oils and fats in use in frying pans, in baking to prevent food sticking), bio-medical applications on humans (e.g. lubricants for artificial joints), ultrasound examination, internal examinations for males and females, and the use of personal lubricant for sexual purposes.

== Properties ==

A good lubricant possesses the following characteristics:
* high boiling point and low freezing point (in order to stay liquid within a wide range of temperature)
* high viscosity index
* thermal stability
* hydraulic stability
* demulsibility
* corrosion prevention
* high resistance to oxidation.

=== Formulation ===

Typically lubricants contain 90% base oil (most often petroleum fractions, called mineral oils) and less than 10% additives. Vegetable oils or synthetic liquids such as hydrogenated polyolefins, esters, silicones, fluorocarbons and many others are sometimes used as base oils. Additives deliver reduced friction and wear, increased viscosity, improved viscosity index, resistance to corrosion and oxidation, aging or contamination, etc.

Non-liquid lubricants include grease, powders (dry graphite, PTFE, Molybdenum disulfide, tungsten disulfide, etc.), PTFE tape used in plumbing, air cushion and others. Dry lubricants such as graphite, molybdenum disulfide and tungsten disulfide also offer lubrication at temperatures (up to 350 C) higher than liquid and oil-based lubricants are able to operate. Limited interest has been shown in low friction properties of compacted oxide glaze layers formed at several hundred degrees Celsius in metallic sliding systems, however, practical use is still many years away due to their physically unstable nature.

=== Additives ===

A large number of additives are used to impart performance characteristics to the lubricants. The main families of additives are:
* Antioxidants
* Detergents
* Anti-wear
* Metal deactivators
* Corrosion inhibitors, Rust inhibitors
* Friction modifiers
* Extreme Pressure
* Anti-foaming agents
* Viscosity index improvers
* Demulsifying/Emulsifying
* Stickiness improver, provide adhesive property towards tool surface (in metalworking)
* Complexing agent (in case of greases)

Note that many of the basic chemical compounds used as detergents (example: calcium sulfonate) serve the purpose of the first seven items in the list as well. Usually it is not economically or technically feasible to use a single do-it-all additive compound. Oils for hypoid gear lubrication will contain high content of EP additives. Grease lubricants may contain large amount of solid particle friction modifiers, such as graphite, molybdenum sulfide.

== Types of lubricants ==

In 1999, an estimated 37,300,000 tons of lubricants were consumed worldwide. Thorsten Bartels et al. "Lubricants and Lubrication" in Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry, 2005, Weinheim. Automotive applications dominate, but other industrial, marine, and metal working applications are also big consumers of lubricants. Although air and other gas-based lubricants are known (e.g., in fluid bearings), liquid and solid lubricants dominate the market, especially the former.

Lubricants are generally composed of a majority of base oil plus a variety of additives to impart desirable characteristics. Although generally lubricants are based on one type of base oil, mixtures of the base oils also are used to meet performance requirements.

=== Base oil groups ===

Mineral oil term is used to encompass lubricating base oil derived from crude oil. The American Petroleum Institute (API) designates several types of lubricant base oil: Engine Oil Publications 

* Group I  Saturates 0.03%, and Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) viscosity index (VI) of 80 to 120
: Manufactured by solvent extraction, solvent or catalytic dewaxing, and hydro-finishing processes. Common Group I base oil are 150SN (solvent neutral), 500SN, and 150BS (brightstock)
* Group II  Saturates over 90% and sulfur under 0.03%, and SAE viscosity index of 80 to 120
: Manufactured by hydrocracking and solvent or catalytic dewaxing processes. Group II base oil has superior anti-oxidation properties since virtually all hydrocarbon molecules are saturated. It has water-white color.
* Group III  Saturates > 90%, sulfur <0.03%, and SAE viscosity index over 120
: Manufactured by special processes such as isohydromerization. Can be manufactured from base oil or slax wax from dewaxing process.
* Group IV  Polyalphaolefins (PAO)
* Group V  All others not included above such as naphthenics, PAG, esters.

The lubricant industry commonly extends this group terminology to include:
* Group I+ with a Viscosity Index of 103108
* Group II+ with a Viscosity Index of 113119
* Group III+ with a Viscosity Index of at least 140

Can also be classified into three categories depending on the prevailing compositions:
* Paraffinic
* Naphthenic
* Aromatic

:: Lubricants for internal combustion engines contain additives to reduce oxidation and improve lubrication. The main constituent of such lubricant product is called the base oil, base stock. While it is advantageous to have a high-grade base oil in a lubricant, proper selection of the lubricant additives is equally as important. Thus some poorly selected formulation of PAO lubricant may not last as long as more expensive formulation of Group III+ lubricant.

=== Biolubricants made from vegetable oils and other renewable sources ===

These are primarily triglyceride esters derived from plants and animals. For lubricant base oil use the vegetable derived materials are preferred. Common ones include high oleic canola oil, castor oil, palm oil, sunflower seed oil and rapeseed oil from vegetable, and Tall oil from tree sources. Many vegetable oils are often hydrolyzed to yield the acids which are subsequently combined selectively to form specialist synthetic esters. Other naturally derived lubricants include lanolin (wool grease, a natural water repellent).

Whale oil was a historically important lubricant, with some uses up to the latter part of the 20th century as a friction modifier additive for automatic transmission fluid. Turbo hydra-matic 350 By Ron Sessions, page 20. 

In 2008, the biolubricant market was around 1% of UK lubricant sales in a total lubricant market of 840,000 tonnes/year. National Non-Food Crops Centre. NNFCC Conference Poster. Improved winter rape varieties for biolubricants 

Lanolin is a natural water repellent, derived from sheep wool grease, and is an alternative to the more common petro-chemical based lubricants. This lubricant is also a corrosion inhibitor, protecting against rust, salts, and acids.

Water can also be used on its own, or as a major component in combination with one of the other base oils. Commonly used in engineering processes, such as milling and lathe turning.

=== Synthetic oils ===

* Polyalpha-olefin (PAO)
* Synthetic esters
* Polyalkylene glycols (PAG)
* Phosphate esters
* Alkylated naphthalenes (AN)
* Silicate esters
* Ionic fluids

=== Solid lubricants ===

PTFE: polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) is typically used as a coating layer on, for example, cooking utensils to provide a non-stick surface. Its usable temperature range up to 350 C and chemical inertness make it a useful additive in special greases. Under extreme pressures, PTFE powder or solids is of little value as it is soft and flows away from the area of contact. Ceramic or metal or alloy lubricants must be used then. "Teflon" is a brand of PTFE owned by DuPont Co. 

Inorganic solids: Graphite, hexagonal boron nitride, molybdenum disulfide and tungsten disulfide are examples of materials that can be used as solid lubricants, often to very high temperature. The use of some such materials is sometimes restricted by their poor resistance to oxidation (e.g., molybdenum disulfide can only be used up to 350C in air, but 1100C in reducing environments).

Metal/alloy: Metal alloys, composites and pure metals can be used as grease additives or the sole constituents of sliding surfaces and bearings. Cadmium and Gold are used for plating surfaces which gives them good corrosion resistance and sliding properties, Lead, Tin, Zinc alloys and various Bronze alloys are used as sliding bearings, or their powder can be used to lubricate sliding surfaces alone, or as additives to

=== Aqueous lubrication ===
Aqueous lubrication is of interest in a number of technological applications. Strongly hydrated brush polymers such as PEG can act as lubricants at liquid solid interfaces. Macrotribological Studies of Poly(L-lysine)-graft-Poly(ethylene glycol) in Aqueous Glycerol Mixtures PC Nalam, JN Clasohm, A Mashaghi, ND Spencer. Tribol Lett (2010) 37:541552 By continuous rapid exchange of bound water with other free water molecules, these polymer films keep the surfaces separated while maintaining a high uidity at the brushbrush interface at high compressions, thus leading to a very low coefcient of friction.

== Applications ==

Lubricants perform the following key functions:
* Keep moving parts apart
* Reduce friction
* Transfer heat
* Carry away contaminants & debris
* Transmit power
* Protect against wear
* Prevent corrosion
* Seal for gases
* Stop the risk of smoke and fire of objects
* Prevent rust.

One of the single largest applications for lubricants, in the form of motor oil, is protecting the internal combustion engines in motor vehicles and powered equipment.

Lubricants such as 2-cycle oil are added to fuels like gasoline which has low lubricity. Sulfur impurities in fuels also provide some lubrication properties, which has to be taken in account when switching to a low-sulfur diesel; biodiesel is a popular diesel fuel additive providing additional lubricity.

Another approach to reducing friction and wear is to use bearings such as ball bearings, roller bearings or air bearings, which in turn require internal lubrication themselves, or to use sound, in the case of acoustic lubrication.

=== Keep moving parts apart ===

Lubricants are typically used to separate moving parts in a system. This has the benefit of reducing friction and surface fatigue, together with reduced heat generation, operating noise and vibrations. Lubricants achieve this by several ways. The most common is by forming a physical barrier i.e., a thin layer of lubricant separates the moving parts. This is analogous to hydroplaning, the loss of friction observed when a car tire is separated from the road surface by moving through standing water. This is termed hydrodynamic lubrication. In cases of high surface pressures or temperatures, the fluid film is much thinner and some of the forces are transmitted between the surfaces through the lubricant.

=== Reduce friction ===

Typically the lubricant-to-surface friction is much less than surface-to-surface friction in a system without any lubrication. Thus use of a lubricant reduces the overall system friction. Reduced friction has the benefit of reducing heat generation and reduced formation of wear particles as well as improved efficiency. Lubricants may contain additives known as friction modifiers that chemically bind to metal surfaces to reduce surface friction even when there is insufficient bulk lubricant present for hydrodynamic lubrication, e.g. protecting the valve train in a car engine at startup.

=== Transfer heat ===

Both gas and liquid lubricants can transfer heat. However, liquid lubricants are much more effective on account of their high specific heat capacity. Typically the liquid lubricant is constantly circulated to and from a cooler part of the system, although lubricants may be used to warm as well as to cool when a regulated temperature is required. This circulating flow also determines the amount of heat that is carried away in any given unit of time. High flow systems can carry away a lot of heat and have the additional benefit of reducing the thermal stress on the lubricant. Thus lower cost liquid lubricants may be used. The primary drawback is that high flows typically require larger sumps and bigger cooling units. A secondary drawback is that a high flow system that relies on the flow rate to protect the lubricant from thermal stress is susceptible to catastrophic failure during sudden system shut downs. An automotive oil-cooled turbocharger is a typical example. Turbochargers get red hot during operation and the oil that is cooling them only survives as its residence time in the system is very short i.e. high flow rate. If the system is shut down suddenly (pulling into a service area after a high speed drive and stopping the engine) the oil that is in the turbo charger immediately oxidizes and will clog the oil ways with deposits. Over time these deposits can completely block the oil ways, reducing the cooling with the result that the turbo charger experiences total failure typically with seized bearings.
Non-flowing lubricants such as greases & pastes are not effective at heat transfer although they do contribute by reducing the generation of heat in the first place.

=== Carry away contaminants and debris ===

Lubricant circulation systems have the benefit of carrying away internally generated debris and external contaminants that get introduced into the system to a filter where they can be removed. Lubricants for machines that regularly generate debris or contaminants such as automotive engines typically contain detergent and dispersant additives to assist in debris and contaminant transport to the filter and removal. Over time the filter will get clogged and require cleaning or replacement, hence the recommendation to change a car's oil filter at the same time as changing the oil. In closed systems such as gear boxes the filter may be supplemented by a magnet to attract any iron fines that get created.

It is apparent that in a circulatory system the oil will only be as clean as the filter can make it, thus it is unfortunate that there are no industry standards by which consumers can readily assess the filtering ability of various automotive filters. Poor filtration significantly reduces the life of the machine (engine) as well as making the system inefficient.

=== Transmit power ===

Lubricants known as hydraulic fluid are used as the working fluid in hydrostatic power transmission. Hydraulic fluids comprise a large portion of all lubricants produced in the world. The automatic transmission's torque converter is another important application for power transmission with lubricants.

=== Protect against wear ===

Lubricants prevent wear by keeping the moving parts apart. Lubricants may also contain anti-wear or extreme pressure additives to boost their performance against wear and fatigue.

=== Prevent corrosion ===

Good quality lubricants are typically formulated with additives that form chemical bonds with surfaces, or exclude moisture, to prevent corrosion and rust.

=== Seal for gases ===

Lubricants will occupy the clearance between moving parts through the capillary force, thus sealing the clearance. This effect can be used to seal pistons and shafts.

=== Application by fluid types ===

* Automotive
** Engine oils
*** Petrol (Gasoline) engine oils
*** Diesel engine oils
** Automatic transmission fluid
** Gearbox fluids
** Brake fluids
** Hydraulic fluids
* Tractor (one lubricant for all systems)
** Universal Tractor Transmission Oil  UTTO
** Super Tractor Oil Universal  STOU  includes engine
* Other motors
** 2-stroke engine oils
*Sexual 
**Personal lubricant
* Industrial
** Hydraulic oils
** Air compressor oils
** Food Grade lubricants
** Gas Compressor oils
** Gear oils
** Bearing and circulating system oils
** Refrigerator compressor oils
** Steam and gas turbine oils
* Aviation
** Gas turbine engine oils
** Piston engine oils
* Marine
** Crosshead cylinder oils
** Crosshead Crankcase oils
** Trunk piston engine oils
** Stern tube lubricants
* Horological

== Other relevant phenomena ==
=== "Glaze" formation (high temperature wear) ===

A further phenomenon that has undergone investigation in relation to high temperature wear prevention and lubrication, is that of a compacted oxide layer glaze formation. This is the generation of a compacted oxide layer which sinters together to form a crystalline 'glaze' (not the amorphous layer seen in pottery) generally at high temperatures, from metallic surfaces sliding against each other (or a metallic surface against a ceramic surface). Due to the elimination of metallic contact and adhesion by the generation of oxide, friction and wear is reduced. Effectively, such a surface is self-lubricating.

As the "glaze" is already an oxide, it can survive to very high temperatures in air or oxidising environments. However, it is disadvantaged by it being necessary for the base metal (or ceramic) having to undergo some wear first to generate sufficient oxide debris.

== Marketing ==

The global lubricant market is generally competitive with numerous manufacturers and marketers. Overall the western market may be considered mature with a flat to declining overall volumes while there is strong growth in the emerging economies. The lubricant marketers generally pursue one or more of the following strategies when pursuing business.

* Specification:
The lubricant is said to meet a certain specification. In the consumer market, this is often supported by a logo, symbol or words that inform the consumer that the lubricant marketer has obtained independent verification of conformance to the specification. Examples of these include the APIs donut logo or the NSF tick mark. The most widely perceived is SAE viscosity specification, like SAE 10W-40. Lubricity specifications are institute and manufacturer based. In the U.S. institute: API S for petrol engines, API C for diesel engines. For 2007 the current specs are API SM and API CJ-4. Higher second letter marks better oil properties, like lower engine wear supported by tests. In EU the ACEA specifications are used. There are classes A, B, C, E with number following the letter. Japan introduced the JASO specification for motorbike engines.
In the industrial market place the specification may take the form of a legal contract to supply a conforming fluid or purchasers may choose to buy on the basis of a manufacturers own published specification.

* Original equipment manufacturer (OEM) approval:
Specifications often denote a minimum acceptable performance levels. Thus many equipment manufacturers add on their own particular requirements or tighten the tolerance on a general specification to meet their particular needs (or doing a different set of tests or using different/own testbed engine). This gives the lubricant marketer an avenue to differentiate their product by designing it to meet an OEM specification. Often, the OEM carries out extensive testing and maintains an active list of approved products. This is a powerful marketing tool in the lubricant marketplace. Text on the back of the motor oil label usually has a list of conformity to some OEM specifications, such as MB, MAN, Volvo, Cummins, VW, BMW or others. Manufactures may have vastly different specifications for the range of engines they make; one may not be completely suitable for some other.

* Performance:
The lubricant marketer claims benefits for the customer based on the superior performance of the lubricant. Such marketing is supported by glamorous advertising, sponsorships of typically sporting events and endorsements. Unfortunately broad performance claims are common in the consumer marketplace, which are difficult or impossible for a typical consumer to verify. In the B2B market place the marketer is normally expected to show data that supports the claims, hence reducing the use of broad claims. Increasing performance, reducing wear and fuel consumption is also aim of the later API, ACEA and car manufacturer oil specifications, so lubricant marketers can back their claims by doing extensive (and expensive) testing.

* Longevity:
The marketer claims that their lubricant maintains its performance over a longer period of time. For example in the consumer market, a typical motor oil change interval is around the 3000 . The lubricant marketer may offer a lubricant that lasts for 12000 mi or more to convince a user to pay a premium. Typically, the consumer would need to check or balance the longer life and any warranties offered by the lubricant manufacturer with the possible loss of equipment manufacturer warranties by not following its schedule. Many car and engine manufacturers support extended drain intervals, but request extended drain interval certified oil used in that case; and sometimes a special oil filter. Example: In older Mercedes-Benz engines and in truck engines one can use engine oil MB 228.1 for basic drain interval. Engine oils conforming with higher specification MB 228.3 may be used twice as long, oil of MB 228.5 specification 3x longer. Note that the oil drain interval is valid for new engine with fuel conforming car manufacturer specification. When using lower grade fuel, or worn engine the oil change interval has to shorten accordingly. In general oils approved for extended use are of higher specification and reduce wear.
In the industrial market place the longevity is generally measured in time units and the lubricant marketer can suffer large financial penalties if their claims are not substantiated.

* Efficiency:
The lubricant marketer claims improved equipment efficiency when compared to rival products or technologies, the claim is usually valid when comparing lubricant of higher specification with previous grade. Typically the efficiency is proved by showing a reduction in energy costs to operate the system. Guaranteeing improved efficiency is the goal of some oil test specifications such as API CI-4 Plus for diesel engines. Some car/engine manufacturers also specifically request certain higher efficiency level for lubricants for extended drain intervals.

* Operational tolerance:
The lubricant is claimed to cope with specific operational environment needs. Some common environments include dry, wet, cold, hot, fire risk, high load, high or low speed, chemical compatibility, atmospheric compatibility, pressure or vacuum and various combinations. The usual thermal characteristics is outlined with SAE viscosity given for 100C, like SAE 30, SAE 40. For low temperature viscosity the SAE xxW mark is used. Both markings can be combined together to form a SAE 0W-60 for example. Viscosity index (VI) marks viscosity change with temperature, with higher VI numbers being more temperature stable.

* Economy:
The marketer offers a lubricant at a lower cost than rivals either in the same grade or a similar one that will fill the purpose for lesser price. (Stationary installations with short drain intervals.) Alternative may be offering a more expensive lubricant and promise return in lower wear, specific fuel consumption or longer drain intervals. (Expensive machinery, un-affordable downtimes.)

* Environment friendly:
The lubricant is said to be environmentally friendly. Typically this is supported by qualifying statements or conformance to generally accepted approvals. Several organizations, typically government sponsored, exist globally to qualify and approve such lubricants by evaluating their potential for environmental harm. Typically, the lubricant manufacturer is allowed to indicate such approval by showing some special mark. Examples include the German Blue Angel, European Daisy Eco label, Global Eco-Label GEN mark, Nordic, White Swan, Japanese Earth friendly mark; USA Green Seal, Canadian Environmental Choice, Chinese Huan, Singapore Green Label and the French NF Environment mark.

* Composition:
The marketer claims novel composition of the lubricant which improves some tangible performance over its rivals. Typically the technology is protected via formal patents or other intellectual property protection mechanism to prevent rivals from copying. Lot of claims in this area are simple marketing buzzwords, since most of them are related to a manufacturer specific process naming (which achieves similar results than other ones) but the competition is prohibited from using a trademark.

* Quality:
The marketer claims broad superior quality of its lubricant with no factual evidence. The quality is proven by references to famous brand, sporting figure, racing team, some professional endorsement or some similar subjective claim. All motor oil labels wear mark similar to "of outstanding quality" or "quality additives," the actual comparative evidence is always lacking.

== Disposal and environmental ==

It is estimated that 40% of all lubricants are released into the environment.

Disposal:
Recycling, burning, landfill and discharge into water may achieve disposal of used lubricant.
There are typically strict regulations in most countries regarding disposal in landfill and discharge into water as even small amount of lubricant can contaminate a large amount of water. Most regulations permit a threshold level of lubricant that may be present in waste streams and companies spend hundreds of millions of dollars annually in treating their waste waters to get to acceptable levels.

Burning the lubricant as fuel, typically to generate electricity, is also governed by regulations mainly on account of the relatively high level of additives present. Burning generates both airborne pollutants and ash rich in toxic materials, mainly heavy metal compounds. Thus lubricant burning takes place in specialized facilities that have incorporated special scrubbers to remove airborne pollutants and have access to landfill sites with permits to handle the toxic ash.

Unfortunately, most lubricant that ends up directly in the environment is due to general public discharging it onto the ground, into drains and directly into landfills as trash. Other direct contamination sources include runoff from roadways, accidental spillages, natural or man-made disasters and pipeline leakages.

Improvement in filtration technologies and processes has now made recycling a viable option (with rising price of base stock and crude oil). Typically various filtration systems remove particulates, additives and oxidation products and recover the base oil. The oil may get refined during the process. This base oil is then treated much the same as virgin base oil however there is considerable reluctance to use recycled oils as they are generally considered inferior. Basestock fractionally vacuum distilled from used lubricants has superior properties to all natural oils, but cost effectiveness depends on many factors. Used lubricant may also be used as refinery feedstock to become part of crude oil. Again there is considerable reluctance to this use as the additives, soot and wear metals will seriously poison/deactivate the critical catalysts in the process. Cost prohibits carrying out both filtration (soot, additives removal) and re-refining (distilling, isomerisation, hydrocrack, etc.) however the primary hindrance to recycling still remains the collection of fluids as refineries need continuous supply in amounts measured in cisterns, rail tanks.

Occasionally, unused lubricant requires disposal. The best course of action in such situations is to return it to the manufacturer where it can be processed as a part of fresh batches.

Environment:
Lubricants both fresh and used can cause considerable damage to the environment mainly due to their high potential of serious water pollution. Further the additives typically contained in lubricant can be toxic to flora and fauna. In used fluids the oxidation products can be toxic as well. Lubricant persistence in the environment largely depends upon the base fluid, however if very toxic additives are used they may negatively affect the persistence. Lanolin lubricants are non-toxic making them the environmental alternative which is safe for both users and the environment.

== Societies and industry bodies ==

* American Petroleum Institute (API)
* Society of Tribologists and Lubrication Engineers (STLE)
* National Lubricating Grease Institute (NLGI)
* Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE)
* Independent Lubricant Manufacturer Association (ILMA)
* European Automobile Manufacturers Association (ACEA)
* Japanese Automotive Standards Organization (JASO)
* Petroleum Packaging Council (PPC)

== Major publications ==

* Peer reviewed
** Tribology Transactions
** Journal of Synthetic Lubricants
** Tribology Letters
** Lubrication Science
* Trade periodicals
** Tribology and Lubrication Technology
** Fuels & Lubes International
** Oiltrends
** Lubes n Greases
** Compoundings
** Chemical Market Review
** Machinery lubrication

== See also ==

* Castor oil
* Grease (lubricant)
* Lubrication
* Mineral oils
* Motor oil
* Oil analysis
* Penetrating oil
* Personal lubricant
* Society of Tribologists and Lubrication Engineers
* Tribology

== References ==
=== Notes ===

=== Sources ===

* API 1509, Engine Oil Licensing and Certification System, 15th Edition, 2002. Appendix E, API Base Oil Interchangeability Guidelines for Passenger Car Motor Oils and Diesel Engine Oils (revised)
* Boughton and Horvath, 2003, Environmental Assessment of Used Oil Management Methods, Environmental Science and Technology, V38
* I.A. Inman. Compacted Oxide Layer Formation under Conditions of Limited Debris Retention at the Wear Interface during High Temperature Sliding Wear of Superalloys, Ph.D. Thesis (2003), Northumbria University, ISBN 1-58112-321-3
* Mercedes-Benz oil recommendations, extracted from factory manuals and personal research
* Measuring reserve alkalinity and evaluation of wear dependence
* Testing used oil quality, list of possible measurements
* Lubricant Additives: Chemistry and Applications, Leslie R. Rudnick, CRC Press.

== External links ==

* SAE-ISO-AGMA viscosity conversion chart
* Chart of API Gravity and Specific gravity

 


[[Lise Meitner]]

Lise Meitner (7 November 1878  27 October 1968) was an Austrian, later Swedish, physicist who worked on radioactivity and nuclear physics. Meitner was part of the team that discovered nuclear fission, an achievement for which her colleague Otto Hahn was awarded the Nobel Prize. Meitner is often mentioned as one of the most glaring examples of women's scientific achievement overlooked by the Nobel committee. A 1997 Physics Today study concluded that Meitner's omission was "a rare instance in which personal negative opinions apparently led to the exclusion of a deserving scientist" from the Nobel. Element 109, meitnerium, is named in her honour. 

==Early years==
Meitner in 1906
Meitner was born into a Jewish family as the third of eight children in Vienna, 2nd district (Leopoldstadt). Her father, Philipp Meitner, was one of the first Jewish lawyers in Austria. She was born on 7 November 1878. She shortened her name from Elise to Lise. Cornwell, John. Hitler's Scientists: science, war and the devil's pact (Viking 2003, ISBN 0-670-03075-9), 66. The birth register of Vienna's Jewish community lists Meitner as being born on 17 November 1878, but all other documents list it as 7 November, which is what she used. As an adult, she converted to Christianity, following Lutheranism, Sime, Ruth Lewin (1996) Lise Meitner: A Life in Physics (Series: California studies in the history of science volume 13) University of California Press, Berkeley, California, page 1, ISBN 0-520-08906-5 and was baptized in 1908. Roqu, Xavier "Meitner, Lise (18781968), physicist" Oxford Dictionary of National Biography Oxford University Press, Oxford, England. Retrieved 27 October 2009 

==Education==
Meitner studied physics and became the second woman to obtain a doctoral degree in physics at the University of Vienna in 1905 ("Wrmeleitung im inhomogenen Krper"). Women were not allowed to attend public institutions of higher education in those days, but Meitner was able to achieve a private education in physics in part because of her supportive parents, and she completed in 1901 with an "externe Matura" examination at the Akademisches Gymnasium. Meitner was said to be inspired by her teacher, physicist Ludwig Boltzmann, and was said to often speak with contagious enthusiasm of his lectures. 

In 1926, Meitner became the first woman in Germany to assume a post of full professor in physics, at the University of Berlin. There she undertook the research program in nuclear physics which eventually led to her co-discovery of nuclear fission in 1939, after she had left Berlin. She was praised by Albert Einstein as the "German Marie Curie". Lisa Yount A to Z of women in science and math, Infobase Publishing, 2008, ISBN 0-8160-6695-7, p. 204 Michael F. L'Annunziata Radioactivity: introduction and history, Elsevier, 2007, ISBN 0-444-52715-X, p. 229 

In 1930, Meitner taught a seminar on nuclear physics and chemistry with Le Szilrd. With the discovery of the neutron in the early 1930s, speculation arose in the scientific community that it might be possible to create elements heavier than uranium (atomic number 92) in the laboratory. A scientific race began between Ernest Rutherford in Britain, Irne Joliot-Curie in France, Enrico Fermi in Italy, and the MeitnerHahn team in Berlin. At the time, all concerned believed that this was abstract research for the probable honour of a Nobel prize. None suspected that this research would culminate in nuclear weapons.

When Adolf Hitler came to power in 1933, Meitner was acting director of the Institute for Chemistry. Although she was protected by her Austrian citizenship, all other Jewish scientists, including her nephew Otto Frisch, Fritz Haber, Le Szilrd and many other eminent figures, were dismissed or forced to resign from their posts. Most of them emigrated from Germany. Her response was to say nothing and bury herself in her work; she later acknowledged, in 1946, that "It was not only stupid but also very wrong that I did not leave at once." Cornwell, Hitler's Scientists, 20713 

==Scientific career==
Following the doctoral degree, she rejected an offer to work in a gas lamp factory. Encouraged by her father and backed by his financial support, she went to Berlin. Max Planck allowed her to attend his lectures, an unusual gesture by Planck, who until then had rejected any women wanting to attend his lectures. After one year, Meitner became Planck's assistant. During the first years she worked together with chemist Otto Hahn and discovered with him several new isotopes. In 1909 she presented two papers on beta-radiation.

In 1912 the research group HahnMeitner moved to the newly founded Kaiser-Wilhelm-Institut (KWI) in Berlin-Dahlem, south west in Berlin. She worked without salary as a "guest" in Hahn's department of Radiochemistry. It was not until 1913, at 35 years old and following an offer to go to Prague as associate professor, that she got a permanent position at KWI.

In the first part of World War I, she served as a nurse handling X-ray equipment. She returned to Berlin and her research in 1916, but not without inner struggle. She felt in a way ashamed of wanting to continue her research efforts when thinking about the pain and suffering of the victims of war and their medical and emotional needs. Charlotte Kerner. Lise, Atomphysikerin. Die Lebensgeschichte der Lise Meitner. 2. Auflage. Weinheim: Verlag Beltz & Gelberg 2006 ISBN 978-3-407-78812-2 

Lise Meitner and Otto Hahn in their laboratory.
In 1917, she and Hahn discovered the first long-lived isotope of the element protactinium, for which she was awarded the Leibniz Medal by the Berlin Academy of Sciences. That year, Meitner was given her own physics section at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Chemistry. 

In 1922, she discovered the cause, known as the Auger effect, of the emission from surfaces of electrons with 'signature' energies. The effect is named for Pierre Victor Auger, a French scientist who independently discovered the effect in 1923. P. Auger: Sur les rayons  secondaires produits dans un gaz par des rayons X, C.R.A.S. 177 (1923) 169171. 

After the Anschluss, her situation became desperate. On July 13, 1938, Meitner, with the support of Otto Hahn and the help from the Dutch physicists Dirk Coster and Adriaan Fokker, escaped to the Netherlands. She was forced to travel under cover to the Dutch border, where Coster persuaded German immigration officers that she had permission to travel to the Netherlands. She reached safety, though without her possessions. Meitner later said that she left Germany forever with 10 marks in her purse. Before she left, Otto Hahn had given her a diamond ring he had inherited from his mother: this was to be used to bribe the frontier guards if required. It was not required, and Meitner's nephew's wife later wore it.

Meitner was lucky to escape, as Kurt Hess, a chemist who was the head of the organic department of the KWI and an avid Nazi, had informed the authorities that she was about to flee. An appointment at the University of Groningen did not come through, and she went instead to Stockholm, where she took up a post at Manne Siegbahn's laboratory, despite the difficulty caused by Siegbahn's prejudice against women in science. Here she established a working relationship with Niels Bohr, who travelled regularly between Copenhagen and Stockholm. She continued to correspond with Hahn and other German scientists. Cornwell, Hitler's Scientists, 21415 

===Nuclear fission===

On occasion of a lecture by Hahn in Bohr's Institute he, Meitner and Frisch met in Copenhagen on November 10. Later they exchanged a series of letters. In December Hahn and Fritz Strassmann performed the difficult experiments which isolated the evidence for nuclear fission at their laboratory in Berlin. The surviving correspondence shows that Hahn recognized that fission was the only explanation for the barium (at first he named the process a 'bursting' of the uranium), but, baffled by this remarkable conclusion, he wrote to Meitner. The possibility that uranium nuclei might break up under neutron bombardment had been suggested years before, notably by Ida Noddack in 1934. However, by employing the existing "liquid-drop" model of the nucleus, Richard Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb (1986), Simon & Schuster, New York, NY pp. 25760 Meitner and Frisch were the first to articulate a theory of how the nucleus of an atom could be split into smaller parts: uranium nuclei had split to form barium and krypton, accompanied by the ejection of several neutrons and a large amount of energy (the latter two products accounting for the loss in mass). She and Frisch had discovered the reason that no stable elements beyond uranium (in atomic number) existed naturally; the electrical repulsion of so many protons overcame the strong nuclear force. Frisch and Meitner also first realized that Einstein's famous equation, E = mc2, explained the source of the tremendous releases of energy in nuclear fission, by the conversion of rest mass into kinetic energy, popularly described as the conversion of mass into energy.

Nuclear fission experimental setup, reconstructed at the Deutsches Museum, Munich.
A letter from Bohr, commenting on the fact that the amount of energy released when he bombarded uranium atoms was far larger than had been predicted by calculations based on a non-fissile core, had sparked the above inspiration in December 1938. But Meitner and Frisch later confirmed that chemistry had been solely responsible for the discovery, although Hahn, as a chemist, was reluctant to explain the fission process in correct physically terms.

In a later appreciation Lise Meitner wrote: Lise Meitner: Recollections of Otto Hahn. S. Hirzel, Stuttgart, 2005 

The discovery of nuclear fission by Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann opened up a new era in human history. It seems to me that what makes the science behind this discovery so remarkable is that it was achieved by purely chemical means.

And in an interview with the West German television (ARD, March 8, 1959) Meitner said: Lise Meitner: Recollections of Otto Hahn. S. Hirzel, Stuttgart, 2005. 

Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann were able to do this by exceptionally good chemistry, fantastically good chemistry, which was way ahead of what any one else was capable of at that time. The Americans learned to do it later. But at that time, Hahn and Strassmann were really the only ones who could do it. And that was because they were such good chemists. Somehow they really succeeded in using chemistry to demonstrate and prove a physical process.

Fritz Strassmann responded in the same interview with this clarification: 

Professor Meitner stated that the success could be attributed to chemistry. I have to make a slight correction. Chemistry merely isolated the individual substances, it did not precisely identify them. It took Professor Hahn's method to do this. This is where his achievement lies.

Hahn and Strassmann had sent the manuscript of their first paper to Naturwissenschaften in December 1938, reporting they had detected and identified the element barium after bombarding uranium with neutrons; O. Hahn and F. Strassmann ber den Nachweis und das Verhalten der bei der Bestrahlung des Urans mittels Neutronen entstehenden Erdalkalimetalle (On the detection and characteristics of the alkaline earth metals formed by irradiation of uranium with neutrons), Naturwissenschaften Volume 27, Number 1, 1115 (1939). The authors were identified as being at the Kaiser-Wilhelm-Institut fr Chemie, Berlin-Dahlem. Received 22 December 1938. simultaneously, Hahn had communicated their results exclusively to Meitner in several letters, and did not inform the physicists in his own institute.

In their second publication on the evidence of barium (Die Naturwissenschaften, 10 February 1939) Hahn and Strassmann used for the first time the name Uranspaltung (Uranium fission) and predicted the existence and liberation of additional neutrons during the fission process (which was proved later to be a chain reaction by Frdric Joliot and his team). 
Lise Meitner and her nephew Otto Frisch were the first who correctly interpreted Hahn's and Strassmann's results as being nuclear fission, a term coined by Frisch, and published their paper in Nature. . Meitner is identified as being at the Physical Institute, Academy of Sciences, Stockholm. Frisch is identified as being at the Institute of Theoretical Physics, University of Copenhagen. Frisch confirmed this experimentally on 13 January 1939. experiment for this letter to the editor was conducted on 13 January 1939; see Richard Rhodes The Making of the Atomic Bomb 263 and 268 (Simon and Schuster, 1986). 

These two reports, the first Hahn-Strassmann publication of January 6, 1939, and the Frisch-Meitner publication of February 11, 1939, had electrifying effects on the scientific community. Because there was a possibility that fission could be used as a weapon, and since the knowledge was in German hands, Le Szilrd, Edward Teller, and Eugene Wigner jumped into action, persuading Albert Einstein, a celebrity, to write President Franklin D. Roosevelt a letter of caution. In 1940 Frisch and Rudolf Peierls produced the FrischPeierls memorandum, which first set out how an atomic explosion could be generated, and this ultimately led to the establishment in 1942 of the Manhattan Project. Meitner refused an offer to work on the project at Los Alamos, declaring "I will have nothing to do with a bomb!" Ruth Lewin Sime, Lise Meitner: A Life in Physics (University of California Press, 1996), 305 Meitner said that Hiroshima had come as a surprise to her, and that she was "sorry that the bomb had to be invented." The Catcher was a Spy,Nicholas Dawidoff, New York 1994 p.228 

In Sweden, Meitner was first active at Siegbahn's Nobel Institute for Physics, and at the Swedish Defence Research Establishment (FOA) and the Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm, where she had a laboratory and participated in research on R1, Sweden's first nuclear reactor. In 1947, a personal position was created for Meitner at the University College of Stockholm with the salary of a professor and funding from the Council for Atomic Research. Entry for Lise Meitner in Svensk Uppslagsbok, volume 19 (1951), column 756. 

==Awards and honours==
Meitner with actress Katharine Cornell and physicist Arthur Compton on 6 June 1946, when Meitner and Cornell were receiving awards from the National Conference of Christians and Jews.
On 15 November 1945 the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences announced that Hahn had been awarded the 1944 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for the discovery of nuclear fission. 

Surely Hahn fully deserved the Nobel Prize for chemistry. There is really no doubt about it. But I believe that Otto Robert Frisch and I contributed something not insignificant to the clarification of the process of uranium fission - how it originates and that it produces so much energy and that was something very remote to Hahn.

wrote Lise Meitner to her friend Eva von Bahr-Bergius in November 1945. Lise Meitner: Recollections of Otto Hahn. S. Hirzel Verlag, Stuttgart 2005. And Carl Friedrich von Weizscker, Lise Meitner's former assistant, later added:

He certainly did deserve this Nobel Prize. He would have deserved it even if he had not made this discovery. But everyone recognized that the splitting of the atomic nucleus merited a Nobel Prize. 

Some historians who have documented their view of the discovery of nuclear fission believe Meitner should have been awarded the Nobel Prize with Hahn. Ruth Lewin Sime From Exceptional Prominence to Prominent Exception: Lise Meitner at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Chemistry Ergebnisse 24 Forschungsprogramm Geschichte der Kaiser-Wilhelm-Gesellschaft im Nationalsozialismus (2005). Ruth Lewin Sime Lise Meitner: A Life in Physics (University of California, 1997). Elisabeth Crawford, Ruth Lewin Sime, and Mark Walker A Nobel Tale of Postwar Injustice, Physics Today Volume 50, Issue 9, 2632 (1997). 

On a visit to the USA in 1946, she received the honour of "Woman of the Year" by the National Press Club and had dinner with President Harry Truman and others at the Women's National Press Club. She lectured at Princeton, Harvard and other US universities, and was awarded a number of honorary doctorates. Meitner refused to move back to Germany, and enjoyed retirement and research in Stockholm until her relocation to Cambridge, England in 1960. She received the Max Planck Medal of the German Physics Society in 1949, and in 1955 she was awarded the first Otto Hahn Prize of the German Chemical Society. In 1957 the German President Theodor Heuss awarded her the highest German order for scientists, the peace class of the Pour le mrite. For both honours she was proposed by Otto Hahn. Meitner was nominated to receive the Nobel Prize three times. An even rarer honour was given to her in 1997 when element 109 was named meitnerium in her honour. Named after Meitner were the HahnMeitner-Institut in Berlin, craters on the Moon and on Venus, and a main-belt asteroid.

Meitner was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in 1945, and had her status changed to that of a Swedish member in 1951. Four years later she became a foreign member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in London. 

In 1966 Hahn, Fritz Strassmann and Meitner were jointly awarded the Enrico Fermi Award.

Meitner received 21 scientific honours and awards for her work (including 5 honorary doctorates and membership of many academies). In 1947 she received the Award of the City of Vienna for science. She was the first female member of the scientific class of the Austrian Academy of Sciences. In 2008, the NBC defence school of the Austrian Armed Forces established the "Lise Meitner" award.

In 1960, Meitner was awarded the Wilhelm Exner Medal and in 1967, the Austrian Decoration for Science and Art.

Public facilities such as schools and streets were named after her in many cities in Austria and Germany.

==Later years==
After the war, Meitner, while acknowledging her own moral failing in staying in Germany from 1933 to 1938, was bitterly critical of Hahn and other German scientists who had collaborated with the Nazis and done nothing to protest against the crimes of Hitler's regime. Referring to the leading German scientist Werner Heisenberg, she said: "Heisenberg and many millions with him should be forced to see these camps and the martyred people." She wrote to Hahn:
Meitner's grave in Bramley

Hahn wrote in his memoirs that he and Lise Meitner had been lifelong friends. Otto Hahn: My Life.Preface by Sir James Chadwick. Macdonald & Co., London, 1970. American edition: Herder and Herder, New York 1970. 

Meitner became a Swedish citizen in 1949. She retired in 1960 and moved to the UK where most of her relatives were, although she continued working part-time and giving lectures. A strenuous trip to the United States in 1964 led to Meitner having a heart attack, from which she spent several months recovering. Her physical and mental condition weakened by atherosclerosis, she was unable to travel to the US to receive the Enrico Fermi prize and relatives had to present it to her. After breaking her hip in a fall and suffering several small strokes in 1967, Meitner made a partial recovery, but eventually was weakened to the point where she moved into a Cambridge nursing home. She died on 27 October 1968 at the age of 89. Meitner was not informed of the deaths of Otto Hahn (d. July 1968) and his wife Edith, as her family believed it would be too much for someone so frail. As was her wish, she was buried in the village of Bramley in Hampshire, at St. James parish church, close to her younger brother Walter, who had died in 1964. Her nephew Otto Frisch composed the inscription on her headstone. It reads "Lise Meitner: a physicist who never lost her humanity". A short residential street in the village is named "Meitner Close".

==See also==
*List of Austrian scientists
*Hans-Hermann Hupfeld
*List of German inventors and discoverers

==References==

==Further reading==

* 
*Hahn, Otto (1966). A Scientific Autobiography. Preface by Glenn T. Seaborg. Charles Scribner's sons, New York, 1966. English edition (1967): McGibbon & Kee, London.
*Hahn, Otto (1970). My Life. Preface by Sir James Chadwick. Macdonald, London. American edition (1970): Herder and Herder, New York.
* 
* 
* 
* 
*Sime, Ruth Lewin From Exceptional Prominence to Prominent Exception: Lise Meitner at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Chemistry Ergebnisse 24 Forschungsprogramm Geschichte der Kaiser-Wilhelm-Gesellschaft im Nationalsozialismus (2005).
* 
* 

==External links==

* "Lise Meitner", "Contributions of 20th-Century Women to Physics" (CWP), University of California, Los Angeles
* Annotated bibliography for Lise Meitner from the Alsos Digital Library for Nuclear Issues
* Wired.com: "February 11, 1939: Lise Meitner, 'Our Madame Curie'"
* "Lise Meitner," B. Weintraub, Chemistry in Israel, no. 21, May 2006, p. 35.



[[Llama]]

The llama (; or ) (Lama glama) is a domesticated South American camelid, widely used as a meat and pack animal by Andean cultures since pre-Hispanic times.

The height of a full-grown, full-size llama is 1.7 to 1.8 m (5.5 to 6.0 ft) tall at the top of the head, and can weigh between 130 and 200 kg (280 to 450 lb). At birth, a baby llama (called a cria) can weigh between 9 and 14 kg (20 and 30 lb). Llamas can live for about 2030 years with good care. They are very social animals and live with other llamas as a herd. The wool produced by a llama is very soft and lanolin-free. Llamas are intelligent and can learn simple tasks after a few repetitions. When using a pack, they can carry about 25% to 30% of their body weight for 813 km (58 miles). 
 

The name llama (in the past also spelled 'lama' or 'glama') was adopted by European settlers from native Peruvians. Oxford English Dictionary, 2nd edition, "llama" 

Llamas appear to have originated from the central plains of North America about 40 million years ago. They migrated to South America about three million years ago. By the end of the last ice age (10,00012,000 years ago), camelids were extinct in North America. As of 2007, there were over seven million llamas and alpacas in South America, and due to importation from South America in the late 20th century, there are now over 158,000 llamas and 100,000 alpacas in the United States and Canada. 
 

== Classification ==
200px
A traditionally dressed Quechua girl with a llama in Cuzco, Peru

Lamoids, or llamas (as they are more generally known as a group), consist of the vicua (Vicugna vicugna, prev. Lama vicugna), guanaco (Lama guanicoe), Suri alpaca, and Huacaya alpaca (Vicugna pacos, prev. Lama guanicoe pacos), and the domestic llama (Lama guanicoe glama). Guanacos and vicuas live in the wild, while alpacas  as well as llamas  exist only as domesticated animals. Although early writers compared llamas to sheep, their similarity to the camel was soon recognized. They were included in the genus Camelus along with alpaca in the Systema Naturae (1758) of Linnaeus. They were, however, separated by Cuvier in 1800 under the name of lama along with the guanaco. Alpacas and vicuas are in genus Vicugna. The genera Lama and Vicugna are, with the two species of true camels, the sole existing representatives of a very distinct section of the Artiodactyla or even-toed ungulates, called Tylopoda, or "bump-footed", from the peculiar bumps on the soles of their feet. The Tylopoda consist of a single family, the Camelidae, and shares the order Artiodactyla with the Suina (pigs), the Tragulina (chevrotains), the Pecora (ruminants), and the Whippomorpha (hippos and cetaceans, which belong to Artiodactyla from a cladistic, if not traditional, standpoint). The Tylopoda have more or less affinity to each of the sister taxa, standing in some respects in a middle position between them, sharing some characteristics from each, but in others showing special modifications not found in any of the other taxa.
A domestic llama
The 19th-century discoveries of a vast and previously unexpected extinct Paleogene fauna of North America, as interpreted by paleontologists Leidy, Cope, and Marsh, aided understanding of the early history of this family. Llamas were not always confined to South America; abundant llama-like remains were found in Pleistocene deposits in the Rocky Mountains and in Central America. Some of the fossil llamas were much larger than current forms. Some species remained in North America during the last ice ages. North American llamas are categorized as a single extinct genus, Hemiauchenia. Llama-like animals would have been a common sight 25,000 years ago, in modern-day California, Texas, New Mexico, Utah, Missouri, and Florida. 

The camelid lineage has a good fossil record. Camel-like animals have been traced from the thoroughly differentiated, modern species back through early Miocene forms. Their characteristics became more general, and they lost those that distinguished them as camelids; hence, they were classified as ancestral artiodactyls. No fossils of these earlier forms have been found in the Old World, indicating that North America was the original home of camelids, and that Old World camels crossed over via the Bering Land Bridge. The formation of the Isthmus of Panama three million years ago allowed camelids to spread to South America as part of the Great American Interchange, where they evolved further. Meanwhile, North American camelids died out at the end of the Pleistocene. 

== Characteristics ==
The following characteristics apply especially to llamas. Dentition of adults:-incisors 1/3 canines 1/1, premolars 2/2, molars 3/2; total 32. In the upper jaw, a compressed, sharp, pointed laniariform incisor near the hinder edge of the premaxilla is followed in the male at least by a moderate-sized, pointed, curved true canine in the anterior part of the maxilla. Colorado State University, Hypertexts for Biomedical Science: Dental Anatomy of Ruminants The isolated canine-like premolar which follows in the camels is not present. The teeth of the molar series which are in contact with each other consist of two very small premolars (the first almost rudimentary) and three broad molars, constructed generally like those of Camelus. In the lower jaw, the three incisors are long, spatulate, and procumbent; the outer ones are the smallest. Next to these is a curved, suberect canine, followed after an interval by an isolated minute and often deciduous simple conical premolar; then a contiguous series of one premolar and three molars, which differ from those of Camelus in having a small accessory column at the anterior outer edge.
Names of llama body parts: 1 ears  2 poll  3 withers  4 back  5 hip  6 croup  7 base of tail  8 tail  9 buttock  10 hock  11 metatarsal gland  12 heel  13 cannon bone  14 gaskin  15 stifle joint  16 flank  17 barrel  18 elbow  19 pastern  20 fetlock  21 Knee  22 Chest  23 point of shoulder  24 shoulder  25 throat  26 cheek or jowl  27 muzzle
The skull generally resembles that of Camelus, the larger brain-cavity and orbits and less-developed cranial ridges being due to its smaller size. The nasal bones are shorter and broader, and are joined by the premaxilla.

Vertebrae:
* cervical 7,
* dorsal 12,
* lumbar 7,
* sacral 4,
* caudal 15 to 20.

The ears are rather long and slightly curved inward, characteristically known as "banana" shaped. There is no dorsal hump. The feet are narrow, the toes being more separated than in the camels, each having a distinct plantar pad. The tail is short, and fibre is long, woolly and soft.

In essential structural characteristics, as well as in general appearance and habits, all the animals of this genus very closely resemble each other, so whether they should be considered as belonging to one, two, or more species is a matter of controversy among naturalists.

The question is complicated by the circumstance of the great majority of individuals which have come under observation being either in a completely or partially domesticated state. Many are also descended from ancestors which have previously been domesticated, a state which tends to produce a certain amount of variation from the original type. The four forms commonly distinguished by the inhabitants of South America are recognized as distinct species, though with difficulties in defining their distinctive characteristics.

These are:
* the llama, Lama glama (Linnaeus);
* the alpaca, Vicugna pacos (Linnaeus);
* the guanaco (from the Quechua huanaco), Lama guanicoe (Mller); and
* the vicua, Vicugna vicugna (Molina)

The llama and alpaca are only known in the domestic state, and are variable in size and of many colors, being often white, brown, or piebald. Some are grey or black. The guanaco and vicua are wild, the former being endangered, and of a nearly uniform light-brown color, passing into white below. They certainly differ from each other, the vicua being smaller, more slender in its proportions, and having a shorter head than the guanaco. The vicua lives in herds on the bleak and elevated parts of the mountain range bordering the region of perpetual snow, amidst rocks and precipices, occurring in various suitable localities throughout Peru, in the southern part of Ecuador, and as far south as the middle of Bolivia. Its manners very much resemble those of the chamois of the European Alps; it is as vigilant, wild, and timid. The fiber is extremely delicate and soft, and highly valued for the purposes of weaving, but the quantity which each animal produces is minimal.
Alpacas are descended from wild vicuna ancestors, while domesticated llamas are descended from wild guanaco ancestors, though a considerable amount of hybridization between the two species has occurred.

Differential characteristics between llamas and alpacas include the llama's larger size, longer head, and curved ears. Alpaca fiber is generally more expensive, but not always more valuable. Alpacas tend to have a more consistent color throughout the body. The most apparent visual difference between llamas and camels is that camels have a hump or humps and llamas do not.

== Reproduction ==
A dam and her cria
Llamas have an unusual reproductive cycle for a large animal. Female llamas are induced ovulators. Through the act of mating, the female releases an egg and is often fertilized on the first attempt. Female llamas do not go into estrus ("heat"). 
 

Like humans, llama males and females mature sexually at different rates. Females reach puberty at about 12 months old; males do not become sexually mature until around three years of age. 
 

=== Mating ===
Llamas mate with the female in a kush (lying down) position, which is fairly unusual in a large animal. They mate for an extended period of time (2045 minutes), also unusual in a large animal. 

=== Gestation ===
The gestation period of a llama is 11.5 months (350 days). Dams (female llamas) do not lick off their babies, as they have an attached tongue which does not reach outside of the mouth more than half an inch (0.5 in). Rather, they will nuzzle and hum to their newborns. 
 

=== Crias ===
A cria (from Spanish for "baby") is the name for a baby llama, alpaca, vicua, or guanaco. Crias are typically born with all the females of the herd gathering around, in an attempt to protect against the male llamas and potential predators. Llamas give birth standing. Birth is usually quick and problem-free, over in less than 30 minutes. Most births take place between 8 am and noon, during the warmer daylight hours. This may increase cria survival by reducing fatalities due to hypothermia during cold Andean nights. This birthing pattern is speculated to be a continuation of the birthing patterns observed in the wild. Crias are up and standing, walking and attempting to suckle within the first hour after birth. Crias are partially fed with llama milk that is lower in fat and salt and higher in phosphorus and calcium than cow or goat milk. A female llama will only produce about 60 ml of milk at a time when she gives milk, so the cria must suckle frequently to receive the nutrients it requires. 
 

=== Breeding situations ===
In harem breeding, the male is left with females most of the year.

For field breeding, a female is turned out into a field with a male llama and left there for some period of time. This is the easiest method in terms of labor, but the least useful in terms of prediction of a likely birth date. An ultrasound test can be performed, and together with the exposure dates, a better idea of when the cria is expected can be determined.

Hand breeding is the most efficient method, but requires the most work on the part of the human involved. A male and female llama are put into the same pen and breeding is monitored. They are then separated and rebred every other day until one or the other refuses the breeding. Usually, one can get in two breedings using this method, though some studs have routinely refused to breed a female more than once. The separation presumably helps to keep the sperm count high for each breeding and also helps to keep the condition of the female llama's reproductive tract more sound. If the breeding is not successful within two to three weeks, the female is bred once again.

=== Pregnancy ===
Llamas at San Pedro de Atacama, Chile
Llamas should be tested for pregnancy after breeding at two to three, six and at least 12 weeks.
# For "spit" testing, bring the potentially pregnant dam to an intact male. If the stud attempts to mate with her and she lies down for him within a fairly short period of time, she is not pregnant. If she remains on her feet, spits, attacks him, or otherwise prevents his being able to mate, it is assumed she is probably pregnant. This test gets its name due to the dam spitting at the male if she is pregnant.
# For progesterone testing, a veterinarian can test a blood sample for progesterone. A high level can indicate a pregnancy.
# With palpation, the veterinarian or breeder manually feels inside the llama to detect a pregnancy. Some risks to the llama exist, but it can be an accurate method for pregnancy detection.
# Ultrasound is the most accurate method for an experienced veterinarian, who can do an exterior examination and detect a fetus as early as 45 days.

Spit testing with an intact male is generally free and is usually accurate. However, some hormonal conditions in females can make them reject a male when they are in fact not pregnant, and, more rarely, accept a male when they are pregnant. Progesterone tests can give a high reading in some females with a hormonal problem which are in fact not pregnant. Neither of the previous methods, nor palpation, can give a reasonably accurate idea of the age of the fetus, while an ultrasound procedure can. In addition, an ultrasound procedure can distinguish between pregnancy and misleading physical conditions, or between a live and dead fetus. The disadvantages of an ultrasound procedure are cost, some training in the use of ultrasound equipment is required, and not all veterinarians have the equipment needed to perform the examination.

== Nutrition ==
Options for feeding llamas are quite wide; a wide variety of commercial and farm-based feeds are available. The major determining factors include feed cost, availability, nutrient balance and energy density required. Young, actively growing llamas require a greater concentration of nutrients than mature animals because of their smaller digestive tract capacities. 
 

 Estimated daily requirements of bromgrass hay, alfalfa hay and corn silage on an as-fed and 100% dry matter basis for llamas from 22 to 550 pounds. 
 Body weight (lb) Bromgrass Alfalfa Corn silage 
 (as fed) (dry matter) (as fed) (dry matter) (as fed) (dry matter) 
 22 0.8 0.7 0.5 0.5 1.5 0.4 
 44 1.3 1.1 0.9 0.8 2.6 0.7 
 88 2.1 1.9 1.5 1.3 4.3 1.2 
 110 2.6 2.3 1.7 1.6 5.2 1.4 
 165 3.4 3.1 2.3 2.1 6.9 1.9 
 275 5.0 4.5 3.4 3.1 10.1 2.8 
 385 6.4 5.7 4.3 3.9 12.9 3.6 
 495 7.8 7.0 5.3 4.8 15.8 4.4 
 550 8.5 7.6 5.7 5.2 17.0 4.8 

== Behavior ==
A pack llama in the Rocky Mountain National Park
Llamas which are well-socialized and trained to halter and lead after weaning are very friendly and pleasant to be around. They are extremely curious and most will approach people easily. However, llamas that are bottle-fed or over-socialized and over-handled as youth will become extremely difficult to handle when mature, when they will begin to treat humans as they treat each other, which is characterized by bouts of spitting, kicking and neck wrestling. Anyone having to bottle-feed a cria should keep contact to a minimum and stop as soon as possible.

When correctly reared, llamas spitting at a human is a rare thing. Llamas are very social herd animals, however, and do sometimes spit at each other as a way of disciplining lower-ranked llamas in the herd. A llama's social rank in a herd is never static. They can always move up or down in the social ladder by picking small fights. This is usually done between males to see which will become dominant. Their fights are visually dramatic, with spitting, ramming each other with their chests, neck wrestling and kicking, mainly to knock the other off balance. The females are usually only seen spitting as a means of controlling other herd members.

While the social structure might always be changing, they live as a family and they do take care of each other. If one notices a strange noise or feels threatened, a warning bray is sent out and all others become alert. They will often hum to each other as a form of communication.

The sound of the llama making groaning noises or going "mwa" is often a sign of fear or anger. If a llama is agitated, it will lay its ears back. One may determine how agitated the llama is by the materials in the spit. The more irritated the llama is, the further back into each of the three stomach compartments it will try to draw materials from for its spit.

An "orgle" is the mating sound of a llama or alpaca, made by the sexually aroused male. The sound is reminiscent of gargling, but with a more forceful, buzzing edge. Males begin the sound when they become aroused and continue throughout the act of procreation  from 15 minutes to more than an hour. 
 
 

=== Guard behavior ===

Llama guarding sheep on the South Downs in West Sussex

Using llamas as livestock guards in North America began in the early 1980s, and some sheep producers have used llamas successfully since then. International Llama Association. (1995). "Guard Llamas." ILA Educational Brochure #2. Walker, Cameron. "Guard Llamas Keep Sheep Safe From Coyotes." National Geographic, June 10, 2003. They are used most commonly in the in western regions of the United States, where larger predators, such as the coyote, are prevalent. Typically, a single gelding (castrated male) is used.

Research suggests the use of multiple guard llamas is not as effective as one. Multiple males tend to bond with one another, rather than with the livestock, and may ignore the flock. A gelded male of two years of age bonds closely with its new charges and is instinctively very effective in preventing predation. Some llamas appear to bond more quickly to sheep or goats if they are introduced just prior to lambing. Many sheep and goat producers indicate a special bond quickly develops between lambs and their guard llama and the llama is particularly protective of the lambs.

Using llamas as guards has eliminated the losses to predators for many producers. The value of the livestock saved each year more than exceeds the purchase cost and annual maintenance of a llama. Although not every llama is suited to the job, most are a viable, nonlethal alternative for reducing predation, requiring no training and little care. 

== History ==
Moche 100300 AD at Lombards Museum
 This sculpture, originating from the Chancay Valley and adjacent Chilln Drainage region (Late Intermediate Period), captures the llama's natural inquisitiveness. The Walters Art Museum.

===Pre-Incan cultures===
The Moche people frequently placed llamas and llama parts in the burials of important people, as offerings or provisions for the afterlife. Berrin, Katherine & Larco Museum. The Spirit of Ancient Peru:Treasures from the Museo Arqueolgico Rafael Larco Herrera. New York: Thames & Hudson, 1997 ISBN 0-500-01802-2. The Moche culture of pre-Columbian Peru depicted llamas quite realistically in their ceramics.

=== Inca empire ===
In the Inca empire, llamas were the only beasts of burden, and many of the people dominated by the Inca had long traditions of llama herding. For the Inca nobility, the llama was of symbolic significance, and llama figures were often buried with the dead. 
 
In South America, llamas are still used as beasts of burden, as well as for the production of fiber and meat. 
 

The Inca deity Urcuchillay was depicted in the form of a multicolored llama. 

Scholar Alex Chepstow-Lusty has argued that the switch from a hunter-gatherer lifestyle to widespread agriculture was only possible because of the use of llama dung as fertilizer. Anning, Caroline. (2011-05-22) BBC News  Inca success in Peruvian Andes 'thanks to llama dung'. BBC.co.uk. Retrieved on 2011-08-21. 

===Spanish empire===
The first image of llamas in Europa, 1553
One of the main uses for llamas at the time of the Spanish conquest was to bring down ore from the mines in the mountains. Gregory de Bolivar estimated that in his day, as many as 300 thousand were employed in the transport of produce from the Potos mines alone, but since the introduction of horses, mules, and donkeys, the importance of the llama as a beast of burden has greatly diminished. 
 

According to Juan Ignacio Molina, the Dutch captain Joris van Spilbergen observed the use of chilihueques (possibly a llama type) by native Mapuches of Mocha Island as plow animals in 1614. 

== Fiber ==
Llamas have a fine undercoat which can be used for handicrafts and garments. The coarser outer guard hair is used for rugs, wall-hangings and lead ropes. The fiber comes in many different colors ranging from white or grey to reddish-brown, brown, dark brown and black.

Handspun llama yarn from Patagonia

 Average diameter of some of the finest, natural fibers 
 Animal Fiber diameter (micrometres) 
 Vicua 610 
 Alpaca (Suri) 1015 
 Muskox (Qivlut) 1113 
 Merino 1220 
 Angora Rabbit 13 
 Cashmere 1519 
 Yak Down 1519 
 Camel Down 1625 
 Guanaco 1618 
 Llama (Tapada) 2030 
 Chinchilla 21 
 Mohair 2545 
 Alpaca (Huacaya) 27.7 
 Llama (Ccara) 3040 

== See also ==
* Alpaca
* Cama, a crossbreed between a llama and a camel
* Grass Mud Horse, a parody originating from Mainland China of 2009 that features the alpaca and llama
* Guard llama, llamas used as livestock guardians
* Lamoid
* Llama hiking

== Notes ==

== References ==
* 

== External links ==

* 
* Llamas Close Up  slideshow by Life magazine
* 



[[L cut]]

An L cut, also known as a split edit, is an edit transition from one shot to another in film or video, where the picture and sound are synchronized but the transitions in each are not coincident. This is often done to enhance the aesthetics or flow of the film as L cuts allow the audience to see context (either before or after) of speaking rather than simply the speaking itself. Without L cuts, a conversation between two people can feel like a tennis match. 

L cuts are also used to hide transitions between scenes. They can be very effective in editing dialog scenes shot with a single camera using multiple takes. The ability to cut the picture/video separately from the sound/audio allows the sound from the various takes to flow smoothly, even though the picture cuts are at different places. In longer shots, this allows the editor to use the picture from one take with the sound from another take if the dialog reading is better.

The name of the cut refers to the shape of the cut pieces of the film Cassidy, Kyle, "Basic Training: Tricks for J and L Cuts" Videomaker vol. 22, no. 12 (June 2008): 56-58. - the audio track is cut somewhat after (or before) the last frame of video, resulting in roughly L-shaped film ends, as the video and audio parts of film are in tracks, one below, one above, on the film itself.

== Example ==
A prominent example of an L cut occurs in the film The Silence of the Lambs when Clarice is leaving her first interview with Dr. Lecter. She has just been humiliated and remembers her father arriving home from work one day when she was a child; after he picks her up and spins her around, the camera pans over to a passing truck and tilts up to the sky. Then we hear Clarice's sobs and cut back to her outside the mental institution, leaning on her car and crying.

== See also ==
* Match cut
* Jump cut

==References==



[[Lexicon]]

Formally, in linguistics, a lexicon is a language's inventory of lexemes. The word "lexicon" derives from the Greek (lexicon), neuter of (lexikos) meaning "of or for words".  in Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon (Perseus Digital Library). Sc.  "book"). 

Linguistic theories generally regard human languages as consisting of two parts: a lexicon, essentially a catalogue of a language's words (its wordstock); and a grammar, a system of rules which allow for the combination of those words into meaningful sentences. The lexicon is also thought to include bound morphemes, which cannot stand alone as words (such as most affixes). In some analyses, compound words and certain classes of idiomatic expressions and other collocations are also considered to be part of the lexicon. Dictionaries represent attempts at listing, in alphabetical order, the lexicon of a given language; usually, however, bound morphemes are not included.

== Size and organization ==

Items in the lexicon are called lexemes or word forms. Lexemes are not atomic elements but contain both phonological and morphological components. When describing the lexicon a reductionist approach is used, trying to remain general while using a minimal description. To describe the size of a lexicon, lexemes are grouped into lemmas. A lemma is a group of lexemes generated by inflectional morphology. Lemmas are represented in dictionaries by headwords which list the citation forms and any irregular forms, since these must be learned to use the words correctly. Lexemes derived from a word by derivation morphology are considered new lemmas. The lexicon is also organized according to open and closed categories. Closed categories, such as determiners or pronouns, are rarely given new lexemes; their function is primarily syntactic. Open categories, such as nouns and verbs, have highly active generation mechanisms and their lexemes are more semantic in nature.

== Lexicalization and other mechanisms in the lexicon ==

A central role of the lexicon is the documenting of established lexical norms and conventions. Lexicalization is the process where new words, having gained into widespread usage, enter in the lexicon. Since lexicalization may modify lexeme phonologically and morphologically it is possible, that a single etymological source may be borrowed in two or more forms into a single lexicon. These pairs are called doublet are often close semantically. Two examples are aptitude versus attitude and employ versus imply. 

The mechanisms, not mutually exclusive, are: 
* Innovation, the planned creation of new roots (often on a large-scale), such as slang, branding.
* Borrowing of foreign words.
* Compounding (composition), the combination of lexemes to make a single word.
* Abbreviation of compounds.
* Acronyms, the reduction of compounds to their initial letters, such as NASA and laser (from "LASER").
* Inflection, a morphology change with a category, such as number or tense.
* Derivation, a morphological change resulting in a change of category.
* Agglutination, the compounding of morphemes into a single word.
In complex words, constituents may be dropped.

Besides word formation, there are also mechanisms of lexeme change:
* Lexical replacement, the replacement of a lexeme or its sense.
* Sound change, a change such as a consonant or vowel shift localised to specific words or phonotactical combinations.
* Blocking the creation of new words while existing lexical conventions are maintained.
* Obsolescence of vocabulary; much slang, for example, typically has short lifespans.

===New words===
Neologisms are new lexeme candidates which, if they gain wide usage over time, become part of a language's lexicon. Neologisms are often introduced by children in a type of kid slip. Another common source is slang and activities such as advertising and branding.

===Loan words===
Most innovations to a lexicon are either loan words introduced by bilingual speakers during language contact or compound words created from existing morphemes. Once a neologism or a compound is introduced to a language, then, if successful, it will often diffuse across geographical boundaries.

===Role of morphology===
Another mechanism involves generative devices that combine morphemes according to a language's rules. For example, the suffix "-able" is usually only added to transitive verbs, as in "read-able" but not "cry-able".

===Compounding===
A compound word is a lexeme composed of several pre-existing morphemes. Because a compound word is composed of established lexeme they are usually easier to acquire than loan words or neologisms. Their meaning is usually just a sum of their constituent parts. The meaning of "armed and dangerous", for example, derives from the sum of its parts, while "armed to the teeth" involves metaphor.

Compound words that are not the semantical sum of their constituents can be interpreted through analogy, common sense and context. Compound words have simple morphological structures, where no more than one element usually requires inflection for agreement. On the other hand, they are subject to the rules of syntax and can contain gaps to hold other lexemes on which they operate. For instance:

* "another nail in" something/someone "another nail in" "the company's" "coffin"
* "bring" something "to" someone's "attention" "bring" "a problem" "to" "your" "attention"

Once new compounds are successfully established in one language they will often cross geographical boundaries:
* "house""wife", becoming housewife.
* vroshza becoming vroshza.
* rotLicht becoming rotlicht.

Compounding tends to produce longer lexemes which may result in lexemes of unwieldy proportion. This is compensated by mechanisms that reduce the length of words.

== Diachronic mechanisms ==

Comparative historical linguistics studies the evolutions languages and takes a diachronic view of the lexicon. The evolution of lexicons in different languages occurs through parallel mechanisms. Over time historical forces work to shape the lexicon, making it simpler to acquire and often creating an illusion of great regularity in language.
* Phonological assimilation, the modification of loanwords to fit a new language's sound structure more effectively. If, however, a loanword sounds too "foreign", inflection or derivation rules may not be able to transform it.
*Analogy, where new words undergo inflection and derivation analogous to that of words with a similar sound structure.
*Emphasis, the modification of words' stress and/or accenting.
*Metaphor, a form of semantic extension.

== Second-language lexicon ==

The term lexicon is generally used in the context of single language. Therefore, multi-lingual speakers are generally thought to have multiple lexicons. Speakers of language variants (Brazilian Portuguese and European Portuguese, for example) may be considered to possess a single lexicon. Thus a cash dispenser (British English) as well as an automatic teller machine or ATM in American English would be understood by both American and British speakers, despite each group using different dialects.

When linguists study a lexicon, they consider such things as what constitutes a word; the word/concept relationship; lexical access and lexical access failure; how a word's phonology, syntax, and meaning intersect; the morphology-word relationship; vocabulary structure within a given language; language use (pragmatics); language acquisition; the history and evolution of words (etymology); and the relationships between words, often studied within philosophy of language.

Various models of how lexicons are organized and how words are retrieved have been proposed in psycholinguistics, neurolinguistics and computational linguistics.

== See also ==
* Grammaticalization
* Lexical Markup Framework

== References ==

== Further reading ==

* Aitchison, Jean. Words in the Mind: An Introduction to the Mental Lexicon. Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2003.

 



[[Leonardo da Vinci]]

Leonardo di ser Piero da Vinci ( ; 15 April 1452  2 May 1519, Old Style) was an Italian Renaissance polymath: painter, sculptor, architect, musician, mathematician, engineer, inventor, anatomist, geologist, cartographer, botanist, and writer. His genius, perhaps more than that of any other figure, epitomized the Renaissance humanist ideal.
Leonardo has often been described as the archetype of the Renaissance Man, a man of "unquenchable curiosity" and "feverishly inventive imagination". He is widely considered to be one of the greatest painters of all time and perhaps the most diversely talented person ever to have lived. See the quotations from the following authors, in section Fame and reputation: Vasari, Boltraffio, Castiglione, "Anonimo" Gaddiano, Berensen, Taine, Fuseli, Rio, Bortolon. According to art historian Helen Gardner, the scope and depth of his interests were without precedent and "his mind and personality seem to us superhuman, the man himself mysterious and remote". Marco Rosci states that while there is much speculation about Leonardo, his vision of the world is essentially logical rather than mysterious, and that the empirical methods he employed were unusual for his time. 

Born out of wedlock to a notary, Piero da Vinci, and a peasant woman, Caterina, in Vinci in the region of Florence, Leonardo was educated in the studio of the renowned Florentine painter Verrocchio. Much of his earlier working life was spent in the service of Ludovico il Moro in Milan. He later worked in Rome, Bologna and Venice, and he spent his last years in France at the home awarded him by Francis I.

Leonardo was, and is, renowned primarily as a painter. Among his works, the Mona Lisa is the most famous and most parodied portrait John Lichfield, The Moving of the Mona Lisa, The Independent, 2005-04-02 (accessed 2012-03-09) and The Last Supper the most reproduced religious painting of all time, with their fame approached only by Michelangelo's The Creation of Adam. Leonardo's drawing of the Vitruvian Man is also regarded as a cultural icon, Vitruvian Man is referred to as "iconic" at the following websites and many others:Vitruvian Man, Fine Art Classics, Key Images in the History of Science; Curiosity and difference; The Guardian: The Real da Vinci Code being reproduced on items as varied as the euro coin, textbooks, and T-shirts. Perhaps fifteen of his paintings have survived, the small number because of his constant, and frequently disastrous, experimentation with new techniques, and his chronic procrastination. There are 15 significant artworks which are ascribed, either in whole or in large part, to Leonardo by most art historians. This number is made up principally of paintings on panel but includes a mural, a large drawing on paper and two works which are in the early stages of preparation. There are a number of other works that have also been variously attributed to Leonardo. Nevertheless, these few works, together with his notebooks, which contain drawings, scientific diagrams, and his thoughts on the nature of painting, compose a contribution to later generations of artists rivalled only by that of his contemporary, Michelangelo.

Leonardo is revered for his technological ingenuity. He conceptualised flying machines, an armoured vehicle, concentrated solar power, an adding machine, and the double hull, also outlining a rudimentary theory of plate tectonics. Relatively few of his designs were constructed or were even feasible during his lifetime, Modern scientific approaches to metallurgy and engineering were only in their infancy during the Renaissance. but some of his smaller inventions, such as an automated bobbin winder and a machine for testing the tensile strength of wire, entered the world of manufacturing unheralded. A number of Leonardo's most practical inventions are displayed as working models at the Museum of Vinci. He made important discoveries in anatomy, civil engineering, optics, and hydrodynamics, but he did not publish his findings and they had no direct influence on later science. Capra, pp.56 

==Life==

===Childhood, 14521466===
alt=Photo of a building of rough stone with small windows, surrounded by olive trees
alt= Pen drawing of a landscape with mountains, a river in a deep valley, and a small castle

Leonardo was born on 15 April 1452 (Old Style), "at the third hour of the night" in the Tuscan hill town of Vinci, in the lower valley of the Arno River in the territory of the Medici-ruled Republic of Florence. His birth is recorded in the diary of his paternal grandfather Ser Antonio, as cited by Angela Ottino della Chiesa in Leonardo da Vinci, p. 83 He was the out-of-wedlock son of the wealthy Messer Piero Fruosino di Antonio da Vinci, a Florentine legal notary, and Caterina, a peasant. It has been suggested that Caterina may have been a slave from the Middle East "or at least, from the Mediterranean". According to Alessandro Vezzosi, head of the Leonardo Museum in Vinci, there is evidence that Piero owned a Middle Eastern slave called Caterina. That Leonardo had Middle Eastern blood is claimed to be supported by the reconstruction of a fingerprint as reported by . The evidence, as stated in the article, is that 60% of people of Middle Eastern origin share the pattern of whirls found on the reconstructed fingerprint. The article also states that the claim is refuted by Simon Cole, associate professor of criminology, law and society at the University of California at Irvine: "You can't predict one person's race from these kinds of incidences, especially if looking at only one finger." Leonardo had no surname in the modern sense, "da Vinci" simply meaning "of Vinci": his full birth name was "Lionardo di ser Piero da Vinci", meaning "Leonardo, (son) of (Mes)ser Piero from Vinci". The inclusion of the title "ser" indicated that Leonardo's father was a gentleman.

Little is known about Leonardo's early life. He spent his first five years in the hamlet of Anchiano in the home of his mother, then from 1457 he lived in the household of his father, grandparents and uncle, Francesco, in the small town of Vinci. His father had married a sixteen-year-old girl named Albiera, who loved Leonardo but died young. When Leonardo was sixteen his father married again, to twenty-year-old Francesca Lanfredini. It was not until his third and fourth marriages that Ser Piero produced legitimate heirs. Rosci, p. 20. 

Leonardo received an informal education in Latin, geometry and mathematics. In later life, Leonardo recorded only two childhood incidents. One, which he regarded as an omen, was when a kite dropped from the sky and hovered over his cradle, its tail feathers brushing his face. Rosci, p. 21. The second occurred while he was exploring in the mountains: he discovered a cave and was both terrified that some great monster might lurk there and driven by curiosity to find out what was inside. 

Leonardo's early life has been the subject of historical conjecture. Vasari, the 16th-century biographer of Renaissance painters, tells of how a local peasant made himself a round shield and requested that Ser Piero have it painted for him. Leonardo responded with a painting of a monster spitting fire which was so terrifying that Ser Piero sold it to a Florentine art dealer, who sold it to the Duke of Milan. Meanwhile, having made a profit, Ser Piero bought a shield decorated with a heart pierced by an arrow, which he gave to the peasant. 

alt=Painting showing Jesus, naked except for a loin-cloth, standing in a shallow stream in a rocky landscape, while to the right, John the Baptist, identifiable by the cross that he carries, tips water over Jesus' head. Two angels kneel at the left. Above Jesus are the hands of God, and a dove descending

===Verrocchio's workshop, 146676===
In 1466, at the age of fourteen, Leonardo was apprenticed to the artist Andrea di Cione, known as Verrocchio, whose workshop was "one of the finest in Florence". Rosci, p.13 Other famous painters apprenticed or associated with the workshop include Domenico Ghirlandaio, Perugino, Botticelli, and Lorenzo di Credi. Leonardo would have been exposed to both theoretical training and a vast range of technical skills Rosci, p.27 including drafting, chemistry, metallurgy, metal working, plaster casting, leather working, mechanics and carpentry as well as the artistic skills of drawing, painting, sculpting and modelling. The "diverse arts" and technical skills of Medieval and Renaissance workshops are described in detail in the 12th-century text On Divers Arts by Theophilus Presbyter and in the early 15th-century text Il Libro Dell'arte O Trattato Della Pittui by Cennino Cennini. 

Much of the painted production of Verrocchio's workshop was done by his employees. According to Vasari, Leonardo collaborated with Verrocchio on his The Baptism of Christ, painting the young angel holding Jesus' robe in a manner that was so far superior to his master's that Verrocchio put down his brush and never painted again. Vasari, p.258 On close examination, the painting reveals much that has been painted or touched-up over the tempera using the new technique of oil paint, with the landscape, the rocks that can be seen through the brown mountain stream and much of the figure of Jesus bearing witness to the hand of Leonardo. della Chiesa, p.88 Leonardo may have been the model for two works by Verrocchio: the bronze statue of David in the Bargello and the Archangel Raphael in Tobias and the Angel. 

By 1472, at the age of twenty, Leonardo qualified as a master in the Guild of St Luke, the guild of artists and doctors of medicine, but even after his father set him up in his own workshop, his attachment to Verrocchio was such that he continued to collaborate with him. Leonardo's earliest known dated work is a drawing in pen and ink of the Arno valley, drawn on August 5, 1473. This work is now in the collection of the Uffizi, Drawing No. 8P. 
 

===Professional life, 14761513===
alt=An unfinished painting showing the Virgin Mary and Christ Child surrounded by many figures who are all crowding to look at the baby. Behind the figures are a distant landscape and a large ruined building. More people are coming, in the distance

Florentine court records of 1476 show that Leonardo and three other young men were charged with sodomy but acquitted. Homosexual acts were illegal in Renaissance Florence. From that date until 1478 there is no record of his work or even of his whereabouts. In 1478 he left Verrocchio's studio and was no longer resident at his father's house. One writer, the "Anonimo" Gaddiano claims that in 1480 Leonardo was living with the Medici and working in the Garden of the Piazza San Marco in Florence, a Neo-Platonic academy of artists, poets and philosophers which the Medici had established. In January 1478, he received his first of two independent commissions: to paint an altarpiece for the Chapel of St. Bernard in the Palazzo Vecchio and, in March 1481, The Adoration of the Magi for the monks of San Donato a Scopeto. Neither commission was completed, the second being interrupted when Leonardo went to Milan.

In 1482 Leonardo, who according to Vasari was a most talented musician, created a silver lyre in the shape of a horse's head. Lorenzo de' Medici sent Leonardo to Milan, bearing the lyre as a gift, to secure peace with Ludovico Sforza, Duke of Milan. At this time Leonardo wrote an often-quoted letter describing the many marvellous and diverse things that he could achieve in the field of engineering and informing Ludovico that he could also paint. 

Leonardo worked in Milan from 1482 until 1499. He was commissioned to paint the Virgin of the Rocks for the Confraternity of the Immaculate Conception and The Last Supper for the monastery of Santa Maria delle Grazie. In the spring of 1485, Leonardo travelled to Hungary on behalf of Ludovico to meet Matthias Corvinus, for whom he is believed to have painted a Holy Family. Franz-Joachim Verspohl, Michelangelo Buonarroti und Leonardo Da Vinci: Republikanischer Alltag und Knstlerkonkurrenz in Florenz zwischen 1501 und 1505 (Wallstein Verlag, 2007), p. 151. Between 1493 and 1495 Leonardo listed a woman called Caterina among his dependents in his taxation documents. When she died in 1495, the list of funeral expenditures suggests that she was his mother. Codex II, 95 r, Victoria and Albert Museum, as cited by della Chiesa p. 85 

alt=A page with two drawings of a war-horse, one from the side, and the other showing the chest and right leg

Leonardo was employed on many different projects for Ludovico, including the preparation of floats and pageants for special occasions, designs for a dome for Milan Cathedral and a model for a huge equestrian monument to Francesco Sforza, Ludovico's predecessor. Seventy tons of bronze were set aside for casting it. The monument remained unfinished for several years, which was not unusual for Leonardo. In 1492 the clay model of the horse was completed. It surpassed in size the only two large equestrian statues of the Renaissance, Donatello's Gattamelata in Padua and Verrocchio's Bartolomeo Colleoni in Venice, and became known as the "Gran Cavallo". Verrocchio's statue of Bartolomeo Colleoni was not cast until 1488, after his death, and after Leonardo had already begun work on the statue for Ludovico. Leonardo began making detailed plans for its casting; however, Michelangelo insulted Leonardo by implying that he was unable to cast it. In November 1494 Ludovico gave the bronze to be used for cannon to defend the city from invasion by Charles VIII. 

At the start of the Second Italian War in 1499, the invading French troops used the life-size clay model for the "Gran Cavallo" for target practice. With Ludovico Sforza overthrown, Leonardo, with his assistant Salai and friend, the mathematician Luca Pacioli, fled Milan for Venice della Chiesa, p.85 where he was employed as a military architect and engineer, devising methods to defend the city from naval attack. On his return to Florence in 1500, he and his household were guests of the Servite monks at the monastery of Santissima Annunziata and were provided with a workshop where, according to Vasari, Leonardo created the cartoon of The Virgin and Child with St. Anne and St. John the Baptist, a work that won such admiration that "men and women, young and old" flocked to see it "as if they were attending a great festival". Vasari, p.256 

Leonardo da Vinci's very accurate map of Imola, created for Cesare Borgia

In Cesena, in 1502 Leonardo entered the service of Cesare Borgia, the son of Pope Alexander VI, acting as a military architect and engineer and travelling throughout Italy with his patron. Leonardo created a map of Cesare Borgia's stronghold, a town plan of Imola in order to win his patronage. Maps were extremely rare at the time and it would have seemed like a new concept. Upon seeing it, Cesare hired Leonardo as his chief military engineer and architect. Later in the year, Leonardo produced another map for his patron, one of Chiana Valley, Tuscany, so as to give his patron a better overlay of the land and greater strategic position. He created this map in conjunction with his other project of constructing a dam from the sea to Florence, in order to allow a supply of water to sustain the canal during all seasons.

Leonardo returned to Florence where he rejoined the Guild of St Luke on October 18, 1503, and spent two years designing and painting a mural of The Battle of Anghiari for the Signoria, with Michelangelo designing its companion piece, The Battle of Cascina. In Florence in 1504, he was part of a committee formed to relocate, against the artist's will, Michelangelo's statue of David. Gaetano Milanesi, Epistolario Buonarroti, Florence (1875), as cited by della Chiesa. 

In 1506 Leonardo returned to Milan. Many of his most prominent pupils or followers in painting either knew or worked with him in Milan, including Bernardino Luini, Giovanni Antonio Boltraffio and Marco d'Oggione. D'Oggione is known in part for his contemporary copies of the Last Supper. However, he did not stay in Milan for long because his father had died in 1504, and in 1507 he was back in Florence trying to sort out problems with his brothers over his father's estate. By 1508 Leonardo was back in Milan, living in his own house in Porta Orientale in the parish of Santa Babila. della Chiesa, p.86 

===Old age, 151319===
From September 1513 to 1516, under Pope Leo X, Leonardo spent much of his time living in the 
Belvedere in the Vatican in Rome, where Raphael and Michelangelo were both active at the time. In October 1515, Francis I of France recaptured Milan. On December 19, Leonardo was present at the meeting of Francis I and Pope Leo X, which took place in Bologna. Georges Goyau, Franois I, Transcribed by Gerald Rossi. The Catholic Encyclopedia, Volume VI. Published 1909. New York: Robert Appleton Company. Retrieved on 2007-10-04 Leonardo was commissioned to make for Francis a mechanical lion which could walk forward, then open its chest to reveal a cluster of lilies. Vasari, p.265 In 1516, he entered Franois' service, being given the use of the manor house Clos Luc Clos Luc, also called Cloux, is now a public museum. near the king's residence at the royal Chteau d'Amboise. It was here that he spent the last three years of his life, accompanied by his friend and apprentice, Count Francesco Melzi, and supported by a pension totalling 10,000 scudi. 

alt=Photo of a large medieval house, built of brick with many windows and gables and a circular tower with a conical roof
Leonardo died at Clos Luc, on 2 May 1519. Francis I had become a close friend. Vasari records that the king held Leonardo's head in his arms as he died, although this story, beloved by the French and portrayed in romantic paintings by Ingres, Mnageot and other French artists, as well as by Angelica Kauffman, may be legend rather than fact. On the day of Leonardo's death, a royal edict was issued by the king at Saint-Germain-en-Laye, a two-day journey from Clos Luc. This has been taken as evidence that King Franois cannot have been present at Leonardo's deathbed. However, White in Leonardo: The First Scientist points out that the edict was not signed by the king. Vasari states that in his last days, Leonardo sent for a priest to make his confession and to receive the Holy Sacrament. Vasari, p.270 In accordance with his will, sixty beggars followed his casket. This was a charitable legacy as each of the sixty paupers would have been awarded an established mourner's fee in the terms of Leonardo's will. Melzi was the principal heir and executor, receiving as well as money, Leonardo's paintings, tools, library and personal effects. Leonardo also remembered his other long-time pupil and companion, Salai and his servant Battista di Vilussis, who each received half of Leonardo's vineyards, his brothers who received land, and his serving woman who received a black cloak "of good stuff" with a fur edge. The black cloak, of good quality material, was a ready-made item from a clothier, with the fur trim being an additional luxury. The possession of this garment meant that Leonardo's house keeper could attend his funeral "respectably" attired at no expense to herself. Leonardo da Vinci was buried in the Chapel of Saint-Hubert in Chteau d'Amboise, in France.

Some 20 years after Leonardo's death, Francis was reported by the goldsmith and sculptor Benevenuto Cellini as saying: "There had never been another man born in the world who knew as much as Leonardo, not so much about painting, sculpture and architecture, as that he was a very great philosopher." 

==Relationships and influences==
Ghiberti's Gates of Paradise, (14251452) were a source of communal pride. Many artists assisted in their creation

===Florence: Leonardo's artistic and social background===
Florence, at the time of Leonardo's youth, was the centre of Christian Humanist thought and culture. Leonardo commenced his apprenticeship with Verrocchio in 1466, the year that Verrocchio's master, the great sculptor Donatello, died. The painter Uccello, whose early experiments with perspective were to influence the development of landscape painting, was a very old man. The painters Piero della Francesca and Fra Filippo Lippi, sculptor Luca della Robbia, and architect and writer Leon Battista Alberti were in their sixties. The successful artists of the next generation were Leonardo's teacher Verrocchio, Antonio Pollaiuolo and the portrait sculptor, Mino da Fiesole whose lifelike busts give the most reliable likenesses of Lorenzo Medici's father Piero and uncle Giovanni. Rosci, Leonardo, chapter 1, the historical setting, pp.920 

Leonardo's youth was spent in a Florence that was ornamented by the works of these artists and by Donatello's contemporaries, Masaccio, whose figurative frescoes were imbued with realism and emotion and Ghiberti whose Gates of Paradise, gleaming with gold leaf, displayed the art of combining complex figure compositions with detailed architectural backgrounds. Piero della Francesca had made a detailed study of perspective, Piero della Francesca, On Perspective for Painting (De Prospectiva Pingendi) and was the first painter to make a scientific study of light. These studies and Alberti's Treatise Leon Battista Alberti, De Pictura, 1435. On Painting, in English, De Pictura, in Latin were to have a profound effect on younger artists and in particular on Leonardo's own observations and artworks. 

Massaccio's "The Expulsion from the Garden of Eden" depicting the naked and distraught Adam and Eve created a powerfully expressive image of the human form, cast into three dimensions by the use of light and shade, which was to be developed in the works of Leonardo in a way that was to be influential in the course of painting. The humanist influence of Donatello's "David" can be seen in Leonardo's late paintings, particularly John the Baptist. 

Small devotional picture by Verrocchio, c. 1470

A prevalent tradition in Florence was the small altarpiece of the Virgin and Child. Many of these were created in tempera or glazed terracotta by the workshops of Filippo Lippi, Verrocchio and the prolific della Robbia family. Leonardo's early Madonnas such as The Madonna with a carnation and The Benois Madonna followed this tradition while showing idiosyncratic departures, particularly in the case of the Benois Madonna in which the Virgin is set at an oblique angle to the picture space with the Christ Child at the opposite angle. This compositional theme was to emerge in Leonardo's later paintings such as The Virgin and Child with St. Anne. 

Leonardo was a contemporary of Botticelli, Domenico Ghirlandaio and Perugino, who were all slightly older than he was. He would have met them at the workshop of Verrocchio, with whom they had associations, and at the Academy of the Medici. Botticelli was a particular favourite of the Medici family, and thus his success as a painter was assured. Ghirlandaio and Perugino were both prolific and ran large workshops. They competently delivered commissions to well-satisfied patrons who appreciated Ghirlandaio's ability to portray the wealthy citizens of Florence within large religious frescoes, and Perugino's ability to deliver a multitude of saints and angels of unfailing sweetness and innocence. The Portinari Altarpiece, by Hugo van der Goes for a Florentine family These three were among those commissioned to paint the walls of the Sistine Chapel, the work commencing with Perugino's employment in 1479. Leonardo was not part of this prestigious commission. His first significant commission, The Adoration of the Magi for the Monks of Scopeto, was never completed. 

In 1476, during the time of Leonardo's association with Verrocchio's workshop, the Portinari Altarpiece by Hugo van der Goes arrived in Florence, bringing new painterly techniques from Northern Europe which were to profoundly affect Leonardo, Ghirlandaio, Perugino and others. In 1479, the Sicilian painter Antonello da Messina, who worked exclusively in oils, traveled north on his way to Venice, where the leading painter Giovanni Bellini adopted the technique of oil painting, quickly making it the preferred method in Venice. Leonardo was also later to visit Venice. 

Like the two contemporary architects Bramante and Antonio da Sangallo the Elder Leonardo experimented with designs for centrally planned churches, a number of which appear in his journals, as both plans and views, although none was ever realised. Hartt, pp.3912 

Lorenzo de' Medici between Antonio Pucci and Francesco Sassetti, with Giulio de' Medici, fresco by Ghirlandaio Leonardo's political contemporaries were Lorenzo Medici (il Magnifico), who was three years older, and his younger brother Giuliano who was slain in the Pazzi Conspiracy in 1478. Ludovico il Moro who ruled Milan between 1479 and 1499 and to whom Leonardo was sent as ambassador from the Medici court, was also of Leonardo's age. 

With Alberti, Leonardo visited the home of the Medici and through them came to know the older Humanist philosophers of whom Marsiglio Ficino, proponent of Neo Platonism; Cristoforo Landino, writer of commentaries on Classical writings, and John Argyropoulos, teacher of Greek and translator of Aristotle were the foremost. Also associated with the Academy of the Medici was Leonardo's contemporary, the brilliant young poet and philosopher Pico della Mirandola. Leonardo later wrote in the margin of a journal "The Medici made me and the Medici destroyed me." While it was through the action of Lorenzo that Leonardo received his employment at the court of Milan, it is not known exactly what Leonardo meant by this cryptic comment. 

Although usually named together as the three giants of the High Renaissance, Leonardo, Michelangelo and Raphael were not of the same generation. Leonardo was twenty-three when Michelangelo was born and thirty-one when Raphael was born. Raphael only lived until the age of 37 and died in 1520, the year after Leonardo, but Michelangelo went on creating for another 45 years. 

Study for a portrait of Isabella d'Este (1500) Louvre

===Personal life===

Within Leonardo's lifetime, his extraordinary powers of invention, his "outstanding physical beauty", "infinite grace", "great strength and generosity", "regal spirit and tremendous breadth of mind" as described by Vasari, Vasari, p.253 as well as all other aspects of his life, attracted the curiosity of others. One such aspect is his respect for life evidenced by his vegetarianism and his habit, according to Vasari, of purchasing caged birds and releasing them. Vasari, p.257 Eugene Muntz, Leonardo da Vinci Artist, Thinker, and Man of Science (1898), quoted at Leonardo da Vinci's Ethical Vegetarianism 

Leonardo had many friends who are now renowned either in their fields or for their historical significance. They included the mathematician Luca Pacioli, with whom he collaborated on the book De Divina Proportione in the 1490s. Leonardo appears to have had no close relationships with women except for his friendship with Cecilia Gallerani and the two Este sisters, Beatrice and Isabella. Cartwright Ady, Julia. Beatrice d'Este, Duchess of Milan, 14751497. Publisher: J.M. Dent, 1899; Cartwright Ady, Julia. Isabella D'Este, Marchioness of Mantua, 14741539. Publisher; J.M. Dent, 1903. He drew a portrait of Isabella while on a journey which took him through Mantua, and which appears to have been used to create a painted portrait, now lost. 

Beyond friendship, Leonardo kept his private life secret. His sexuality has been the subject of satire, analysis, and speculation. This trend began in the mid-16th century and was revived in the 19th and 20th centuries, most notably by Sigmund Freud. Sigmund Freud, Eine Kindheitserinnerung des Leonardo da Vinci, (1910) Leonardo's most intimate relationships were perhaps with his pupils Salai and Melzi. Melzi, writing to inform Leonardo's brothers of his death, described Leonardo's feelings for his pupils as both loving and passionate.
It has been claimed since the 16th century that these relationships were of a sexual or erotic nature. Court records of 1476, when he was aged twenty-four, show that Leonardo and three other young men were charged with sodomy in an incident involving a well-known male prostitute. The charges were dismissed for lack of evidence, and there is speculation that since one of the accused, Lionardo de Tornabuoni, was related to Lorenzo de' Medici, the family exerted its influence to secure the dismissal. Since that date much has been written about his presumed homosexuality and its role in his art, particularly in the androgyny and eroticism manifested in John the Baptist and Bacchus and more explicitly in a number of erotic drawings. Michael Rocke, Forbidden Friendships epigraph, p. 148 & N120 p.298 

John the Baptist. Salai is thought to have been the model. (c. 1514)Louvre

===Assistants and pupils===
Gian Giacomo Caprotti da Oreno, nicknamed Salai or Il Salaino ("The Little Unclean One" i.e., the devil), entered Leonardo's household in 1490. After only a year, Leonardo made a list of his misdemeanours, calling him "a thief, a liar, stubborn, and a glutton", after he had made off with money and valuables on at least five occasions and spent a fortune on clothes. Leonardo, Codex C. 15v, Institut of France. Trans. Richter Nevertheless, Leonardo treated him with great indulgence, and he remained in Leonardo's household for the next thirty years. della Chiesa, p.84 Salai executed a number of paintings under the name of Andrea Salai, but although Vasari claims that Leonardo "taught him a great deal about painting", his work is generally considered to be of less artistic merit than others among Leonardo's pupils, such as Marco d'Oggione and Boltraffio. In 1515, he painted a nude version of the Mona Lisa, known as Monna Vanna. Salai owned the Mona Lisa at the time of his death in 1525, and in his will it was assessed at 505 lire, an exceptionally high valuation for a small panel portrait. 

In 1506, Leonardo took on another pupil, Count Francesco Melzi, the son of a Lombard aristocrat, who is considered to have been his favourite student. He travelled to France with Leonardo and remained with him until Leonardo's death. Melzi inherited the artistic and scientific works, manuscripts, and collections of Leonardo and administered the estate.

==Painting==

Annunciation (14751480)Uffizi, is thought to be Leonardo's earliest complete work
Despite the recent awareness and admiration of Leonardo as a scientist and inventor, for the better part of four hundred years his fame rested on his achievements as a painter and on a handful of works, either authenticated or attributed to him that have been regarded as among the masterpieces. By the 1490s Leonardo had already been described as a "Divine" painter. His fame is discussed by Daniel Arasse in Leonardo da Vinci, pp.1115 

These paintings are famous for a variety of qualities which have been much imitated by students and discussed at great length by connoisseurs and critics. Among the qualities that make Leonardo's work unique are the innovative techniques which he used in laying on the paint, his detailed knowledge of anatomy, light, botany and geology, his interest in physiognomy and the way in which humans register emotion in expression and gesture, his innovative use of the human form in figurative composition, and his use of the subtle gradation of tone. All these qualities come together in his most famous painted works, the Mona Lisa, the Last Supper and the Virgin of the Rocks. These qualities of Leonardo's works are discussed by Frederick Hartt in A History of Italian Renaissance Art, pp.387411. 

Unfinished painting of St. Jerome in the Wilderness, (c. 1480), Vatican

===Early works===
Leonardo's early works begin with the Baptism of Christ painted in conjunction with Verrocchio. Two other paintings appear to date from his time at the workshop, both of which are Annunciations. One is small, 59 cm long and 14 cm high. It is a "predella" to go at the base of a larger composition, in this case a painting by Lorenzo di Credi from which it has become separated. The other is a much larger work, 217 cm long. della Chiesa, pp. 88, 90 In both these Annunciations, Leonardo used a formal arrangement, such as in Fra Angelico's two well-known pictures of the same subject, of the Virgin Mary sitting or kneeling to the right of the picture, approached from the left by an angel in profile, with a rich flowing garment, raised wings and bearing a lily. Although previously attributed to Ghirlandaio, the larger work is now generally attributed to Leonardo. 

In the smaller picture Mary averts her eyes and folds her hands in a gesture that symbolised submission to God's will. In the larger picture, however, Mary is not submissive. The girl, interrupted in her reading by this unexpected messenger, puts a finger in her bible to mark the place and raises her hand in a formal gesture of greeting or surprise. This calm young woman appears to accept her role as the Mother of God, not with resignation but with confidence. In this painting the young Leonardo presents the humanist face of the Virgin Mary, recognising humanity's role in God's incarnation.

===Paintings of the 1480s===
Virgin of the Rocks, Louvre, demonstrates Leonardo's interest in nature
In the 1480s Leonardo received two very important commissions and commenced another work which was also of ground-breaking importance in terms of composition. Two of the three were never finished, and the third took so long that it was subject to lengthy negotiations over completion and payment. One of these paintings is that of St. Jerome in the Wilderness. Bortolon associates this picture with a difficult period of Leonardo's life, as evidenced in his diary: "I thought I was learning to live; I was only learning to die." 

Although the painting is barely begun, the composition can be seen and it is very unusual. Jerome, as a penitent, occupies the middle of the picture, set on a slight diagonal and viewed somewhat from above. His kneeling form takes on a trapezoid shape, with one arm stretched to the outer edge of the painting and his gaze looking in the opposite direction. J. Wasserman points out the link between this painting and Leonardo's anatomical studies. Across the foreground sprawls his symbol, a great lion whose body and tail make a double spiral across the base of the picture space. The other remarkable feature is the sketchy landscape of craggy rocks against which the figure is silhouetted.

The daring display of figure composition, the landscape elements and personal drama also appear in the great unfinished masterpiece, the Adoration of the Magi, a commission from the Monks of San Donato a Scopeto. It is a complex composition, of about 250 x 250 centimetres. Leonardo did numerous drawings and preparatory studies, including a detailed one in linear perspective of the ruined classical architecture which makes part of the backdrop to the scene. But in 1482 Leonardo went off to Milan at the behest of Lorenzo de' Medici in order to win favour with Ludovico il Moro, and the painting was abandoned. 

The third important work of this period is the Virgin of the Rocks which was commissioned in Milan for the Confraternity of the Immaculate Conception. The painting, to be done with the assistance of the de Predis brothers, was to fill a large complex altarpiece, already constructed. Wasserman, p.108 Leonardo chose to paint an apocryphal moment of the infancy of Christ when the infant John the Baptist, in protection of an angel, met the Holy Family on the road to Egypt. In this scene, as painted by Leonardo, John recognizes and worships Jesus as the Christ. The painting demonstrates an eerie beauty as the graceful figures kneel in adoration around the infant Christ in a wild landscape of tumbling rock and whirling water. 
While the painting is quite large, about 200  120 centimetres, it is not nearly as complex as the painting ordered by the monks of St Donato, having only four figures rather than about fifty and a rocky landscape rather than architectural details. The painting was eventually finished; in fact, two versions of the painting were finished, one which remained at the chapel of the Confraternity and the other which Leonardo carried away to France. But the Brothers did not get their painting, or the de Predis their payment, until the next century. 

The Last Supper (1498)Convent of Sta. Maria delle Grazie, Milan, Italy

===Paintings of the 1490s===
Leonardo's most famous painting of the 1490s is The Last Supper, painted for the refectory of the Convent of Santa Maria della Grazie in Milan. The painting represents the last meal shared by Jesus with his disciples before his capture and death. It shows specifically the moment when Jesus has just said "one of you will betray me". Leonardo tells the story of the consternation that this statement caused to the twelve followers of Jesus. 

The novelist Matteo Bandello observed Leonardo at work and wrote that some days he would paint from dawn till dusk without stopping to eat and then not paint for three or four days at a time. Wasserman, p.124 This was beyond the comprehension of the prior of the convent, who hounded him until Leonardo asked Ludovico to intervene. Vasari describes how Leonardo, troubled over his ability to adequately depict the faces of Christ and the traitor Judas, told the Duke that he might be obliged to use the prior as his model. Vasari, p.263 

When finished, the painting was acclaimed as a masterpiece of design and characterisation, Vasari, p.262 but it deteriorated rapidly, so that within a hundred years it was described by one viewer as "completely ruined". della Chiesa, p.97 Leonardo, instead of using the reliable technique of fresco, had used tempera over a ground that was mainly gesso, resulting in a surface which was subject to mold and to flaking. della Chiesa, p.98 Despite this, the painting has remained one of the most reproduced works of art, countless copies being made in every medium from carpets to cameos.

===Paintings of the 1500s===
Mona Lisa or La Gioconda (15031505/1507)Louvre, Paris, France
Among the works created by Leonardo in the 16th century is the small portrait known as the Mona Lisa or "la Gioconda", the laughing one. In the present era it is arguably the most famous painting in the world. Its fame rests, in particular, on the elusive smile on the woman's face, its mysterious quality brought about perhaps by the fact that the artist has subtly shadowed the corners of the mouth and eyes so that the exact nature of the smile cannot be determined. The shadowy quality for which the work is renowned came to be called "sfumato" or Leonardo's smoke. Vasari, who is generally thought to have known the painting only by repute, said that "the smile was so pleasing that it seemed divine rather than human; and those who saw it were amazed to find that it was as alive as the original". Vasari, p.267 

Other characteristics found in this work are the unadorned dress, in which the eyes and hands have no competition from other details, the dramatic landscape background in which the world seems to be in a state of flux, the subdued colouring and the extremely smooth nature of the painterly technique, employing oils, but laid on much like tempera and blended on the surface so that the brushstrokes are indistinguishable. Vasari expressed the opinion that the manner of painting would make even "the most confident master ... despair and lose heart." Vasari, p.266 The perfect state of preservation and the fact that there is no sign of repair or overpainting is rare in a panel painting of this date. della Chiesa, p.103 

In the painting Virgin and Child with St. Anne the composition again picks up the theme of figures in a landscape which Wasserman describes as "breathtakingly beautiful" Wasserman, p.150 and harkens back to the St Jerome picture with the figure set at an oblique angle. What makes this painting unusual is that there are two obliquely set figures superimposed. Mary is seated on the knee of her mother, St Anne. She leans forward to restrain the Christ Child as he plays roughly with a lamb, the sign of his own impending sacrifice. This painting, which was copied many times, influenced Michelangelo, Raphael, and Andrea del Sarto, della Chiesa, p.109 and through them Pontormo and Correggio. The trends in composition were adopted in particular by the Venetian painters Tintoretto and Veronese.

===Drawings===
Leonardo was not a prolific painter, but he was a most prolific draftsman, keeping journals full of small sketches and detailed drawings recording all manner of things that took his attention. As well as the journals there exist many studies for paintings, some of which can be identified as preparatory to particular works such as The Adoration of the Magi, The Virgin of the Rocks and The Last Supper. 
His earliest dated drawing is a Landscape of the Arno Valley, 1473, which shows the river, the mountains, Montelupo Castle and the farmlands beyond it in great detail. 

Among his famous drawings are the Vitruvian Man, a study of the proportions of the human body, the Head of an Angel, for The Virgin of the Rocks in the Louvre, a botanical study of Star of Bethlehem and a large drawing (160100 cm) in black chalk on coloured paper of The Virgin and Child with St. Anne and St. John the Baptist in the National Gallery, London. This drawing employs the subtle sfumato technique of shading, in the manner of the Mona Lisa. It is thought that Leonardo never made a painting from it, the closest similarity being to The Virgin and Child with St. Anne in the Louvre. della Chiesa, p.102 

Other drawings of interest include numerous studies generally referred to as "caricatures" because, although exaggerated, they appear to be based upon observation of live models. Vasari relates that if Leonardo saw a person with an interesting face he would follow them around all day observing them. Vasari, p.261 There are numerous studies of beautiful young men, often associated with Salai, with the rare and much admired facial feature, the so-called "Grecian profile". The "Grecian profile" has a continuous straight line from forehead to nose-tip, the bridge of the nose being exceptionally high. It is a feature of many Classical Greek statues. These faces are often contrasted with that of a warrior. Salai is often depicted in fancy-dress costume. Leonardo is known to have designed sets for pageants with which these may be associated. Other, often meticulous, drawings show studies of drapery. A marked development in Leonardo's ability to draw drapery occurred in his early works. Another often-reproduced drawing is a macabre sketch that was done by Leonardo in Florence in 1479 showing the body of Bernardo Baroncelli, hanged in connection with the murder of Giuliano, brother of Lorenzo de' Medici, in the Pazzi Conspiracy. With dispassionate integrity Leonardo has registered in neat mirror writing the colours of the robes that Baroncelli was wearing when he died.

==Observation and invention==

The Vitruvian Man (c. 1485) Accademia, Venice

===Journals and notes===

Renaissance humanism recognized no mutually exclusive polarities between the sciences and the arts, and Leonardo's studies in science and engineering are as impressive and innovative as his artistic work. These studies were recorded in 13,000 pages of notes and drawings, which fuse art and natural philosophy (the forerunner of modern science), made and maintained daily throughout Leonardo's life and travels, as he made continual observations of the world around him. 

Leonardo's writings are mostly in mirror-image cursive. The reason may have been more a practical expediency than for reasons of secrecy as is often suggested. Since Leonardo wrote with his left hand, it is probable that it was easier for him to write from right to left. Left-handed writers using a split nib or quill pen experience difficulty pushing the pen from left to right across the page. A page showing Leonardo's study of a foetus in the womb (c. 1510) Royal Library, Windsor Castle
His notes and drawings display an enormous range of interests and preoccupations, some as mundane as lists of groceries and people who owed him money and some as intriguing as designs for wings and shoes for walking on water. There are compositions for paintings, studies of details and drapery, studies of faces and emotions, of animals, babies, dissections, plant studies, rock formations, whirlpools, war machines, flying machines and architecture. 

These notebooksoriginally loose papers of different types and sizes, distributed by friends after his deathhave found their way into major collections such as the Royal Library at Windsor Castle, the Louvre, the Biblioteca Nacional de Espaa, the Victoria and Albert Museum, the Biblioteca Ambrosiana in Milan which holds the twelve-volume Codex Atlanticus, and British Library in London which has put a selection from the Codex Arundel (BL Arundel MS 263) online. The Codex Leicester is the only major scientific work of Leonardo's in private hands. It is owned by Bill Gates and is displayed once a year in different cities around the world.

Leonardo's notes appear to have been intended for publication because many of the sheets have a form and order that would facilitate this. In many cases a single topic, for example, the heart or the human fetus, is covered in detail in both words and pictures on a single sheet. Windsor Castle, Royal Library, sheets RL 19073v-19074v and RL 19102 respectively. This method of organisation minimises of loss of data in the case of pages being mixed up or destroyed. Why they were not published within Leonardo's lifetime is unknown. 

===Scientific studies===
Rhombicuboctahedron as published in Pacioli's De Divina Proportione
Leonardo's approach to science was an observational one: he tried to understand a phenomenon by describing and depicting it in utmost detail and did not emphasize experiments or theoretical explanation. Since he lacked formal education in Latin and mathematics, contemporary scholars mostly ignored Leonardo the scientist, although he did teach himself Latin. In the 1490s he studied mathematics under Luca Pacioli and prepared a series of drawings of regular solids in a skeletal form to be engraved as plates for Pacioli's book De Divina Proportione, published in 1509. 

It appears that from the content of his journals he was planning a series of treatises to be published on a variety of subjects. A coherent treatise on anatomy was said to have been observed during a visit by Cardinal Louis 'D' Aragon's secretary in 1517. 
 Aspects of his work on the studies of anatomy, light and the landscape were assembled for publication by his pupil Francesco Melzi and eventually published as Treatise on Painting by Leonardo da Vinci in France and Italy in 1651 and Germany in 1724, della Chiesa, p.117 with engravings based upon drawings by the Classical painter Nicolas Poussin. According to Arasse, the treatise, which in France went into 62 editions in fifty years, caused Leonardo to be seen as "the precursor of French academic thought on art". 

While Leonardo's experimentation followed clear scientific methods, a recent and exhaustive analysis of Leonardo as a scientist by Frtijof Capra argues that Leonardo was a fundamentally different kind of scientist from Galileo, Newton and other scientists who followed him in that, as a Renaissance Man, his theorising and hypothesising integrated the arts and particularly painting. Capra, Fritjof. The Science of Leonardo; Inside the Mind of the Genius of the Renaissance. (New York, Doubleday, 2007) 

Anatomical study of the arm, (c. 1510)

===Anatomy===
Leonardo's formal training in the anatomy of the human body began with his apprenticeship to Andrea del Verrocchio, who insisted that all his pupils learn anatomy. As an artist, he quickly became master of topographic anatomy, drawing many studies of muscles, tendons and other visible anatomical features.

As a successful artist, he was given permission to dissect human corpses at the Hospital of Santa Maria Nuova in Florence and later at hospitals in Milan and Rome. From 1510 to 1511 he collaborated in his studies with the doctor Marcantonio della Torre. Leonardo made over 240 detailed drawings and wrote about 13,000 words towards a treatise on anatomy. These papers were left to his heir, Francesco Melzi, for publication, a task of overwhelming difficulty because of its scope and Leonardo's idiosyncratic writing. It was left incomplete at the time of Melzi's death more than fifty years later, with only a small amount of the material on anatomy included in Leonardo's Treatise on painting, published in France in 1632. Kenneth D. Keele, Leonardo da Vinci's Influence on Renaissance Anatomy. (1964) During the time that Melzi was ordering the material into chapters for publication, they were examined by a number of anatomists and artists, including Vasari, Cellini and Albrecht Drer who made a number of drawings from them. 

Leonardo's anatomical drawings include many studies of the human skeleton and its parts, and studies muscles and sinews. He studied the mechanical functions of the skeleton and the muscular forces that are applied to it in a manner that prefigured the modern science of biomechanics. He drew the heart and vascular system, the sex organs and other internal organs, making one of the first scientific drawings of a fetus in utero. The drawings and notation are far ahead of their time, and if published, would undoubtedly have made a major contribution to medical science. Alistair Sooke, The Daily Telegraph, 28 July 2013, Online, accessed 29 July 2013. Hannah Furness, The Daily Telegraph, 12 March 2013, Online, accessed 28 July 2013. 

As an artist, Leonardo also closely observed and recorded the effects of age and of human emotion on the physiology, studying in particular the effects of rage. He also drew many figures who had significant facial deformities or signs of illness. Leonardo also studied and drew the anatomy of many animals, dissecting cows, birds, monkeys, bears, and frogs, and comparing in his drawings their anatomical structure with that of humans. He also made a number of studies of horses. 

===Engineering and inventions===
A design for a flying machine, (c. 1488) Institut de France, Paris
During his lifetime Leonardo was valued as an engineer. In a letter to Ludovico il Moro he claimed to be able to create all sorts of machines both for the protection of a city and for siege. When he fled to Venice in 1499 he found employment as an engineer and devised a system of moveable barricades to protect the city from attack. He also had a scheme for diverting the flow of the Arno River, a project on which Niccol Machiavelli also worked. Leonardo's journals include a vast number of inventions, both practical and impractical. They include musical instruments, a mechanical knight, hydraulic pumps, reversible crank mechanisms, finned mortar shells, and a steam cannon. 

In 1502, Leonardo produced a drawing of a single span 720 ft bridge as part of a civil engineering project for Ottoman Sultan Beyazid II of Constantinople. The bridge was intended to span an inlet at the mouth of the Bosporus known as the Golden Horn. Beyazid did not pursue the project because he believed that such a construction was impossible. Leonardo's vision was resurrected in 2001 when a smaller bridge based on his design was constructed in Norway. 

For much of his life, Leonardo was fascinated by the phenomenon of flight, producing many studies of the flight of birds, including his c. 1505 Codex on the Flight of Birds, as well as plan for several flying machines, including a flapping ornithopter and a machine with a helical rotor. The British television station Channel Four commissioned a documentary Leonardo's Dream Machines, for broadcast in 2003. Leonardo's designs for machines such as a parachute, and giant crossbow were interpreted, constructed and tested. Leonardo's Dream Machines British Library online gallery (retrieved 10 October 2013) Some of those designs proved a success, whilst others fared less well when practically tested.

==Fame and reputation==

Francis I of France receiving the last breath of Leonardo da Vinci, by Ingres, 1818
Within Leonardo's own lifetime his fame was such that the King of France carried him away like a trophy and was claimed to have supported him in his old age and held him in his arms as he died. Interest in Leonardo has never diminished. The crowds still queue to see his most famous artworks, T-shirts bear his most famous drawing, and writers continue to marvel at his genius and speculate about his private life and, particularly, about what one so intelligent actually believed in. 

Giorgio Vasari, in the enlarged edition of Lives of the Artists, 1568, Vasari, p.255 introduced his chapter on Leonardo da Vinci with the following words:

Statue of Leonardo in Amboise

The continued admiration that Leonardo commanded from painters, critics and historians is reflected in many other written tributes. Baldassare Castiglione, author of Il Cortegiano ("The Courtier"), wrote in 1528: "... Another of the greatest painters in this world looks down on this art in which he is unequalled ..." 
 while the biographer known as "Anonimo Gaddiano" wrote, c. 1540: "His genius was so rare and universal that it can be said that nature worked a miracle on his behalf ...". "Anonimo Gaddiani", elaborating on Libro di Antonio Billi, 15371542 

The 19th century brought a particular admiration for Leonardo's genius, causing Henry Fuseli to write in 1801: "Such was the dawn of modern art, when Leonardo da Vinci broke forth with a splendour that distanced former excellence: made up of all the elements that constitute the essence of genius ..." 
 This is echoed by A. E. Rio who wrote in 1861: "He towered above all other artists through the strength and the nobility of his talents." 
 

By the 19th century, the scope of Leonardo's notebooks was known, as well as his paintings. Hippolyte Taine wrote in 1866: "There may not be in the world an example of another genius so universal, so incapable of fulfilment, so full of yearning for the infinite, so naturally refined, so far ahead of his own century and the following centuries." 
 
Art historian Bernard Berenson wrote in 1896: "Leonardo is the one artist of whom it may be said with perfect literalness: Nothing that he touched but turned into a thing of eternal beauty. Whether it be the cross section of a skull, the structure of a weed, or a study of muscles, he, with his feeling for line and for light and shade, forever transmuted it into life-communicating values." 
 

The interest in Leonardo's genius has continued unabated; experts study and translate his writings, analyse his paintings using scientific techniques, argue over attributions and search for works which have been recorded but never found. 
 Liana Bortolon, writing in 1967, said: "Because of the multiplicity of interests that spurred him to pursue every field of knowledge ... Leonardo can be considered, quite rightly, to have been the universal genius par excellence, and with all the disquieting overtones inherent in that term. Man is as uncomfortable today, faced with a genius, as he was in the 16th century. Five centuries have passed, yet we still view Leonardo with awe." 

==See also==

* Aerial perspective
* Italian Renaissance painting
* Leonardo da Vinci, A Memory of His Childhood
* Leonardo da Vinci-Fiumicino Airport
* List of Italian painters
* List of vegetarians
* Medical Renaissance
* Museo della Scienza e della Tecnologia "Leonardo da Vinci"
* Renaissance technology

==Footnotes==

==References==

==Bibliography==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* volume 2: ISBN 0-486-22573-9. A reprint of the original 1883 edition.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* chapter "The Graphic Works" is by Frank Zollner & Johannes Nathan.

==External links==

* 
* Leonardo da Vinci and the Virgin of the Rocks, A different point of view
* 
* 
* Complete text & images of Richter's translation of the Notebooks
* Web Gallery of Leonardo Paintings
* Drawings of Leonardo da Vinci
* Da Vinci Decoded Article from The Guardian
* The true face of Leonardo Da Vinci?
* Leonardo da Vinci's Ethical Vegetarianism
* The Notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci
* Leonardo da Vinci at BBC Science
* Yahoo news, 500-year-old Leonardo da Vinci sculpture 'Horse and Rider' unveiled
* Leonardo da Vinci: Anatomist The Queen's Gallery, Buckingham Palace, Friday, 4 May 2012 to Sunday, 7 October 2012. High-resolution anatomical drawings.

 



[[Lacrosse]]

Lacrosse is a team sport of Native American origin played using a small rubber ball and a long-handled stick called a crosse or lacrosse stick. It is a contact sport which requires padding, except in the women's version. The head of the lacrosse stick is strung with loose mesh designed to catch and hold the lacrosse ball. Offensively, the objective of the game is to score by shooting the ball into an opponent's goal, using the lacrosse stick to catch, carry, and pass the ball to do so. Defensively, the objective is to keep the opposing team from scoring and to gain the ball through the use of stick checking and body contact or positioning. The sport has four major types: men's field lacrosse, women's lacrosse, box lacrosse and intercrosse.

==History==

Lacrosse, today a relatively popular team sport in North America, may have developed as early as 1100 AD among indigenous peoples on the continent. By the seventeenth century, it was well-established. It was documented by Jesuit missionary priests in the territory of present-day Canada. The game has undergone many modifications since that time.

In the traditional aboriginal Canadian version, each team consisted of about 100 to 1,000 men on a field that stretched from about 500 meters to 3 kilometers long. These lacrosse games lasted from sunup to sundown for two to three days straight. These games were played as part of ceremonial ritual, a kind of symbolic warfare, to give thanks to the Creator or Master. 

Ball-play of the Choctaw  ball up by George Catlin, circa 18461850
Lacrosse played a significant role in the community and religious life of tribes across the continent for many years. Early lacrosse was characterized by deep spiritual involvement, befitting the spirit of combat in which it was undertaken. Those who took part did so in the role of warriors, with the goal of bringing glory and honor to themselves and their tribes. The game was said to be played "for the Creator" or was referred to as "The Creator's Game."

The French Jesuit missionary Jean de Brbeuf saw Iroquois tribesmen play the game during 1637 in present-day New York. He was the first European to write about the game. He called it la crosse ("the stick"). Some say the name originated from the French term for field hockey, le jeu de la crosse. Others suggest that it was named after the crosier, a staff carried by bishops that bears a similarity to the sticks used in the sport. STX Lacrosse 

In 1856, William George Beers, a Canadian dentist, founded the Montreal Lacrosse Club. In 1867, Beers codified the game, shortening the length of each game and reducing the number of players to 12 per team. The first game played under Beers' rules was at Upper Canada College in 1867; they lost to the Toronto Cricket Club by a score of 31. By the 20th century, teams in high schools, colleges, and universities in Canada and the United States began playing the game.

Lacrosse was contested for medals in the 1904 and 1908 Olympics with teams from Canada, the United States, and Great Britain. It was contested as a demonstration sport in the 1928 and 1932 Olympics. On each occasion, a playoff was held in the United States to determine what team would go to the Olympics; each time the playoffs were won by the Johns Hopkins Blue Jays of the university in Baltimore, Maryland. 
Richmond Hill "Young Canadians" lacrosse team, 1885.

In the United States, lacrosse during the 1900s was primarily a regional sport centered around the East Coast, including states such as the following: Connecticut, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia and North Carolina. In the last half of the 20th century, the sport has continued growth west of this region, including the Midwest, Oklahoma and Texas, as well as the West of Arizona, Utah, Colorado, California, Oregon, and Washington.

At the highest amateur level, it is represented by the collegiate NCAA Division I in the United States. The first collegiate lacrosse program was established by New York University in 1877. Nearly 100 years later, the 1971 tournament was the first Men's Lacrosse Championship sponsored by the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA). 

In other countries, the sport is also played at a high level on the amateur level by the Australian Lacrosse League, the Canadian University Field Lacrosse Association, and club lacrosse leagues internationally. 

In 1998, a number of national lacrosse organizations in the United States merged to create US Lacrosse, a unified national governing body for men's and women's lacrosse in the United States. Headquartered in Baltimore, US Lacrosse seeks to provide a leadership role in virtually every aspect of the game.

In the summer of 2001, a men's professional field lacrosse league, known as Major League Lacrosse (MLL), was inaugurated in the United States. Initially starting with three teams, the MLL has grown to a current total of eight clubs located in major metropolitan areas in the United States. On July 4, 2008, Major League Lacrosse set the professional lacrosse attendance record: 20,116 fans attended a game at Invesco Field in Denver, Colorado. 

==Types of play==

===Field lacrosse===
There are ten players on each team: three attackers, three midfielders, four defenders.

Diagram of a men's college lacrosse field
Each player carries a lacrosse stick (or crosse). A "short crosse" (or "short stick") measures between 40 in and 42 in long (head and shaft together) and is typically used by attackers or midfielders. A maximum of four players per team may carry a "long crosse" (sometimes called "long pole", "long stick" or "d-pole") which is 52 in to 72 in long; typically used by defenders or midfielders.

The head of the crosse on both long and short crosses must be 6.5 in or larger at its widest point. The throat of the lacrosse head for college must be at least 3 inches wide. For high school play, there is no minimum width at its narrowest point; the only provision is that the ball must roll out unimpeded. The designated goalkeeper is allowed to have a stick from 40 in to 72 in long and the head of a goalkeeper's crosse may measure up to 12 in wide, significantly larger than field players' heads, to assist in blocking shots. 
A face-off

The field of play is 110 yd long and 60 yd wide. The goals are 6 ft by 6 ft. The goal sits inside a circular "crease", measuring 18 ft in diameter. Each offensive and defensive area is surrounded by a "restraining box." Each quarter, and after each goal scored, play is restarted with a face-off. During a face-off, two players lay their stick horizontally next to the ball, head of the stick inches from the ball and the butt-end pointing down the midfield line. Face-off-men scrap for the ball, often by clamping it under their stick and flicking it out to their teammates. Attackers and defenders cannot cross their restraining line until one player from the midfield takes possession of the ball or the ball crosses the restraining line. If a member of one team touches the ball and it travels outside of the playing area, play is restarted by awarding possession to the opposing team. During play, teams may substitute players in and out freely. Sometimes this is referred to as "on the fly" substitution. Substitution must occur within the designated exchange area (often called "the box") in order to be legal. 

For most penalties, the offending player is sent to the penalty box, which is located between each team's bench. His team must play without the player for a designated amount of time based upon the foul. (Most penalties are "releasable", that is, the penalty ends when a goal is scored by the non-offending team.) Technical fouls (such as offsides and holding) result in either a turnover or a player's suspension of 30 seconds, while personal fouls are generally penalized one minute. (Some infractions, such as playing with a stick that does not meet the specifications of the designated level of play, may serve non-releasable penalties of up to three minutes). The team that has taken the penalty is said to be playing man down, while the other team is on the man up. Teams will use various lacrosse strategies to attack and defend while a player is being penalized. Offsides is penalized by a 30-second penalty. It occurs when there are more than 7 players on the defensive side of the field (three midfielders/three defensemen/one goalkeeper), or more than 6 players from one team on the offensive side of the field (three midfielders/three attack). The zones are separated by the midfield line. 

1904 Olympics Gold Medal winning Winnipeg Shamrocks lacrosse team
Lacrosse at the Olympics was a medal-earning sport in the 1904 and 1908 Summer Olympics. Lacrosse was a demonstration sport in the 1928 and 1932 Summer Olympics, as well as at the 1948 Summer Olympics. 

The men's professional Major League Lacrosse has used different field lacrosse rules from the international, college, and high school programs. With intentions to increase scoring, the league employed a sixty-second shot clock and a twopoint goal for shots taken outside a designated perimeter. In 2007, the MLL was bolstered by a ten-year television contract with ESPN. 

===Box lacrosse===

Up until the 1930s, all lacrosse was played on large fields outdoors. The owners of Canadian hockey arenas invented a reduced-size version of the game, called box lacrosse, as a means to make more profit from their arena investments, and because severe winter weather in many areas limits outdoor play.

Since 1985, when the Canadian University Field Lacrosse Association (CUFLA) began operating a collegiate men's league, field lacrosse has witnessed a revival in Canada. There are now 12 varsity teams. In 1994, Canada declared lacrosse its national summer sport in the National Sports Act (Bill C-212).

In 1987, a men's professional box lacrosse league was started, called the Eagle Pro Box Lacrosse League. This league changed its name to the Major Indoor Lacrosse League, then later to the National Lacrosse League. It grew to encompass men's lacrosse clubs in 14 cities throughout the United States and Canada.

A game of box lacrosse
Box lacrosse is played by teams of six on a hockey rink where the ice has been removed or covered by artificial turf, or in an indoor soccer or lacrosse field. The enclosed playing area is called a box, in contrast to the open playing field of the traditional game. This version of the game was introduced in the 1930s to promote business for hockey arenas, and within several years had nearly supplanted field lacrosse in Canada. 

Box lacrosse is played at the highest level by the Senior A divisions of the Canadian Lacrosse Association and the National Lacrosse League (NLL). The National Lacrosse League employs some minor rule changes from the Canadien Lacrosse Association (CLA) rules. Notably, the games are played during the winter. The NLL games consist of four fifteen-minute quarters compared with three periods of twenty minutes each (similar to ice hockey) in CLA games (multiple 15-minute OT periods for tied games, until whoever scores first). NLL players may use only sticks with hollow shafts, while CLA permits solid wooden sticks.: 

The goals in box lacrosse are much smaller than field lacrosse, traditionally 4 ft wide by 4 ft tall in box, and 4.6 ft wide by 4 ft tall in the NLL. Also, the goaltender wears much more protective padding, including a massive chest protector and armguard combination known as "uppers", large shin guards known as leg pads (both of which must follow strict measurement guidelines), and ice hockey-style masks or lacrosse helmets. Also, at the professional level, box lacrosse goaltenders often use traditional wooden sticks outside of the NLL, which does not allow wooden sticks. This makes Box Lacrosse faster and rougher than the traditional Field Lacrosse.

The style of the game is quick, accelerated by the close confines of the floor and a shot clock. The shot clock requires the attacking team to take a shot on goal within 30 seconds of gaining possession of the ball. In addition, players must advance the ball from their own defensive end to the offensive side of the floor within 10 seconds. 

Box lacrosse is also a much more physical game. Since cross checking is legal in box lacrosse, players wear rib pads in addition to the shoulder and elbow pads that field lacrosse players wear. Box lacrosse players wear a different type of helmet as well, a hockey helmet with a box lacrosse cage.

For most penalties, the offending player is sent to the penalty box and his team has to play without him (thus lacking one player) for a short amount of time. Most penalties last for two minutes, unless a five-minute major penalty has been assessed. What separates box lacrosse (and ice hockey) from other sports is that at the top levels of professional and junior lacrosse, a five-minute major penalty is given and the players are not ejected for participating in a fight. 

===Women's lacrosse===
2005 NCAA Women's Lacrosse Championship

The rules of women's lacrosse differ significantly from men's lacrosse, most notably by equipment and the degree of allowable physical contact. 2007 IWWLA Women's Lacrosse Rules, International Federation of Women's Lacrosse Associations Women's lacrosse rules also differ significantly between the US and all other countries, who play by the Federation of International Lacrosse, or FIL, rules. Women's lacrosse does not promote physical contact, primarily because the only protective equipment worn for this sport is a mouth guard sometimes and face guard (mandatory in the United States, optional internationally) and thin gloves. Stick checking (with several rules applied), and not body checking as in men's lacrosse, is permitted in the women's game, but only in certain levels of play. Sometimes checking can lead to body checking; while this is still not permitted in a women's game, some referees will allow limited body checking. Women's lacrosse also does not allow players to have a pocket, or loose net, on the lacrosse stick.

The first modern women's lacrosse game was held at St Leonards School in Scotland in 1890. It was introduced by the school's headmistress Louisa Lumsden after a visit to Quebec, where she saw it played. The first women's lacrosse team in the United States was established at Bryn Mawr School in Baltimore, Maryland in 1926. Mens and womens lacrosse were played under virtually the same rules, with no protective equipment, until the mid-1930s.

Both the number of players on the field, as well as the general set up of the field, differ from men's lacrosse. In women's lacrosse there are 3 defensive players, five mid-fielders, three attack players and one goalie per team, as opposed to men's lacrosse, where there are only three mid-fielders. Also, women players must abide by certain boundaries that do not exist in men's play. The three specific boundaries are the 8-meter "fan" in front of the goal (11 meters internationally), the 12-meter (15 meters internationally) half circle that surrounds the 8-meter half circle, and the draw circle in the center of the field, which is used for the women's version of "face-offs", known as "draws". The goal circle is also positioned slightly closer to the end line in women's lacrosse, compared to men's. In women's lacrosse on either the offensive or defensive end, the players are not able to step inside the goal circle for any reason, except when the goalkeeper has stepped out of the circle and one defensive player has stepped in as her deputy; this becomes a "goal-circle violation". However, at the women's collegiate level, a new rule has been established that allows defenders to pass through the goal circle.

Internationally, the game is commonly played in British girls' independent schools. While a minor sport in Australia, it is played to a very high standard at the elite level. Women's lacrosse has seen significant growth in Europe since the beginning of the 21st century, particularly in Germany, the Czech Republic, and the Netherlands. Japan entered its first team into the World Cup in 1993, and South Korea followed suit in 2009. In 2012, the first Israeli international team competed in the European Championships in Amsterdam.

The Australia national squad won the 2005 Women's Lacrosse World Cup. The 2009 Women's World Cup was played in Prague, Czech Republic, won by the United States, and the 2013 World Cup was played in Oshawa, Canada, again won by the United States. 

==College lacrosse==

Lacrosse in the United States is played at the collegiate level in both the club and sanctioned team sport. There are currently 87 and 3/4 NCAA sanctioned Division I men's lacrosse teams, 46 Division II men's lacrosse teams, and 189 Division III men's lacrosse teams. There are also currently 91 Division I women's lacrosse teams, 57 Division II women's lacrosse Teams, and 201 Division III women's lacrosse teams. 209 collegiate men's club teams compete at the Men's Collegiate Lacrosse Association level, including most major universities in the United States. Another 107 schools have club teams in the National College Lacrosse League.

The first U. S. intercollegiate game was played on November 22, 1877 between New York University and Manhattan College. Lacrosse had been introduced in upstate New York in the 1860s. Lacrosse was further introduced to the Baltimore area in the 1890s. These two areas continue to be the hotbeds of college lacrosse in the U.S. The first intercollegiate lacrosse tournament was held in 1881, with Harvard beating Princeton, 3-0, in the championship game.

The NCAA men's Lacrosse Division I in 1971, when Cornell took the first championship over Maryland, 126. Johns Hopkins has 9 championships with three consecutive wins from 1978 to 1980. The other two teams that have three consecutive wins are Syracuse from 1988 to 1990 and Princeton from 1996 to 1998. Syracuse also holds the NCAA record of championships with 11, the last occurring in 2009. In 2013 Duke beat Syracuse to claim the NCAA Division I Championship in Philadelphia. http://www.laxpower.com/laxnews/news.php?story=35664 The Division I national championship tournament draws one of the largest crowds of any Division I NCAA sport.

The NCAA men's Lacrosse Division III is growing at a much faster rate than Division I. There are currently 208 Division III teams playing in 25 different conferences in 2013, http://www.laxpower.com/update13/binmen/rating03.php compared to 130 teams in 2005. Stevenson University was the 2013 Division III national champion.

There is also the MCLA. This is Mens Club Lacrosse Association. It is played at schools that do not have a NCAA lacrosse team. The 2012 Division I MCLA champion was Colorado State University and Division II was won by the University of St. Thomas. 

NCAA women's Lacrosse Division I began play in 1982. The University of Maryland, College Park has traditionally dominated the women's intercollegiate play, producing many head coaches across the country and many U.S. national team players. The Terrapins won seven consecutive NCAA championships, from 1995 through 2001. Princeton University's women's teams have made it to the final game seven times since 1993 and have won three NCAA titles, in 1993, 2002, and 2003. In recent years, Northwestern University has become a force, winning the national championship from 2005 through 2009. Maryland ended Northwestern's streak by defeating the Wildcats in the 2010 final, however Northwestern has since won the 2011 and 2012 national titles. Maryland again claimed the national championship in 2014.

==Major League Lacrosse==
Major League Lacrosse (MLL) is a semi-professional lacrosse league founded in 1999 in the United States that showcases the world's best players. The season consists of 56 games running from April to August. MLL uses standard lacrosse rules with several exceptions, such as a 16-yard 2-point line and a 60-second shot clock. Regular season play began in 2001 with 6 teams, with plans to expand to 19 teams. The MLL currently has 8 teams: Boston, Annapolis, New York City, Rochester, Denver, Columbus, Charlotte, and Palm Beach County (formerly Hamilton).

==International lacrosse==

Lacrosse has been played for the most part in Canada and the United States, with small but dedicated lacrosse communities in the United Kingdom and Australia. Recently, however, lacrosse has begun to flourish at an international level, with teams being established particularly in Europe and east Asia.

With lacrosse not having been an official Olympic sport since 1908, the pinnacle of international lacrosse competition consists of the quadrennial World Championships. Begun in 1968, world championships began as a four-team invitational tournament sponsored by the International Lacrosse Federation. Until 1986, lacrosse world championships had been contested only by the US, Canada, England, and Australia. Scotland and Wales had teams competing in the women's edition. They are now held for lacrosse at senior men, senior women, under 19 men and under 19 women levels.

With the expansion of the game internationally, the 2006 Men's World Championship was contested by 21 countries and the Iroquois Nationals, representing the Six Nations of the Iroquois Confederacy. They are the only Native American/First Nations team to compete internationally. The 2009 Women's World Cup was competed for by 16 nations.

In 2003, the first World Indoor Lacrosse Championship was contested by six nations at four sites in Ontario. Canada won the championship in a final game against the Iroquois Nationals, 21-4. The 2007 WILC was held in Halifax from May 1420, and also won by Canada. Competition included the Iroquois Nationals and teams from Australia, Canada, Czech Republic, England, Ireland, Scotland, and the United States.

The World Lacrosse Championships have been dominated by the United States, particularly in the men's game. Its only world championship game losses at either level was in the 1978 final and 2006 final, both to Canada. The USA has won 9 of the 11 senior men's and all six under-19 men's tournaments to date.

In the women's game, Australia has provided stiffer competition, having won 6 of 14 games against the USA at senior world championships, including one draw. The USA has won 6 of the 8 senior women's, and 2 of the 3 under-19 women's tournaments to date, with the other world championships won by Australia.

The Iroquois Nationals are a team with members representing the Six Nations of the Iroquois Confederacy. The team was admitted to the International Lacrosse Federation (ILF) in 1990. It is the only First Nations team sanctioned to compete in any sport internationally. The Nationals placed fourth in the 1998, 2002 and 2006 World Lacrosse Championships. In 2008, the Iroquois were admitted as the Haudenosunee Nation to the International Federation of Women's Lacrosse Associations (IFWLA), since merged with the FIL (see below).

===Federation of International Lacrosse===
One obstacle to the international development of lacrosse had been separate governing bodies for the men's and women's versions of the sport. Men's lacrosse was governed by ILF and the women's version by IFWLA. In August 2008, after four years of negotiation, the two bodies merged to form a single unified body, the Federation of International Lacrosse (FIL). All championships previously operated by the ILF and IFWLA were taken over by the FIL. The FIL hosted the 2010 World Lacrosse Championship in Manchester, England, between July 15 to 24, 2010. The 2014 World Lacrosse Championship will be held in Denver, Colorado, US.

Internationally, as of 2013, a total of 47 members belong to the Federation of International Lacrosse (FIL). Only the United States, Canada, Australia, and the Iroquois Nationals have finished in the top three places at the World Lacrosse Championships.

Internationally, the World Indoor Lacrosse Championships are held every four years and are also sponsored by the FIL. Only eight nations have competed so far. Canada, the Iroquois Nationals and the United States have finished in the most coveted 1st, 2nd and 3rd places at these events.

===European Lacrosse Foundation===
right

The next largest international field lacrosse competition are the European Lacrosse Championships, held for both men and women's teams. Since 1995, the European Lacrosse Federation (ELF) has been running the European Championships. Before 2001 they held the Championships annually, but that year the ELF changed the format to every four years, between the World Championships. Before 2004, only seven nations had ever participated.

In 2004 a record number of countries participated, fielding 12 men's and 6 women's teams, making it the largest international lacrosse event of the year. In 2008 the European Lacrosse Championships were held in Lahti, Finland, with 18 competing countries. England placed first with the Netherlands and Germany placing second and third, respectively. The most recent ELF Championships were held in Amsterdam in 2012. England was victorious over Ireland in the championship game, and Sweden took third place.

==See also==

* Lacrosse in Canada
* Intercrosse, a version of lacrosse popular in school physical education classes, it is played with plastic sticks and hollow balls.
* Polocrosse, a version of lacrosse played on horseback
* Hurling, an ancient Gaelic team sport played with sticks and a ball

==References==

==Further reading==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* US Lacrosse - The national governing body for lacrosse in the United States.
* Lacrosse news archive at Baltimore Sun
* CBC Digital Archives - Lacrosse: A History of Canada's Game
* Lacrosse Map - Interactive team and tournament map documenting the growth of lacrosse since 1850.
* The "Official" Lacrosse Dictionary from E-Lacrosse.com
* UK Lacrosse Forum

 



[[Liverpool]]

Liverpool is a city and metropolitan borough of Merseyside, England, United Kingdom along the eastern side of the Mersey Estuary. It was founded as a borough in 1207 and was granted city status in 1880. In 2011 the population administered by Liverpool City Council was 466,415 and is at the centre of a wider urban area, the Liverpool City Region. 

Historically, Liverpool was a part of Lancashire. The city's urbanisation and expansion were largely brought about by the city's status as a major port. By the 18th century, trade from the West Indies, Ireland and mainland Europe, coupled with close links with the Atlantic slave trade, furthered the economic expansion of Liverpool. Liverpool is also well known for its inventions and innovations, particularly in terms of infrastructure, transport, general construction, and in the fields of public health and social reform. Railways, ferries and the skyscraper were all pioneered in the city, together with the first societies for animal and child protection, the first schools for the blind, for working-men, and for girls. Liverpool was the port of registry of the ocean liner, the RMS Titanic, and the words Titanic, Liverpool could be seen on the stern of the ship.

Inhabitants of Liverpool are referred to as Liverpudlians but are also colloquially known as "Scousers", in reference to the local dish known as "scouse", a form of stew. The word "Scouse" has also become synonymous with the Liverpool accent and dialect. Many people "self-identify" as Liverpudlians or Scousers without actually being born or living within the city boundaries of Liverpool. Many people from within the greater Merseyside area consider themselves thus, although many do not. Conversely, a number of people from Liverpool itself may not consider themselves Scousers, since the term for them may have pejorative overtones. Liverpool's status as a port city has contributed to its diverse population, which, historically, were drawn from a wide range of peoples, cultures, and religions, particularly those from Ireland. The city is also home to the oldest Black African community in the country and the oldest Chinese community in Europe.

Labelled the World Capital City of Pop by Guinness World Records, artists of Liverpool origin have produced more number one singles than any other. The popularity of The Beatles, Billy Fury, Gerry and the Pacemakers, and the other groups from the Merseybeat era, and later bands such as Echo & the Bunnymen and Frankie Goes to Hollywood, contributes to Liverpool's status as a tourist destination; tourism forms a significant part of the city's modern economy. The city celebrated its 800th anniversary in 2007, and it held the European Capital of Culture title together with Stavanger, Norway, in 2008. 

Liverpool is noted for its rich architectural heritage and is home to many buildings regarded as amongst the greatest examples of their respective styles in the world. Several areas of the city centre were granted World Heritage Site status by UNESCO in 2004. Referred to as the Liverpool Maritime Mercantile City, the site comprises six separate locations in the city including the Pier Head, Albert Dock and William Brown Street and includes many of the city's most famous landmarks. 

Liverpool is also well known for its strong sporting identity. The city is home of two Premier League football clubs, Liverpool F.C. and Everton F.C. Matches between the two clubs are known as the Merseyside derby. The world-famous Grand National also takes places annually at Aintree Racecourse on the outskirts of the city.

==History==
 
A map of Liverpool from 1947
A map of Liverpool's original seven streets (north to the left)

===Early history===
King John's letters patent of 1207 announced the foundation of the borough of Liverpool, but by the middle of the 16th century the population was still only around 500. The original street plan of Liverpool is said to have been designed by King John near the same time it was granted a royal charter, making it a borough. The original seven streets were laid out in a H shape: Bank Street (now Water Street), Castle Street, Chapel Street, Dale Street, Juggler Street (now High Street), Moor Street (now Tithebarn Street) and Whiteacre Street (now Old Hall Street).

In the 17th century there was slow progress in trade and population growth. Battles for the town were waged during the English Civil War, including an eighteen-day siege in 1644. In 1699 Liverpool was made a parish by Act of Parliament, that same year its first slave ship, Liverpool Merchant, set sail for Africa. As trade from the West Indies surpassed that of Ireland and Europe, and as the River Dee silted up, Liverpool began to grow. The first commercial wet dock was built in Liverpool in 1715. Note: "pdf" reader needed to see full article Substantial profits from the slave trade helped the town to prosper and rapidly grow, although several prominent local men, including William Rathbone, William Roscoe and Edward Rushton, were at the forefront of the abolitionist movement.

In the early 19th century Liverpool played a major role in the Antarctic sealing industry, in recognition of which Liverpool Beach in the South Shetland Islands is named after the city. Liverpool Beach. SCAR Composite Gazetteer of Antarctica. 

By the start of the 19th century, a large volume of trade was passing through Liverpool, and the construction of major buildings reflected this wealth. In 1830, Liverpool and Manchester became the first cities to have an intercity rail link, through the Liverpool and Manchester Railway. The population continued to rise rapidly, especially during the 1840s when Irish migrants began arriving by the hundreds of thousands as a result of the Great Famine. By 1851, approximately 25% of the city's population was Irish-born. During the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Liverpool was drawing immigrants from across Europe. This is evident from the diverse array of religious buildings located across the city, many of which are still in use today. The Deutsche Kirche Liverpool, Greek Orthodox Church of St Nicholas, Gustav Adolfus Kyrka and Princes Road Synagogue were all established in the 1800s to serve Liverpool's growing German, Greek, Nordic and Jewish communities respectively. One of Liverpool's oldest surviving churches, St. Peter's Roman Catholic Church, served the Polish community in its final years as a place of worship.
Inaugural journey of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway in 1830, the first ever commercial railway line.

===20th century===
The Housing Act 1919 resulted in mass council housing building across Liverpool during the 1920s and 1930s. Thousands of families were rehoused from the inner-city to new suburban housing estates, based on the pretext that this would improve their standard of living, though this is largely subjective. A large number of private homes were also built during this era. The process continued after the Second World War, with many more new housing estates being built in suburban areas, while some of the older inner city areas were also redeveloped for new homes. The Great Depression of the early 1930s saw unemployment in the city peak at around 30%.

During the Second World War there were 80 air-raids on Merseyside, killing 2,500 people and causing damage to almost half the homes in the metropolitan area. Significant rebuilding followed the war, including massive housing estates and the Seaforth Dock, the largest dock project in Britain. Much of the immediate reconstruction of the city centre has been deeply unpopular, and was as flawed as much town planning renewal in the 1950s and 1960s  the portions of the city's heritage that survived German bombing could not withstand the efforts of urban renewal. Since 1952 Liverpool has been twinned with Cologne, Germany, a city which also experienced severe aerial bombing during the war.
Liverpool was the port of registry of the ill fated ocean liner, the RMS Titanic. The words Titanic, Liverpool could be seen on the stern of the ship that sank in April 1912 with the loss of 1,517 lives (including numerous Liverpudlians). A Memorial to the Engine Room Heroes of the Titanic is located on the city's waterfront.

Like most British cities and industrialised towns, Liverpool became home to a significant number of Commonwealth immigrants after World War II, mostly settling in older inner city areas such as Toxteth. However, a significant West Indian black community had existed in the city as long ago as the first two decades of the 20th century.

In the 1960s Liverpool was the centre of the "Merseybeat" sound which became synonymous with The Beatles and fellow Liverpudlian rock bands.

From the mid-1970s onwards Liverpool's docks and traditional manufacturing industries went into sharp decline. The advent of containerisation meant that the city's docks became largely obsolete. By the early 1980s unemployment rates in Liverpool were once again among the highest in the UK, standing at 17% by January 1982  although this was just over half of the level of unemployment that was affecting the city in an economic downturn 50 years previously. http://news.google.com/newspapers?id=gJJVAAAAIBAJ&sjid=-z8NAAAAIBAJ&pg=1176,3408501&dq=liverpool+million+unemployment&hl=en 

In recent years, Liverpool's economy has recovered and has experienced growth rates higher than the national average since the mid-nineties.
Mathew Street is one of many tourist attractions related to The Beatles, and the location of Europe's largest annual free music festival. At the end of the 20th century Liverpool was concentrating on regeneration, a process which still continues today.

Previously part of Lancashire, and a county borough from 1889, Liverpool became in 1974 a metropolitan borough within the newly created metropolitan county of Merseyside.

===21st century===
To celebrate the Golden Jubilee of Elizabeth II in 2002, the conservation charity Plantlife organised a competition to choose county flowers; the sea-holly was Liverpool's final choice.

Capitalising on the popularity of 1960s rock groups, such as The Beatles, as well as the city's world-class art galleries, museums and landmarks, tourism has also become a significant factor in Liverpool's economy.

In 2004, property developer Grosvenor started the Paradise Project, a 920 m development centred on Paradise Street, which involved the most significant changes to Liverpool's city centre since the post-war reconstruction. Renamed 'Liverpool ONE', the centre opened in May 2008.

In 2007, the city celebrated the 800th anniversary of the foundation of the borough of Liverpool, for which a number of events were planned. Liverpool is a joint European Capital of Culture for 2008. The main celebrations, in September 2008, included La Princesse, a large mechanical spider which is 20 metres high and weighs 37 tonnes, and represents the "eight legs" of Liverpool: honour, history, music, the Mersey, the ports, governance, sunshine and culture. La Princesse roamed the streets of the city during the festivities, and concluded by entering the Queensway Tunnel.

Spearheaded by the multi-billion Liverpool ONE development, regeneration has continued on an unprecedented scale through to the start of the early 2010s in Liverpool. Some of the most significant regeneration projects to have taken place in the city include the new Commercial District, King's Dock, Mann Island, the Lime Street Gateway, the Baltic Triangle, RopeWalks and the Edge Lane Gateway. All projects could however soon be eclipsed by the Liverpool Waters scheme which if built will cost in the region of 5.5billion and be one of the largest megaprojects in the UK's history. Liverpool Waters is a mixed use development which will contain one of Europe's largest skyscraper clusters. The project received outline planning permission in 2012, despite fierce opposition from the likes of UNESCO who claim it will have a damaging effect on Liverpool's World Heritage status.

On 9 June 2014, Prime Minister David Cameron launched the International Festival for Business in Liverpool, the world's largest business event in 2014, IFB website and the largest in the UK since the Festival of Britain in 1951. Liverpool Echo David Cameron's speech 

===Second city of Empire===
Lime Street, Liverpool, in the 1890s, St.George's Hall to the left, Great North Western Hotel to the right, Walker Art Gallery and Sessions House in the background. Statues of Prince Albert, Disraeli, Queen Victoria and Wellington's Column in the middle ground.
For periods during the 19th century the wealth of Liverpool exceeded that of London itself, Ten facts about Liverpool Telegraph, 4 June 2003 and Liverpool's Custom House was the single largest contributor to the British Exchequer. Liverpool's status can be judged from the fact that it was the only British city ever to have its own Whitehall office. 

The first United States consul anywhere in the world, James Maury, was appointed to Liverpool in 1790, and remained in office for 39 years.

As early as 1851 the city was described as "the New York of Europe" and its buildings, constructed on a heroic, even megalomaniacal scale stand witness to the supreme confidence and ambition of the city at the turn of the 20th century.

Liverpool was also the site of the UK's first provincial airport, operating from 1930, and was the first UK airport to be renamed after an individual  John Lennon.

Elgar's Pomp and Circumstance March No.1, often seen as Britain's Imperial anthem, was dedicated by the composer to the Liverpool Orchestral Society and had its premiere in the city in October 1901.

During the Second World War, the critical strategic importance of Liverpool was recognised by both Hitler and Churchill, with the city suffering a blitz second only to London's, and the pivotal Battle of the Atlantic being planned, fought and won from Liverpool. 

===Inventions and innovations===
The Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine and its modern extension. The first such school in the world
Railways, transatlantic steamships, municipal trams, electric trains were all pioneered in Liverpool as modes of mass transit. In 1829 and 1836 the first railway tunnels in the world were constructed under Liverpool. From 195051, the world's first scheduled passenger helicopter service ran between Liverpool and Cardiff. 

The first School for the Blind, Mechanics' Institute, Speeches of Henry, Lord Brougham Vol. II, 1841, Lea and Blanchard, Philadelphia High School for Girls, council house and Juvenile Court were all founded in Liverpool. The RSPCA, NSPCC, Age Concern, Relate, Citizen's Advice Bureau and Legal Aid all evolved from work in the city.

In the field of public health, the first lifeboat station, public baths and wash-houses, sanitary act, The first M.O.H. (review by C. Fraser Brockington) British Medical Journal 14 February 1948 medical officer for health, district nurse, slum clearance, purpose-built ambulance, X-ray medical diagnosis, school of tropical medicine, motorised municipal fire-engine, 
free school milk and school meals, cancer research centre, BBC News 12 May 1998 and zoonosis research centre Liverpool University press release, 22 February 2006 all originated in Liverpool. The first British Nobel Prize was awarded in 1902 to Ronald Ross, professor at the School of Tropical Medicine, the first school of its kind in the world. Orthopaedic surgery was pioneered in Liverpool by Hugh Owen Thomas, Liverpool's Contributions to Medicine
Lord Cohen of Birkenhead BMJ 1965 April 10; 1(5440): 945948 and modern medical anaesthetics by Thomas Cecil Gray.

The world's first integrated sewer system was constructed in Liverpool by James Newlands, appointed the UK's first borough engineer in 1847. 

In finance, Liverpool founded the UK's first Underwriters' Association and the first Institute of Accountants. The Western world's first financial derivatives (cotton futures) were traded on the Liverpool Cotton Exchange in the late 1700s. 

In the arts, Liverpool was home to the first lending library, athenaeum society, arts centre and public art conservation centre. Liverpool is also home to the UK's oldest surviving classical orchestra, the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra, as well as the oldest surviving repertory theatre, the Liverpool Playhouse. 

Oriel Chambers, the first 'modern' building in the world
In 1864, Peter Ellis built the world's first iron-framed, curtain-walled office building, Oriel Chambers, the prototype of the skyscraper. The UK's first purpose-built department store was Compton House, completed in 1867 for the retailer J.R. Jeffrey; Pevsner Architectural Guides: Liverpool, Joseph Sharples, 2004, Yale University Press it was the largest store in the world at the time. Black's Guide to Liverpool and Birkenhead, 1871, Adam and Charles Black, Edinburgh 

Between 1862 and 1867, Liverpool held an annual Grand Olympic Festival. Devised by John Hulley and Charles Melly, these games were the first to be wholly amateur in nature and international in outlook. George R. Matthews (2005). America's first Olympics: the St. Louis games of 1904 University of Missouri Press ISBN 978-0-8262-1588-8 Ingomar Weiler (2004). The predecessors of the Olympic movement, and Pierre de Coubertin European Review, Vol. 12, No. 3, Cambridge University Press The programme of the first modern Olympiad in Athens in 1896 was almost identical to that of the Liverpool Olympics. Craig Reedie, Jim Parry, Vassil Girginov (2005). The Olympic Games Explained: A Student Guide to the Evolution of the Modern Olympic Games Routledge ISBN 978-0-415-34604-7 In 1865 Hulley co-founded the National Olympian Association in Liverpool, a forerunner of the British Olympic Association. Its articles of foundation provided the framework for the International Olympic Charter.

Shipowner Sir Alfred Lewis Jones introduced the banana to Great Britain in 1884. (requires login or UK library card) 

In 1889, borough engineer John Alexander Brodie invented the football goal-net, and was a pioneer in the use of pre-fabricated housing. He was also vice-president of the Liverpool Self-Propelled Traffic Association which was a precursor, and later a constituent member, of the Royal Automobile Club. Brodie oversaw the construction of the UK's first ring road, the UK's first intercity highway as well as the Queensway Tunnel, linking Liverpool and Birkenhead. Described as "the eighth wonder of the world", at the time of its construction it was the longest underwater tunnel in the world, a title it held for 24 years.

In 1897, the Lumire brothers filmed Liverpool, Liverpool Scenes 1896/1897 YouTube including what is believed to be the world's first tracking shot, Liverpool City Council News, 14 October 2008 taken from the Liverpool Overhead Railway  the world's first elevated electrified railway.

Liverpool inventor Frank Hornby was a visionary in toy development and manufacture and produced three of the most popular lines of toys in the 20th century: Meccano, Hornby Model Railways and Dinky Toys.

The British Interplanetary Society, founded in Liverpool in 1933 by Phillip Ellaby Cleator, is the world's oldest existing organisation devoted to the promotion of spaceflight, and its journal the longest running astronautical publication in the world. Reaching for the Stars History Today, Volume: 63 Issue: 1 2013 

In 1999, Liverpool was the first city outside the capital to be awarded blue plaques by English Heritage in recognition of the "significant contribution made by its sons and daughters in all walks of life." BBC News 26 May 1999 

==Government==
Liverpool has three tiers of government; the Mayor and Local Council, the National Government and the European Parliament. Liverpool is officially governed by a Unitary Authority, as when Merseyside County Council was disbanded civic functions were returned to a district borough level. However several services such as the Police and Fire and Rescue Service, continue to be run at a county-wide level.

===Mayor and local council===

The late Georgian Liverpool Town Hall
A number of Liverpool City Council services are based in the Municipal Buildings
The City of Liverpool is governed by the Directly elected mayor of Liverpool and Liverpool City Council, and is one of five metropolitan boroughs that combine to make up the metropolitan county of Merseyside. The Mayor is elected by the citizens of Liverpool every four years and is responsible for the day-to-day running of the council. The council's 90 elected councillors who represent local communities throughout the city, are responsible for scrutininsing the Mayor's decisions, setting the Budget, and policy framework of the city. The Mayor's responsibility is to be a powerful voice for the city both nationally and internationally, to lead, build investor confidence, and to direct resources to economic priorities. The Mayor also exchanges direct dialogue with government ministers and the Prime minister through his seat at the 'Cabinet of Mayors'. Discussions include pressing decision makers in the government on local issues as well as building relationships with the other Directly elected mayors in England and Wales. The mayor is Joe Anderson.

The city of Liverpool effectively has two Mayors. As well as the directly elected Mayor, there is the ceremonial 'Lord Mayor' (or civic Mayor) who is elected by the full city council at its annual general meeting in May, and stands for one year in office. The Lord Mayor acts as the 'first citizen' of Liverpool and is responsible for promoting the city, supporting local charities and community groups as well as representing the city at civic events. The Lord Mayor is Councillor Frank Prendergast. 

For local elections the city is split into 30 local council wards, which in alphabetical order are:

 Allerton and Hunts Cross Anfield Belle Vale Central Childwall Church Clubmoor County Greenbank Croxteth Everton Fazakerley Greenbank Kensington and Fairfield Kirkdale Knotty Ash Mossley Hill Norris Green Old Swan Picton Princes Park Riverside Speke-Garston St Michaels Tuebrook and Stoneycroft Warbreck Wavertree West Derby Woolton Yew Tree 

During the most recent local elections, held in May 2011, the Labour Party consolidated its control of Liverpool City Council, following on from regaining power for the first time in 12 years, during the previous elections in May 2010. The Labour Party gained 11 seats during the election, taking their total to 62 seats, compared with the 22 held by the Liberal Democrats. Of the remaining seats the Liberal Party won three and the Green Party claimed two. The Conservative Party, one of the three major political parties in the UK had no representation on Liverpool City Council. 

In February 2008, Liverpool City Council was revealed to be the worst-performing council in the country, receiving just a one star rating (classified as inadequate). The main cause of the poor rating was attributed to the council's poor handling of tax-payer money, including the accumulation of a 20m shortfall on Capital of Culture funding. 

While Liverpool through most of the 19th and early 20th Century was a municipal stronghold of Toryism, support for the Conservative Party recently has been among the lowest in any part of Britain, particularly since the monetarist economic policies of prime minister Margaret Thatcher after her 1979 general election victory contributed to high unemployment in the city which did not begin to fall for many years. Liverpool is one of the Labour Party's key strongholds; however the city has seen hard times under Labour governments as well, particularly in the Winter of Discontent (late 1978 and early 1979) when Liverpool suffered public sector strikes along with the rest of the United Kingdom but also suffered the particularly humiliating misfortune of having grave-diggers going on strike, leaving the dead unburied. 

===Parliamentary constituencies and MPs===

Liverpool has four parliamentary constituencies entirely within the city, through which members of parliament (MPs) are elected to represent the city in Westminster: Liverpool Riverside, Liverpool Walton, Liverpool Wavertree and Liverpool West Derby. At the last general election, all were won by Labour with representation being from Louise Ellman, Steve Rotheram, Luciana Berger and Stephen Twigg respectively. Due to boundary changes prior to the 2010 election, the Liverpool Garston constituency was merged with most of Knowsley South to form the Garston and Halewood cross-boundary seat. At the most recent election this seat was won by Maria Eagle of the Labour Party. 

==Geography==
Satellite imagery showing Liverpool Bay, Liverpool and the wider Merseyside area
Liverpool has been described as having "the most splendid setting of any English city." The Buildings of England  Lancashire: Liverpool and the Southwest By Richard Pollard, Nikolaus Pevsner, Yale University Press, 2006, p243 At (53.4, 2.98), 176 mi northwest of London, located on the Liverpool Bay of the Irish Sea the city of Liverpool is built across a ridge of sandstone hills rising up to a height of around 230 feet (70 m) above sea-level at Everton Hill, which represents the southern boundary of the West Lancashire Coastal Plain.

The Mersey Estuary separates Liverpool from the Wirral Peninsula. The boundaries of Liverpool are adjacent to Bootle, Crosby and Maghull in south Sefton to the north, and Kirkby, Huyton, Prescot and Halewood in Knowsley to the east.

===Climate===
Liverpool experiences a temperate maritime climate, like much of the British Isles, with relatively cool summers and mild winters. Historically, Bidston Observatory (actually located on the Wirral Peninsula) has provided the longest and most unbroken weather data for the Merseyside area. More recently, the Met Office has operated a weather station at Crosby.

The absolute minimum temperature recorded at Bidston was -12.8 C during January 1881, typically the coldest night of the year should fall to -4.0 C (19712000 average) However, the variability of the local climate was exposed as the weather station at Crosby fell to -17.6 C during December 2010.

The absolute maximum temperature recorded at Bidston was 34.5 C in August 1990  typically the warmest day of the year should reach 27.5 C (19712000 average). The absolute maximum at Crosby is 33.5 C, recorded in July 2006. 

===Green Liverpool===
In 2010 Liverpool City Council and the Primary Care Trust Commissioned The Mersey Forest to complete A Green Infrastructure Strategy for the City. Liverpool Green Infrastructure Strategy  www.ginw.co.uk/liverpool 

==Demography==

Population of Liverpool, 18012001

===Population===
At the 2011 UK Census the recorded population of Liverpool was 466,400. Liverpool's population peaked in the 1930s with 846,101 recorded in the 1931 census. Since then the city has experienced negative population growth every decade, with at its peak over 100,000 people leaving the city between 1971 and 1981. Between 2001 and 2006 it experienced the ninth largest percentage population loss of any UK unitary authority. The "Liverpool city region", as defined by the Mersey Partnership, includes Wirral, Warrington, Flintshire, Chester and other areas, and has a population of around 2 million. The European Spatial Planning Observation Network defines a Liverpool metropolitan area consisting of the Merseyside metropolitan county, the borough of Halton, Wigan in Greater Manchester, the city of Chester as well as number of towns in Lancashire and Cheshire including Ormskirk and Warrington. Liverpool and Manchester are sometimes considered as one large polynuclear metropolitan area, http://archive.is/20130105182544/http://www.world-gazetteer.com/wg.php?x=1122670315&men=gcis&lng=en&des=wg&geo=-81&srt=pnan&col=adhoq&msz=1500&va=&pt=a or megalopolis. [http://www2.mssociety.org.uk/download/Achieving_equality_in_Service_Provision_across_the_Northwest_by_David_Stockdale.a9e2968a.pdf#page=2 ] 

In common with many cities, Liverpool's population is younger than that of England as a whole, with 42.3 per cent of its population under the age of 30, compared to an English average of 37.4 per cent. 65.1 per cent of the population is of working age. 

===Ethnicity===
The ornamental gate to Chinatown, Liverpool
As of June 2009, an estimated 91.0 per cent of Liverpool's population was White British, 3.0 per cent Asian or Asian British, 1.9 per cent Black or Black British, 2.0 per cent mixed-race and 2.1 per cent Chinese and other. 

Liverpool is home to Britain's oldest Black community, dating to at least the 1730s, and some Black Liverpudlians are able to trace their ancestors in the city back ten generations. Early Black settlers in the city included seamen, the children of traders sent to be educated, and freed slaves, since slaves entering the country after 1722 were deemed free men. 

The city is also home to the oldest Chinese community in Europe; the first residents of the city's Chinatown arrived as seamen in the 19th century. The gateway in Liverpool's Chinatown is also the largest gateway outside of China. The city is also known for its large Irish population and its historical Welsh population. In 1813, 10 per cent of Liverpool's population was Welsh, leading to the city becoming known as "the capital of North Wales". Following the start of the Great Irish Famine, two million Irish people migrated to Liverpool in the space of one decade, many of them subsequently departing for the United States. By 1851, more than 20 per cent of the population of Liverpool was Irish. At the 2001 Census, 1.17 per cent of the population were Welsh-born and 0.75 per cent were born in the Republic of Ireland, while 0.54 per cent were born in Northern Ireland, but many more Liverpudlians are of Welsh or Irish ancestry. Liverpool is also noted for its large African-Caribbean, Ghanaian, Indian, Latin American, Malaysian, Somali [http://www.liverpoolpct.nhs.uk/Library/Impact/IA0073.doc ] and Yemeni. communities which number several thousand each.

===Religion===
Liverpool Metropolitan Cathedral of Christ the King
The thousands of migrants and sailors passing through Liverpool resulted in a religious diversity that is still apparent today. This is reflected in the equally diverse collection of religious buildings, and two Christian cathedrals.

Christ Church, in Buckingham Road, Tuebrook, is a conservative evangelical congregation and is affiliated with the Evangelical Connexion. They worship using the 1785 Prayer Book, and regard the Bible as the sole rule of faith and practice.

The parish church of Liverpool is the Anglican Our Lady and St Nicholas, colloquially known as "the sailors church", which has existed near the waterfront since 1257. It regularly plays host to Catholic masses. Other notable churches include the Greek Orthodox Church of St Nicholas (built in the Neo-Byzantine architecture style), and the Gustav Adolfus Kyrka (the Swedish Seamen's Church, reminiscent of Nordic styles).

Liverpool's wealth as a port city enabled the construction of two enormous cathedrals, both dating from the 20th century. The Anglican Cathedral, which was designed by Sir Giles Gilbert Scott and plays host to the annual Liverpool Shakespeare Festival, has one of the longest naves, largest organs and heaviest and highest peals of bells in the world. The Roman Catholic Metropolitan Cathedral, on Mount Pleasant next to Liverpool Science Park was initially planned to be even larger. Of Sir Edwin Lutyens' original design, only the crypt was completed. The cathedral was eventually built to a simpler design by Sir Frederick Gibberd; while this is on a smaller scale than Lutyens' original design, it still manages to incorporate the largest panel of stained glass in the world. The road running between the two cathedrals is called Hope Street, a coincidence which pleases believers. The cathedral is colloquially referred to as "Paddy's Wigwam" due to its shape. The term may have its origins in religious and racial sectarianism, which, while now largely disappeared, was once notoriously virulent in Liverpool. 

The Al-Rahma Mosque in the Toxteth area of Liverpool
Liverpool contains several synagogues, of which the Grade I listed Moorish Revival Princes Road Synagogue is architecturally the most notable. Princes Road is widely considered to be the most magnificent of Britain's Moorish Revival synagogues and one of the finest buildings in Liverpool. Sharples, Joseph, Pevsner Architectural guide to Liverpool, Yale University Press, 2004, p249 Liverpool has a thriving Jewish community with a further two orthodox Synagogues, one in the Allerton district of the city and a second in the Childwall district of the city where a significant Jewish community reside. A third orthodox Synagogue in the Greenbank Park area of L17 has recently closed, and is a listed 1930s structure. There is also a Lubavitch Chabad House and a reform Synagogue. Liverpool has had a Jewish community since the mid-18th century. The Jewish population of Liverpool is around 5,000. The Liverpool Talmudical College existed from 1914 until 1990, when its classes moved to the Childwall Synagogue.

Liverpool also has a Hindu community, with a Mandir on Edge Lane, Edge Hill. The Shri Radha Krishna Temple from the Hindu Cultural Organisation in Liverpool is based there. Liverpool also has the Guru Nanak Sikh Gurdwara in Wavertree and a Bah' Centre in the same area. 

The city had the earliest mosque in England, and possibly the UK, founded in 1887 by William Abdullah Quilliam, a lawyer who had converted to Islam, and set up the Liverpool Muslim Institute in a terraced house on West Derby Road. Islam In British Stone website The building was used as a house of worship until 1908, when it was sold to the City Council and converted into offices. Plans have been accepted to re-convert the building where the mosque once stood into a museum. There are three mosques in Liverpool: the largest and main one, Al-Rahma mosque, in the Toxteth area of the city and a mosque recently opened in the Mossley Hill district of the city. The third mosque was also recently opened in Toxteth and is on Granby Street.

===LGBT community===

Liverpool has a large lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender/transsexual population, as well as the UK's only official 'gay quarter'. Despite cities such as Manchester and Brighton being historically more noted for their LGBT communities, Liverpool now has an LGBT comparable per capita to that of San Francisco.

==Economy==

Apartment buildings within Liverpool's new commercial district
The Economy of Liverpool is one of the largest within the United Kingdom, sitting at the centre of one of the two core economies within the North West of England. In 2006, the city's GVA was 7,626 million, providing a per capita figure of 17,489, which was above the North West average. After several decades of decline, Liverpool's economy has seen somewhat of a revival since the mid-1990s, with its GVA increasing 71.8% between 1995 and 2006 and employment increasing 12% between 1998 and 2006. 

In common with much of the rest of the UK today, Liverpool's economy is dominated by service sector industries, both public and private. In 2007, over 60% of all employment in the city was in the public administration, education, health, banking, finance and insurance sectors. Over recent years there has also been significant growth in the knowledge economy of Liverpool with the establishment of the Liverpool Knowledge Quarter in sectors such as media and life sciences. Liverpool's rich architectural base has also helped the city become the second most filmed city in the UK outside of London, including doubling for Chicago, London, Moscow, New York, Paris and Rome. 

Liverpool One has helped move the city into the top five retail destinations in the UK
Another important component of Liverpool's economy are the tourism and leisure sectors. Liverpool is the 6th most visited city in the United Kingdom and one of the 100 most visited cities in the world by international tourists. In 2008, during the city's European Capital of Culture celebrations, overnight visitors brought 188m into the local economy, while tourism as a whole is worth approximately 1.3bn a year to Liverpool. The city's new cruise liner terminal, which is situated close to the Pier Head, also makes Liverpool one of the few places in the world where cruise ships are able to berth right in the centre of the city. Other recent developments in Liverpool such as the Echo Arena and Liverpool One have made Liverpool an important leisure centre with the latter helping to lift Liverpool into the top five retail destinations in the UK. The Range Rover Evoque is manufactured at Jaguar Land Rover's plant at Halewood.

Historically, the economy of Liverpool was centred around the city's port and manufacturing base, although today less than 10% of employment in the city are in these sectors. Nonetheless the city remains one of the most important ports in the United Kingdom, handling over 32.2m tonnes of cargo in 2008. It is also home to the UK headquarters of many shipping lines including Japanese firm NYK and Danish firm Maersk Line. Future plans to redevelop the city's northern dock system, in a project known as Liverpool Waters, could see 5.5bn invested in the city over the next 50 years, creating 17,000 new jobs. 

Car-manufacturing also takes place in the city at the Halewood plant where the Jaguar X-Type and Land Rover Freelander models are assembled.

==Landmarks==

Liverpool's Three Graces, the Royal Liver Building, Cunard Building and Port of Liverpool Building at the Pier Head
Liverpool's history means that there are a considerable variety of architectural styles found within the city, ranging from 16th century Tudor buildings to modern-day contemporary architecture. Hughes (1999), p10 The majority of buildings in the city date from the late-18th century onwards, the period during which the city grew into one of the foremost powers in the British Empire. Hughes (1999), p11 There are over 2,500 listed buildings in Liverpool, of which 27 are Grade I listed and 85 are Grade II* listed. The city also has a greater number of public sculptures than any other location in the United Kingdom aside from Westminster and more Georgian houses than the city of Bath. This richness of architecture has subsequently seen Liverpool described by English Heritage, as England's finest Victorian city. The value of Liverpool's architecture and design was recognised in 2004, when several areas throughout the city were declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Known as the Liverpool Maritime Mercantile City, the sites were added in recognition of the city's role in the development of international trade and docking technology. 

===Waterfront and docks===
The Albert Dock contains the UK's largest collection of Grade I listed buildings as well as being the most visited multi-use attraction outside London
As a major British port, the docks in Liverpool have historically been central to the city's development. Several major docking firsts have occurred in the city including the construction of the world's first enclosed wet dock (the Old Dock) in 1715 and the first ever hydraulic lifting cranes. The best-known dock in Liverpool is the Albert Dock, which was constructed in 1846 and today comprises the largest single collection of Grade I listed buildings anywhere in Britain. Built under the guidance of Jesse Hartley, it was considered to be one of the most advanced docks anywhere in the world upon completion and is often attributed with helping the city to become one of the most important ports in the world. The Albert Dock houses restaurants, bars, shops, two hotels as well as the Merseyside Maritime Museum, International Slavery Museum, Tate Liverpool and The Beatles Story. North of the city centre is Stanley Dock, home to the Stanley Dock Tobacco Warehouse, which was at the time of its construction in 1901, the world's largest building in terms of area Nicholls, p38 and today stands as the world's largest brick-work building. 

One of the most famous locations in Liverpool is the Pier Head, renowned for the trio of buildings  the Royal Liver Building, the Cunard Building and the Port of Liverpool Building  which sit upon it. Collectively referred to as the Three Graces, these buildings stand as a testament to the great wealth in the city during the late 19th and early 20th century. Built in a variety of architectural styles, they are recognised as being the symbol of Maritime Liverpool, and are regarded by many as contributing to one of the most impressive waterfronts in the world. Liverpool City Counci (2005), p49 Moscardini (2008), p10 Nicholls (2005), p11 Pevsner (cited in Sharples, 2004), p67 
Bluecoat Chambers, the oldest building in Liverpool city centre
In recent years, several areas along Liverpool's waterfront have undergone significant redevelopment. Amongst the notable recent developments are the construction of the Echo Arena Liverpool and BT Convention Centre on Kings Dock, Alexandra Tower and 1 Princes Dock on Princes Dock and Liverpool Marina around Coburg and Brunswick Docks.

===Commercial District and Cultural Quarter===
Victoria Street like many streets in the city centre is lined with dozens of listed building
Liverpool's historic position as one of the most important trading ports in the world has meant that over time many grand buildings have been constructed in the city as headquarters for shipping firms, insurance companies, banks and other large firms. The great wealth this brought, then allowed for the development of grand civic buildings, which were designed to allow the local administrators to 'run the city with pride'. 

The neo-classical St George's Hall
The commercial district is centred around the Castle Street, Dale Street and Old Hall Street areas of the city, with many of the area's roads still following their medieval layout. Having developed over a period of three centuries the area is regarded as one of the most important architectural locations in the city, as recognised by its inclusion in Liverpool's World Heritage site. Liverpool City Council (2005), p73 The oldest building in the area is the Grade I listed Liverpool Town Hall, which is located at the top of Castle Street and dates from 1754. Often regarded as the city's finest piece of Georgian architecture, the building is noted as one of the most extravagantly decorated civic buildings anywhere in Britain. Liverpool City Council (2005), p74 Sharples, p48 Also on Castle Street is the Grade I listed Bank of England Building, constructed between 1845 and 1848, as one of only three provincial branches of the national bank. Amongst the other noted buildings in the area are the Tower Buildings, Albion House (the former White Star Line headquarters), the Municipal Buildings and Oriel Chambers, Manchester School of Architecture video YouTube which is considered to be one of the earliest Modernist style buildings ever built. 

The area around William Brown Street is referred to as the city's 'Cultural Quarter', owing to the presence of numerous civic buildings, including the William Brown Library, Walker Art Gallery, Picton Reading Rooms and World Museum Liverpool. The area is dominated by neo-classical architecture, of which the most prominent, St George's Hall, Manchester School of Architecture video YouTube is widely regarded as the best example of a neo-classical building anywhere in Europe. Liverpool City Council (2005), p87 A Grade I listed building, it was constructed between 1840 and 1855 to serve a variety of civic functions in the city and its doors are inscribed with "S.P.Q.L." (Latin senatus populusque Liverpudliensis), meaning "the senate and people of Liverpool". William Brown Street is also home to numerous public monuments and sculptures, including Wellington's Column and the Steble Fountain. Many others are located around the area, particularly in St John's Gardens, which was specifically developed for this purpose. Liverpool City Council (2005), p93 The William Brown Street area has been likened to a modern recreation of the Roman Forum. People's Palaces: The Golden Age of Civic Architecture BBC Four, Sep 2010, presenter Dr. Jonathan Foyle 

===Other notable landmarks===
Speke Hall Tudor manor house is one of Liverpool's oldest buildings
West Tower has been the city's tallest building since completion in 2008
While the majority of Liverpool's architecture dates from the mid-18th century onwards, there are several buildings that pre-date this time. One of the oldest surviving buildings is Speke Hall, a Tudor manor house located in the south of the city, which was completed in 1598. Hughes (1999), p20 The building is one of the few remaining timber framed Tudor houses left in the north of England and is particularly noted for its Victorian interior, which was added in the mid-19th century. In addition to Speke Hall, many of the city's other oldest surviving buildings are also former manor houses including Croxteth Hall and Woolton Hall, which were completed in 1702 and 1704 respectively. Hughes (1999), p22 
The oldest building within the city centre is the Grade I listed Bluecoat Chambers, Manchester School of Architecture video YouTube which was built between 1717 and 1718. Constructed in British Queen Anne style, Liverpool City Council (2005), p97 Hughes (1999), p23 the building was influenced in part by the work of Christopher Wren Sharples (2004), p7 and was originally the home of the Bluecoat School (who later moved to larger site in the south of the city). Since 1908 it has acted as a centre for arts in Liverpool. 

Liverpool Cathedral is regarded as one of the greatest buildings of the twentieth century and is one of the largest church buildings in the world
Liverpool is noted for having two Cathedrals, each of which imposes over the landscape around it. The Anglican Cathedral, which was constructed between 1904 and 1978, is the largest Cathedral in Britain and the fifth largest in the world. Designed and built in Gothic style, it is regarded as one of the greatest buildings to have been constructed during the 20th century Sharples (2004), p83 and was described by former British Poet Laureate, John Betjeman, as 'one of the great buildings of the world. The Roman Catholic Metropolitan Cathedral was constructed between 1962 and 1967 and is noted as one of the first Cathedrals to break the traditional longitudinal design. Sharples (2004), p73 

In recent years, many parts of Liverpool's city centre have undergone significant redevelopment and regeneration after years of decline. The largest of these developments has been Liverpool One, which has seen almost 1 billion invested in the redevelopment of 42 acre of land, providing new retail, commercial, residential and leisure space. Around the north of the city centre several new skyscrapers have also been constructed including the RIBA award winning Unity Buildings and West Tower, which at 140m is Liverpool's tallest building. Many future redevelopment schemes are also planned including Central Village (planning permission granted), the Lime Street gateway (work started) and the highly ambitious Liverpool Waters (early planning stage). 

There are many other notable buildings in Liverpool, including the art deco former terminal building of Speke Airport, the University of Liverpool's Victoria Building, (which provided the inspiration for the term Red Brick University), and the Adelphi Hotel, which was in that past considered to be one of the finest hotels anywhere in the world. 

===Parks and gardens===
The English Heritage National Register of Historic Parks describes Merseyside's Victorian Parks as collectively the "most important in the country". The city of Liverpool has ten listed parks and cemeteries, including two Grade I and five Grade II*, more than any other English city apart from London. Liverpool City Council News, 23 February 2009 

==Transport==

The Wallasey entrance to the Kingsway Tunnel. Liverpool's skyline is visible in the background

Transport in Liverpool is primarily centred around the city's road and rail networks, both of which are extensive and provide links across the United Kingdom. Liverpool has an extensive local public transport network, which is managed by the Merseyside Passenger Transport Executive, and includes buses, trains and ferries. Additionally, the city also has an international airport and a major port, both of which provides links to locations outside the country.

===National and international travel===

====Road links====
As a major city, Liverpool has direct road links with many other areas within England. To the east, the M62 motorway connects Liverpool with Hull and along the route provides links to several large cities, including Manchester, Leeds and Bradford. The M62 also provides a connection to both the M6 motorway and M1 Motorway, providing indirect links to more distant areas including Birmingham, Sheffield, Preston, London and Nottingham. To the west of the city, the Kingsway and Queensway Tunnels connect Liverpool with the Wirral Peninsula, providing links to both Birkenhead, and Wallasey. The A41 road, which begins in Birkenhead, also provides links to Cheshire and Shropshire and via the A55 road, North Wales. To the south, Liverpool is connected to Widnes and Warrington via the A562 road and subsequently across the River Mersey to Runcorn, via the Silver Jubilee Bridge. Plans have been developed in recent years to construct a second bridge, known as the Mersey Gateway, across the river to alleviate congestion on the route today.
Liverpool Lime Street Station

====Rail links====
Liverpool is served by two separate rail networks. The local rail network is managed and run by Merseyrail and provides links throughout Merseyside and beyond (see Local Travel below), while the national network, which is managed by Network Rail, provides Liverpool with connections to major towns and cities across the England. The city's primary mainline station is Lime Street station, which acts as a terminus for several lines into the city. Train services from Lime Street provide connections to numerous destinations, including London (in 2 hours 8 minutes with Pendolino trains), Birmingham, Newcastle upon Tyne, Manchester, Preston, Leeds, Scarborough, Sheffield, Nottingham and Norwich. In the south of the city, Liverpool South Parkway provides a connection to the city's airport.

====Port====

The Port of Liverpool is one of Britain's largest ports, providing passenger ferry services across the Irish Sea to Belfast, Dublin and the Isle of Man. Services are provided by several companies, including the Isle of Man Steam Packet Company, P&O Ferries and Stena Line. In 2007, a new cruise terminal was opened in Liverpool, located alongside the Pier Head in the city centre.

====Airport====
Liverpool John Lennon Airport terminal building
Liverpool John Lennon Airport, which is located in the south of the city, provides Liverpool with direct air connections across the United Kingdom and Europe. In 2008, the airport handled over 5.3 million passengers and today offers services to 68 destinations, including Berlin, Rome, Milan, Paris, Barcelona and Zrich. The airport is primarily served by low-cost airlines, notably Ryanair and Easyjet, although it does provide additional charter services in the summer.

===Local travel===
The Merseyrail network has extensive underground sections within the city centre. Liverpool Central is the UK's busiest underground station outside London

====Buses====
Local bus services within and around Liverpool are managed by the Merseyside Passenger Transport Executive (more commonly known as Merseytravel) and are run by several different companies, including Arriva and Stagecoach. The two principal termini for local buses are Queen Square Bus Station (located near Lime Street railway station) for services north and east of the city, and Liverpool One Bus Station formerly known as Paradise Street Bus Interchange (located near the Albert Dock) for services to the south and east. Cross-river services to the Wirral use roadside terminus points in Castle Street and Sir Thomas Street. A night bus service also operates on Saturdays providing services from the city centre across Liverpool and Merseyside. 

MV Royal Iris of the Mersey is one of three ferries that provide cross river services between Liverpool and the Wirral

====Trains====
Liverpool's local rail network is one of the busiest and most extensive in the country. The network consists of three lines: the Northern Line, which runs to Southport, Ormskirk, Kirkby and Hunts Cross; the Wirral Line, which runs through the Mersey Railway Tunnel and has branches to New Brighton, West Kirby, Chester and Ellesmere Port; and the City Line, which begins at Lime Street, providing links to St Helens, Wigan, Preston, Warrington and Manchester.

The network is predominantly electric, with diesel trains running on the City Line. The two lines operated by Merseyrail are the busiest British urban commuter networks outside London,
covering 75 mi of track, with an average of 100,000 passenger journeys per weekday. Services are operated by the Merseyrail franchise and managed by the Merseyside Passenger Transport Executive. It should be noted that local services on the City Line are operated by Northern Rail rather than Merseyrail, although the line itself remains part of the Merseyrail network. Within the city centre the majority of the network is underground, with five city centre stations and over 6.5 mi of tunnels. 

====Mersey Ferry====
The cross river ferry service in Liverpool, known as the Mersey Ferry, is managed and operated by Merseytravel, with services operating between the Pier Head in Liverpool and both Woodside in Birkenhead and Seacombe in Wallasey. Services operate at intervals ranging from 20 minutes at peak times, to every hour during the middle of the day and during weekends. Despite remaining an important transport link between the city and the Wirral Peninsula, the Mersey Ferry has become an increasingly popular tourist attraction within the city, with daytime River Explorer Cruises providing passengers with an historical overview of the River Mersey and surrounding areas. 

==Culture==
As with other large cities, Liverpool is an important cultural centre within the United Kingdom, incorporating music, performing arts, museums and art galleries, literature and nightlife amongst others. In 2008, the cultural heritage of the city was celebrated with the city holding the title of European Capital of Culture, during which time a wide range of cultural celebrations took place in the city, including Go Superlambananas! and La Princesse.

===Music===

Liverpool was the birthplace of The Beatles

Liverpool is internationally known for music and is recognised by Guinness World Records as the World Capital City of Pop. Musicians from the city have produced 56 number one singles, more than any other city in the world. Both the most successful male band and girl group in global music history have contained Liverpudlian members. Liverpool is most famous as the birthplace of The Beatles and during the 1960s was at the forefront of the Beat Music movement, which would eventually lead to the British Invasion. Many notable musicians of the time originated in the city including Billy J Kramer, Cilla Black, Gerry and the Pacemakers and The Searchers. The influence of musicians from Liverpool, coupled with other cultural exploits of the time, such as the Liverpool poets, prompted American poet Allen Ginsberg to proclaim that the city was "the centre of consciousness of the human universe". Other musicians from Liverpool include Billy Fury, A Flock of Seagulls, Echo and the Bunnymen, Frankie Goes to Hollywood, Frankie Vaughan and more recently Ladytron, The Zutons, Atomic Kitten, Heidi Range and Rebecca Ferguson. Elvis Costello, whose mother is from Liverpool, moved to Birkenhead aged 17 and formed his first band.

Philharmonic Hall, home of the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic

The city is also home to the oldest surviving professional symphony orchestra in the UK, the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra, which is based in the Philharmonic Hall. The chief conductor of the orchestra is Vasily Petrenko. Sir Edward Elgar dedicated his famous Pomp and Circumstance March No. 1 to the Liverpool Orchestral Society, and the piece had its first performance in the city in 1901. The Elgar Society Among Liverpool's curiosities, the Austrian migr Fritz Spiegl is notable. He not only became a world expert on the etymology of Scouse, but composed the music to Z-cars and the Radio 4 UK Theme.

The Mathew Street Festival is an annual street festival that is one of the most important musical events in Liverpool's calendar. It is Europe's largest free music event and takes place every August. Other well established festivals in the city include Africa Oy and Brazilica which are the UK's largest free African and Brazilian music festivals respectively. The dance music festival Creamfields was established by the famous Liverpool-based Cream clubbing brand which started life as a weekly event at Nation nightclub. There are numerous music venues located across the city, however the Echo Arena is by far the largest. Opened in 2008 the 11,000-seat arena hosted the MTV Europe Music Awards the same year and since then has held host to world renowned acts such as Andrea Bocelli, Beyonc, Elton John, Kanye West, Kasabian, The Killers, Lady Gaga, Oasis, Pink, Rihanna, UB40.

===Visual arts===
William Brown Street, also known as the Cultural Quarter is a World Heritage Site consisting of the World Museum, Central Library, Picton Reading Room and Walker Art Gallery
Liverpool has more galleries and national museums than any other city in the United Kingdom apart from London. National Museums Liverpool is the only English national collection based wholly outside London. DCMS sponsored museums and galleries The Tate Liverpool gallery houses the modern art collection of the Tate in the North of England and was, until the opening of Tate Modern, the largest exhibition space dedicated to modern art in the United Kingdom. The FACT centre hosts touring multimedia exhibitions, while the Walker Art Gallery houses one of the most impressive permanent collections of Pre-Raphaelite art in the world. The Pre-Raphaelite Collections Culture24 website Sudley House contains another major collection of pre-20th-century art. Liverpool University's Victoria Building was re-opened as a public art gallery and museum to display the University's artwork and historical collections which include the largest display of art by Audubon outside the US. A number of artists have also come from the city, including painter George Stubbs who was born in Liverpool in 1724.

The Liverpool Biennial festival of arts runs from mid-September to late November and comprises three main sections; the International, The Independents and New Contemporaries although fringe events are timed to coincide. It was during the 2004 festival that Yoko Ono's work "My mother is beautiful" caused widespread public protest when photographs of a naked woman's pubic area were exhibited on the main shopping street. 
Nelson Monument at Exchange Flags. The other British hero of the Napoleonic Wars is commemorated in Wellington's Column

===Literature===
Felicia Hemans (ne Browne) was born in Dale Street, Liverpool, in 1793, although she later moved to Flintshire, in Wales. Her first collection of poetry was published in Liverpool when she was only 14 years old, catching the attention of no less a figure than Percy Bysshe Shelley. Felicia was born in Liverpool, a granddaughter of the Venetian consul in that city. Her father's business soon brought the family to Denbighshire in North Wales, where she spent her youth. They made their home near Abergele and St. Asaph (Flintshire), and it is clear that she came to regard herself as Welsh by adoption, later referring to Wales as "Land of my childhood, my home and my dead". Her first poems, dedicated to the Prince of Wales, were published in Liverpool in 1808, when she was only fourteen, arousing the interest of no less a person than Percy Bysshe Shelley, who briefly corresponded with her.

A number of notable authors have visited Liverpool, including Daniel Defoe, Washington Irving, Thomas De Quincey, Herman Melville, Nathaniel Hawthorne, Charles Dickens, Gerard Manley Hopkins and Hugh Walpole. Daniel Defoe, after visiting the city, described it, as "one of the wonders of Britain in his "'Tour through England and Wales. 
Herman Melvilles novel Redburn deals with the first seagoing voyage of 19 years old Wellingborough Redburn between New York and Liverpool in 1839. Largely autobiographical, the middle sections of the book are set in Liverpool and describe the young merchantman's wanderings, and his reflections. Hawthorne was stationed in Liverpool as United States consul between 1853 and 1856. Philip James McFarland, Hawthorne in Concord. (New York, NY : Grove Press, 2004), p.186 Charles Dickens visited the city on numerous occasions to give public readings. Hopkins served as priest at St Francis Xavier Church, Langdale St., Liverpool, between 1879 and 81. Although he is not known to have ever visited Liverpool, Jung famously had a vivid dream of the city which he analysed in one of his works. 

Of all the poets who are connected with Liverpool, perhaps the greatest is Constantine P. Cavafy, a twentieth-century Greek cultural icon, although he was born in Alexandria. From a wealthy family, his father had business interests in Egypt, London and Liverpool. After his father's death, Cavafy's mother brought him in 1872 at the age of nine to Liverpool where he spent part of his childhood being educated. He lived first in Balmoral Road, then when the family firm crashed, he lived in poorer circumstances in Huskisson Street. After his father died in 1870, Cavafy and his family settled for a while in Liverpool. In 1876, his family faced financial problems due to the Long Depression of 1873, so, by 1877, they had to move back to Alexandria. 

Her Benny, a novel telling the tragic story of Liverpool street urchins in the 1870s, written by Methodist preacher Silas K. Hocking, was a best-seller and the first book to sell a million copies in the author's lifetime. Her Benny Bluecoat Press The prolific writer of adventure novels, Harold Edward Bindloss (18661945), was born in Liverpool.

The writer, docker and political activist George Garrett was born in Secombe, on the Wirral Peninsula in 1896 and was brought up in Liverpool's South end, around Park Road, the son of a fierce LiverpoolIrish Catholic mother and a staunch 'Orange' stevedore father. In the 1920s and 1930s his organisation within the Seamen's Vigilance Committees, unemployed demonstrations, and hunger marches from Liverpool became part of a wider cultural force. He spoke at reconciliation meetings in sectarian Liverpool, and helped found the Unity Theatre in the 1930s as part of the Popular Front against the rise of fascism, particularly its echoes in the Spanish Civil War. Garrett died in 1966. Michael Murphy, "Introduction" to The Collected George Garrett. (Nottingham: Trent Editions, 1999). 

The novelist and playwright James Hanley (18971985) was born in Kirkdale, Liverpool, in 1897 (not Dublin, nor 1901 as he generally implied) to a working-class family. An important biographical source is Chris Gostick's "Extra Material on James Hanley's Boy", in the OneWorld Classics edition of Boy (2007), pp. 1814. Hanley grew up close to the docks and much of his early writing is about seamen. The Furys (1935) is first in a sequence of five loosely autobiographical novels about working-class life in Liverpool. James Hanley's brother, novelist Gerald Hanley (191692) was also born in Liverpool (not County Cork, Republic of Ireland, as he claimed). Chris Gostick, "Extra Material on James Hanley's Boy" from the OneWorld Classics edition of Boy (2007). While he published a number of novels he also wrote radio plays for the BBC as well as some film scripts, most notably The Blue Max (1966). Irishwriters online. He was also one of several script writers for a life of Gandhi (1964). The Times, 29 November 1982; pg. 11; see also "Gandhi's Life As A Film", The Times 16 Dec 1964; pg. 7. Novelist Beryl Bainbridge (19322010) was born in Liverpool and raised in nearby Formby. She was primarily known for her works of psychological fiction, often set among the English working classes. Bainbridge won the Whitbread Awards prize for best novel in 1977 and 1996 and was nominated five times for the Booker Prize. The Times newspaper named Bainbridge among their list of "The 50 greatest British writers since 1945". 

J. G. Farrell was born in Liverpool in 1935 but left at the outbreak of war in 1939. Ralph Crane, "A Man from Elsewhere: The Liminal Presence of Liverpool in the Fiction of J. G. Farrell". Writing Liverpool:Essays and Interviews. (Liverpool: University of Liverpool Press, 2007), pp.889. A novelist of Irish descent, Farrell gained prominence for his historical fiction, most notably his Empire Trilogy (Troubles, The Siege of Krishnapur and The Singapore Grip), dealing with the political and human consequences of British colonial rule. However, his career ended when he drowned in Ireland in 1979 at the age of 44.

Helen Forrester was the pen name of June Bhatia (ne Huband) (19192011), who was known for her books about her early childhood in Liverpool during the Great Depression, including Twopence to Cross the Mersey (1974), as well as several works of fiction. During the late 1960s the city became well known for the Liverpool poets, who include Roger McGough and the late Adrian Henri. An anthology of poems, The Mersey Sound, written by Henri, McGough and Brian Patten, has sold well since it was first being published in 1967.

Liverpool has produced several noted writers of horror fiction, often set on Merseyside  Ramsey Campbell, Clive Barker and Peter Atkins among them. A collection of Liverpudlian horror fiction, Spook City was edited by a Liverpool expatriate, Angus Mackenzie, and introduced by Doug Bradley, also from Liverpool. Bradley is famed for portraying Barker's creation Pinhead in the Hellraiser series of films.

===Performing arts===
The Empire Theatre has the largest two tier auditorium in the UK
Liverpool also has a history of performing arts, reflected in several annual theatre festivals such as the Liverpool Shakespeare Festival which takes place inside Liverpool Cathedral and in the adjacent historic St James' Gardens every summer, The Everyword Festival of new theatre writing, the only one of its kind in the country, Physical Fest, an international festival of physical theatre, organised by Tmesis, the annual festivals run by John Moores University Drama department and LIPA, and by the number of theatres in the city. These include the Empire, Everyman, Liverpool Playhouse, Neptune, Royal Court and Unity theatres. The Everyman and Playhouse are now both part of one company, and both houses produce their own work as well as receiving touring productions. 
The Everyman was rebuilt between 2011 and 2014, with the previous building being demolished and a new venue constructed on the same site. Some notable actors from Liverpool include; Rex Harrison (Henry Higgins in My Fair Lady), Malcolm McDowell (Alex DeLarge in A Clockwork Orange), Tom Baker (fourth incarnation of the Doctor in Doctor Who) and Jason Isaacs (Lucius Malfoy in the Harry Potter films).

===Nightlife===
Liverpool has a thriving and varied nightlife, with the majority of the city's late night bars, pubs, nightclubs, live music venues and comedy clubs being located in a number of distinct districts. A 2011 TripAdvisor poll voted Liverpool as having the best nightlife of any UK city, ahead of Manchester, Leeds and even London. Concert Square, St. Peter's Square and the adjoining Seel, Duke and Hardman Streets are home to some of Liverpool's largest and most famed nightclubs including Alma de Cuba, Blue Angel, Bumper, Chibuku, Heebie Jeebies, Korova, The Krazyhouse, The Magnet, Nation (home of the Cream brand, and Medication, the UK's largest and longest running weekly student event), Popworld as well as countless other smaller establishments and chain bars. Another popular nightlife destination in the city centre is Mathew Street and the Gay Quarter, located close to the city's commercial district, this are is famed for The Cavern Club alongside numerous gay bars including Garlands and G-Bar. The Albert Dock and Lark Lane in Aigburth also contain an abundance of bars and late night venues.

==Education==
University of Liverpool's Victoria Building
In Liverpool primary and secondary education is available in various forms supported by the state including secular, Church of England, Jewish, and Roman Catholic. Islamic education is available at primary level, but there is no secondary provision.
One of Liverpool's important early schools was The Liverpool Blue Coat School; founded in 1708 as a charitable school.

The Liverpool Blue Coat School is the top-performing school in the city with 100% 5 or more A*-C grades at GCSE resulting in the 30th best GCSE results in the country and an average point score per student of 1087.4 in A/AS levels. Other notable schools include Liverpool College founded in 1840 Merchant Taylors' School founded in 1620. Another of Liverpool's notable senior schools is St. Edward's College situated in the West Derby area of the city. Historic grammar schools, such as the Liverpool Institute High School and Liverpool Collegiate School, closed in the 1980s are still remembered as centres of academic excellence. Bellerive Catholic College is the city's top performing non-selective school, based upon GCSE results in 2007.
Liverpool John Moores University's James Parsons Building

Liverpool has three universities: the University of Liverpool, Liverpool John Moores University and Liverpool Hope University. Edge Hill University, originally founded as a teacher-training college in the Edge Hill district of Liverpool, is now located in Ormskirk in South-West Lancashire. Liverpool is also home to the Liverpool Institute for Performing Arts (LIPA).

The University of Liverpool, was established in 1881 as University College Liverpool. In 1884, became part of the federal Victoria University. Following a Royal Charter and Act of Parliament in 1903, it became an independent university, the University of Liverpool, with the right to confer its own degrees. It was the first university to offer degrees in biochemistry, architecture, civic design, veterinary science, oceanography and social science.

Liverpool Community College's Arts Centre
Liverpool Hope University, which was formed through the merger of three colleges, the earliest of which was founded in 1844, gained university status in 2005. It is the only ecumenical university in Europe. It is situated on both sides of Taggart Avenue in Childwall and has a second campus in the city centre (the Cornerstone).

The Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, founded to address some of the problems created by trade, continues today as a post-graduate school affiliated with the University of Liverpool and hothaw an anti-venom repository.

Liverpool John Moores University was previously a polytechnic, and gained status in 1992. It is named in honour of Sir John Moores, one of the founders of the Littlewoods football pools and retail group, who was a major benefactor. The institution was previously owned and run by Liverpool City Council. It traces it lineage to the Liverpool Mechanics Institute, opened in 1823, making it by this measure England's third-oldest university.

The city has one further education colleges, Liverpool Community College in the city centre. Liverpool City Council operates Burton Manor, a residential adult education college in nearby Burton, on the Wirral Peninsula.

There are two Jewish schools in Liverpool, both belonging to the King David Foundation. King David School, Liverpool is the High School and the King David Primary School. There is also a King David Kindergarten, featured in the community centre of Harold House. These schools are all run by the King David Foundation based in Harold House in Childwall; conveniently next door to the Childwall Synagogue.

==Sport==

=== Football ===
The Merseyside Derby is the football match between the two biggest clubs in the city, Liverpool and Everton.
The City of Liverpool is the most successful footballing city in England. Football is the most popular sport in the city, home to Everton F.C. and Liverpool F.C.. Between them, the clubs have won 27 English First Division titles, 12 FA Cup titles, 10 League Cup titles, 5 European Cup titles, 1 European Cup Winners' Cup title, 3 UEFA Cup titles, and 24 FA Charity Shields. The clubs both compete in the Premier League, of which they are founding members, and contest the Merseyside Derby, dubbed the 'friendly derby' despite there having been more sending-offs in this fixture than any other. However, unlike many other derbies, it is not rare for families in the city to contain supporters of both clubs. 

Everton F.C. were founded in 1878 and play at Goodison Park and Liverpool F.C. were founded in 1892 and play at Anfield. Many high-profile players have played for the clubs, including Dixie Dean, Alan Ball, Gary Lineker, Neville Southall and Wayne Rooney for Everton F.C. and Kenny Dalglish, Alan Hansen, Kevin Keegan, Ian Rush and Steven Gerrard for Liverpool F.C.. Notable managers of the clubs include Harry Catterick and Howard Kendall of Everton, and Bill Shankly and Bob Paisley of Liverpool. Famous professional footballers from Liverpool include Peter Reid, Gary Ablett, Wayne Rooney, Steven Gerrard, Jamie Carragher and Tony Hibbert. The City of Liverpool is the only one in England to have staged top division football every single season since the formation of the Football League in 1888, and both of the city's clubs play in high-capacity stadiums.

=== Boxing ===
Boxing is massively popular in Liverpool. The city has a proud heritage and history in the sport and is home to around 22 amateur boxing clubs, which are responsible for producing many successful boxers, such as Ike Bradley, Alan Rudkin, John Conteh, Andy Holligan, Paul Smith, Shea Neary, Tony Bellew and David Price. The city also boasts a consistently strong amateur contingent which is highlighted by Liverpool being the most represented city on the GB Boxing team, as well as at the 2012 London Olympics, the most notable Liverpool amateur fighters include; George Turpin, Tony Willis, Robin Reid and David Price who have all medalled at the Olympic Games. Boxing events are usually hosted at the Echo Arena and Liverpool Olympia within the city, although the former home of Liverpool boxing was the renowned Liverpool Stadium.

=== Horse-Racing ===
The Earl of Derby Stand at Aintree Racecourse; home of the Grand National Aintree is home to the world's most famous steeple-chase, the John Smith's Grand National which takes place annually in early April. The race meeting attracts horse owners/ jockeys from around the world to compete in the demanding 4 mi and 30 fence course. There have been many memorable moments of the Grand National, for instance the 100/1 outsider Foinavon in 1967, the dominant Red Rum and Ginger McCain of the 1970s and Mon Mome (100/1) who won the 2009 meeting. In 2010, the National became the first horse race to be televised in high-definition in the UK.

=== Golf ===
The Royal Liverpool Golf Club, situated in the nearby town of Hoylake on the Wirral Peninsula, has hosted The Open Championship on a number of occasions, most recently in 2006. It also hosted the Walker Cup in 1983. The Royal Liverpool Golf Club, Hoylake

=== Other sports===
Wavertree Sports Park is home to the Liverpool Harriers athletics club which, over the years has produced such athletes as; JT Rimmer, Allyn Condon  the only British athlete to compete at both the Summer & Winter Olympics, Curtis Robb and Katrina Johnson-Thompson  who represented GB at the 2012 London Olympics in the women's heptathlon. In August 2012, Liverpool-based gymnast, Beth Tweddle won an Olympic bronze medal in London 2012 in the uneven bars at her third Olympic Games, thus becoming the most decorated British gymnast in history. Park Road Gymnastics Centre provides training to a high level. Liverpool has produced several famous swimmers who have gone on to represent their nation at major championships such as the Olympic Games. The most notable of which is Steve Parry who claimed a bronze medal at the 2004 Athens Olympics in the 200m butterfly. Others include Herbert Nickel Haresnape, Margaret Kelly, Shellagh Ratcliffe and Austin Rawlinson. There is a purpose-built aquatics centre at Wavertree Sports Park, which opened in 2008. The City of Liverpool Swimming Club has been National Speedo League Champions 8 out of the last 11 years.

Calderstones Park, situated in Allerton in the south of the city, plays host to the annual Tradition-ICAP Liverpool International tennis tournament, which has saw tennis stars such as Novak Djokovic, David Ferrer, Mardy Fish, Laura Robson and Caroline Wozniacki. Liverpool Tennis Development Programme based at Wavertree Tennis Centre is one of the largest in the UK.

The Echo Arena hosts numerous sporting events and was formerly the home of British Basketball League team, the Mersey Tigers
Professional basketball came to the city in 2007 with the entry of Everton Tigers, now known as Mersey Tigers, into the elite British Basketball League. The club was originally associated with Everton F.C., and was part of the Toxteth Tigers youth development programme, which reached over 1,500 young people every year. The Tigers began play in Britain's top league for the 200708 season, playing at the Greenbank Sports Academy before moving into the newly completed Echo Arena during that season. After the 200910 season, Everton F.C. withdrew funding from the Tigers, who then changed their name to Mersey Tigers. Their closest professional rivals are the Cheshire Jets, based 18 mi away in Chester. Liverpool is one of three cities which still host the traditional sport of British baseball and it hosts the annual England-Wales international match every two years, alternating with Cardiff and Newport. Liverpool Trojans are the oldest existing baseball club in the UK.

===Sports stadiums===
Anfield, home of Liverpool F.C.
Liverpool is home to the Premier League football clubs Everton and Liverpool F.C.
Liverpool have played at Anfield since 1892, when the club was formed to occupy the stadium following Everton's departure due to a dispute with their landlord. Liverpool are still playing there 116 years later, although the ground has been completely rebuilt since the 1970s and only the Main Stand survives from before 1992. The Spion Kop (rebuilt as an all-seater stand in 1994/1995) was the most famous part of the ground, gaining cult status across the world due to the songs and celebrations of the many fans who packed onto its terraces. Anfield is classified as a 4 Star UEFA Elite Stadium with capacity for 45,000 spectators in comfort, and is a distinctive landmark in an area filled with smaller and older buildings. Liverpool club also has a multi-million-pound youth training facility called The Academy.

After leaving Anfield in 1892, Everton moved to Goodison Park on the opposite side of Stanley Park. Goodison Park was the first major football stadium built in England. Molineux (Wolves' ground) had been opened three years earlier but was still relatively undeveloped. St. James's Park, Newcastle, opened in 1892, was little more than a field. Only Scotland had more advanced grounds. Rangers opened Ibrox in 1887, while Celtic Park was officially inaugurated at the same time as Goodison Park. Everton performed a miraculous transformation at Mere Green, spending up to 3000 on laying out the ground and erecting stands on three sides. For 552 Mr. Barton prepared the land at 4d a square yard. Kelly Brothers of Walton built two uncovered stands each for 4,000 people, and a covered stand seating 3,000, at a total cost of 1,460. Outside, hoardings cost a further 150, gates and sheds cost 132 10s and 12 turnstiles added another 7 15s to the bill.Goodison Park, home of Everton F.C

The ground was immediately renamed Goodison Park and proudly opened on 24 August 1892, by Lord Kinnaird and Frederick Wall of the FA. But instead of a match the 12,000 crowd saw a short athletics meeting followed by a selection of music and a fireworks display. Everton's first game there was on 2 September 1892 when they beat Bolton 42. It now has the capacity for more than 40,000 spectators all-seated, but the last expansion took place in 1994 when a new goal-end stand gave the stadium an all-seater capacity. The Main Stand dates back to the 1970s, while the other two stands are refurbished pre-Second World War structures.

Everton have been considering relocation since 1996, and in 2003 were forced to scrap plans for a 55,000-seat stadium at King's Dock due to financial reasons. The latest plan has been to move beyond Liverpool's council boundary to Kirkby, but this has proved controversial with some fans, as well as members of the local community. At one point there was much talk for Everton to ground-share with Liverpool, at the proposed new Stanley Park Stadium, but this was not progressed by either club.

==Media==
Radio City Tower, home to Radio City 96.7 and a number of subsidiary stations
The ITV region which covers Liverpool is ITV Granada. In 2006, the Television company opened a new newsroom in the Royal Liver Building. Granada's regional news broadcasts were produced at the Albert Dock News Centre during the 1980s and 1990s. The BBC also opened a new newsroom on Hanover Street in 2006.

ITV's daily magazine programme This Morning was famously broadcast from studios at Albert Dock until 1996, when production was moved to London. Granada's short-lived shopping channel "Shop!" was also produced in Liverpool until it was axed in 2002.

Liverpool is the home of the TV production company Lime Pictures, formerly Mersey Television, which produced the now-defunct soap operas Brookside and Grange Hill. It also produces the soap opera Hollyoaks, which was formerly filmed in Chester and began on Channel 4 in 1995. All three series were/are largely filmed in the Childwall area of Liverpool.

The city has two daily newspapers: the morning Daily Post and the evening Echo, both published by the same company, the Trinity Mirror group. The Daily Post, especially, serves a wider area, including north Wales. The UK's first online only weekly newspaper called Southport Reporter (Southport and Mersey Reporter), is also one of the many other news outlets that covers the city.
Radio stations include BBC Radio Merseyside, Juice FM, and Radio City 96.7, City Talk 105.9, as well as Magic 1548. The last three are based in Radio City Tower which, along with the two cathedrals, dominates the city's skyline. The independent media organisation Indymedia also covers Liverpool, while 'Nerve' magazine publishes articles and reviews of cultural events.

Liverpool has also featured in films; Movie City: Liverpool Film in Focus, 10 November 2009 see List of films set in Liverpool for some of them. In films the city has "doubled" for London, Paris, New York, Chicago, Location filming for Al's Lads Youtube Moscow, Dublin, Venice and Berlin. City fights to preserve star quality Guardian, 8 November 1999 

==Notable people==

==Quotes about Liverpool==
*"Lyrpole, alias Lyverpoole, a pavid towne, hath but a chapel... The king hath a castelet there, and the Earl of Darbe hath a stone howse there. Irisch merchants cum much thither, as to a good haven... At Lyrpole is smaul custom payed, that causith marchantes to resorte thither. Good marchandis at Lyrpole, and much Irish yarrn that Manchester men do buy there..."  John Leland (antiquary), Itinery, c. 153639
*"Liverpoole is one of the wonders of Britain... In a word, there is no town in England, London excepted, that can equal for the fineness of the streets, and the beauty of the buildings." Daniel Defoe  A tour thro' the Whole Island of Great Britain, 172126
*"ne of the neatest, best towns I have seen in England."  John Wesley. Journal, 1755
*"I have not come here to be insulted by a set of wretches, every brick in whose infernal town is cemented with an African's blood." Actor George Frederick Cooke (17561812) responding to being hissed when he came on stage drunk during a visit to Liverpool. 
*"That immense City which stands like another Venice upon the water...where there are riches overflowing and every thing which can delight a man who wishes to see the prosperity of a great community and a great empire... This quondam village, now fit to be the proud capital of any empire in the world, has started up like an enchanted palace even in the memory of living men." Thomas Erskine, 1st Baron Erskine, 1791
*"I have heard of the greatness of Liverpool but the reality far surpasses my expectation"  Prince Albert, speech, 1846
*"Liverpoolhas become a wonder of the world. It is the New York of Europe, a world city rather than merely British provincial."  Illustrated London News, 15 May 1886
*"Liverpool is the 'pool of life' "  C.G. Jung, Memories, Dreams, Reflections, 1928
*"The centre is imposing, dignified and darkish, like a city in a rather gloomy Victorian novel...We had now arrived in the heart of the big city, and as usual it was almost a heart of darkness. But it looked like a big city, there was no denying that. Here, emphatically, was the English seaport second only to London. The very weight of stone emphasised that fact. And even if the sun never seems to properly rise over it, I like a big city to proclaim itself a big city at once..."  J.B. Priestley, English Journey, 1934
*"...if Liverpool can get into top gear again there is no limit to the city's potential. The scale and resilience of the buildings and people is amazing  it is a world city, far more so than London and Manchester. It doesn't feel like anywhere else in Lancashire: comparisons always end up overseas  Dublin, or Boston, or Hamburg. The city is tremendous, and so, right up to the First World War, were the abilities of the architects who built over it The centre is humane and convenient to walk around in, but never loses its scale. And, in spite of the bombings and the carelessness, it is still full of superb buildings. Fifty years ago it must have outdone anything in England."  Ian Nairn, Britain's Changing Towns, 1967

==International links==

===Twin cities===
Liverpool is twinned with: 

* Cologne, Germany (1952)
* Dublin, Ireland (1997)
* Shanghai, China (1999)
* Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (2003)
* Medan, Indonesia
* Penang, Malaysia

===Friendship links===
Liverpool has friendship links (without formal constitution) with the following cities:

* Givenchy-ls-la-Basse, France
* Halifax, Canada
* Havana, Cuba
* La Plata, Argentina
* Memphis, US
* Minamitane, Japan
* Naples, Italy
* New Orleans, US
* Odessa, Ukraine
* Ponsacco, Italy
* Rmnicu Vlcea, Romania
* Valparaso, Chile

===Consulates===
The first overseas consulate of the United States was opened in Liverpool in 1790, and it remained operational for almost two centuries. The consulates in Liverpool serve the following countries:

* Hungary
* Italy
* Netherlands
* Norway
* Sweden
* Thailand

==See also==

* 1911 Liverpool general transport strike
* 2008 European Amateur Boxing Championships
* Liverpool Stadium
* La Princesse, the giant mechanical spider roaming the streets in September 2008
* Big Dig (Liverpool)
* Culture in Liverpool
* List of films and television shows set in Liverpool
* List of hotels in Liverpool
* International Garden Festival
* Port of Liverpool
* Williamson Tunnels
* Liverpool Football Club
* Everton Football Club
* Magistrates Courts, Liverpool

==References==

===Notes===

*http://www.liverpoolcitystrategyces.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2009/08/LCR-MAA-FINAL-Story-of-Place-Jan-09.pdf

===Bibliography===
*
*
*
*
*

==Further reading==
*Liverpool, Dixon Scott, 1907
*A History of Liverpool, Ramsay Muir, 1907
*Bygone Liverpool, Ramsay Muir, 1913
*Bygone Liverpool, David Clensy, 2008. ISBN 978-1-4357-0897-6
*Liverpool 800, John Belchem, 2006. ISBN 978-1-84631-035-5
*Beatle Pete, Time Traveller, Mallory Curley, 2005.
*Chinese Liverpudlians, Maria Lin Wong, 1989. ISBN 978-1-871201-03-1
*Writing Liverpool: Essays and Interviews, edited by Michael Murphy and Rees Jones, 2007. ISBN 978-1-84631-073-7

==External links==

*A Summary of the Liverpool City Region
*Liverpool Pictorial
*Liverpool City Council
*Official Liverpool European Capital of Culture website
*Official Liverpool Tourism Site
*Origins of the name Liverpool

 



[[Long jump]]

The long jump (historically called the broad jump) is a track and field event in which athletes combine speed, strength, and agility in an attempt to leap as far as possible from a take off point. This event has a history in the Ancient Olympic Games and has been a modern Olympic event for men since the first Olympics in 1896 and for women since 1948.

==Rules==
An indicator of wind direction and a device for measuring wind speed (here +2.6 m/s) along a run-up track.
At the elite level, competitors run down a runway (usually coated with the same rubberized surface as running tracks, crumb rubber also vulcanized rubberknown generally as an all-weather track) and jump as far as they can from a wooden board 20 cm or 8 inches wide that is built flush with the runway into a pit filled with finely ground gravel or sand. If the competitor starts the leap with any part of the foot past the foul line, the jump is declared a foul and no distance is recorded. A layer of plasticine is placed immediately after the board to detect this occurrence. An official (similar to a referee) will also watch the jump and make the determination. The competitor can initiate the jump from any point behind the foul line; however, the distance measured will always be perpendicular to the foul line to the nearest break in the sand caused by any part of the body or uniform. Therefore, it is in the best interest of the competitor to get as close to the foul line as possible. Competitors are allowed to place two marks along the side of the runway in order to assist them to jump accurately. At a lesser meet and facilities, the plasticine will likely not exist, the runway might be a different surface or jumpers may initiate their jump from a painted or taped mark on the runway. At a smaller meet, the number of attempts might also be limited to four or three.

Each competitor has a set number of attempts. That would normally be three trials, with three additional jumps being awarded to the best 8 or 9 (depending on the number of lanes on the track at that facility, so the event is equatable to track events) competitors. All legal marks will be recorded but only the longest legal jump counts towards the results. The competitor with the longest legal jump (from either the trial or final rounds) at the end of competition is declared the winner. In the event of an exact tie, then comparing the next best jumps of the tied competitors will be used to determine place. In a large, multi-day elite competition (like the Olympics or World Championships), a set number of competitors will advance to the final round, determined in advance by the meet management. A set of 3 trial round jumps will be held in order to select those finalists. It is standard practice to allow at a minimum, one more competitor than the number of scoring positions to return to the final round, though 12 plus ties and automatic qualifying distances are also potential factors. (For specific rules and regulations in United States Track & Field see Rule 185). 
:*See Rule 185 in Article III 

For record purposes, the maximum accepted wind assistance is two metres per second (m/s) (4.5 mph).

==History==
Halteres used in athletic games in ancient Greece.
Standing long jump, detail of a page from the Luzerner Chronik of 1513.
The long jump is the only known jumping event of Ancient Greece's original Olympics' pentathlon events. All events that occurred at the Olympic Games were initially supposed to act as a form of training for warfare. The long jump emerged probably because it mirrored the crossing of obstacles such as streams and ravines. After investigating the surviving depictions of the ancient event it is believed that unlike the modern day event, athletes were only allowed a short running start. The athletes carried a weight in each hand, which were called halteres (between 1 and 4.5 kg). These weights were swung forward as the athlete jumped in order to increase momentum. It is commonly believed that the jumper would throw the weights behind him in mid-air to increase his forward momentum; however, halteres were held throughout the duration of the jump. Swinging them down and back at the end of the jump would change the athlete's center of gravity and allow the athlete to stretch his legs outward, increasing his distance. The jump itself was made from the bater ("that which is trod upon"). It was most likely a simple board placed on the stadium track which was removed after the event. Stephen G. Miller, Ancient Greek Athletics. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2004, p.66 The jumpers would land in what was called a skamma ("dug-up" area). The idea that this was a pit full of sand is wrong. Sand in the jumping pit is a modern invention Stephen G. Miller, Ancient Greek Athletics. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2004 p.66 The skamma was simply a temporary area dug up for that occasion and not something that remained over time. The long jump was considered one of the most difficult of the events held at the Games since a great deal of skill was required. Music was often played during the jump and Philostratus says that pipes at times would accompany the jump so as to provide a rhythm for the complex movements of the halteres by the athlete. Philostratos is quoted as saying, "The rules regard jumping as the most difficult of the competitions, and they allow the jumper to be given advantages in rhythm by the use of the flute, and in weight by the use of the halter.". Stephen G. Miller, Ancient Greek Athletics. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2004, p.67 Most notable in the ancient sport was a man called Chionis, who in the 656BC Olympics staged a jump of 7.05 metres (23 feet and 1.7 inches). 

There has been some argument by modern scholars over the long jump. Some have attempted to recreate it as a triple jump. The images provide the only evidence for the action so it is more well received that it was much like today's long jump. The main reason some want to call it a triple jump is the presence of a source that claims there once was a fifty five ancient foot jump done by a man named Phayllos. Stephen G. Miller, Ancient Greek Athletics. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2004, p.68 

The long jump has been part of modern Olympic competition since the inception of the Games in 1896. In 1914, Dr. Harry Eaton Stewart recommended the "running broad jump" as a standardized track and field event for women. However, it was not until 1948 that the women's long jump was added to the Olympic athletics programme.

==Technique==

Emmanuelle Chazal competes in the women's heptathlon long jump final during the French Athletics Championships 2013 at Stade Charlty in Paris, 13 July 2013.
There are five main components of the long jump: the approach run, the last two strides, takeoff, action in the air, and landing. Speed in the run-up, or approach, and a high leap off the board are the fundamentals of success. Because speed is such an important factor of the approach, it is not surprising that many long jumpers also compete successfully in sprints. A classic example of this long jump / sprint doubling are performances by Carl Lewis.

===The approach===
The objective of the approach is to gradually accelerate to a maximum controlled speed at takeoff. The most important factor for the distance traveled by an object is its velocity at takeoff  both the speed and angle. Elite jumpers usually leave the ground at an angle of twenty degrees or less; therefore, it is more beneficial for a jumper to focus on the speed component of the jump. The greater the speed at takeoff, the longer the trajectory of the center of mass will be. The importance of a takeoff speed is a factor in the success of sprinters in this event.

The length of the approach is usually consistent distance for an athlete. Approaches can vary between 12 and 19 strides on the novice and intermediate levels, while at the elite level they are closer to between 20 and 22 strides. The exact distance and number of strides in an approach depends on the jumper's experience, sprinting technique, and conditioning level. Consistency in the approach is important as it is the competitor's objective to get as close to the front of the takeoff board as possible without crossing the line with any part of the foot.

Inconsistent approaches are a common problem in the event. As a result the approach is usually practiced by athletes about 68 times per jumping session (see Training below).

===The last two strides===
The objective of the last two strides is to prepare the body for takeoff while conserving as much speed as possible.

The penultimate stride is longer than the last stride. The competitor begins to lower his or her center of gravity to prepare the body for the vertical impulse. The final stride is shorter because the body is beginning to raise the center of gravity in preparation for takeoff.

The last two strides are extremely important because they determine the velocity with which the competitor will enter the jump; the greater the velocity, the better the jump.

===Takeoff===
The objective of the takeoff is to create a vertical impulse through the athlete's center of gravity while maintaining balance and control.

This phase is one of the most technical parts of the long jump. Jumpers must be conscious to place the foot flat on the ground, because jumping off either the heels or the toes negatively affects the jump. Taking off from the board heel-first has a braking effect, which decreases velocity and strains the joints. Jumping off the toes decreases stability, putting the leg at risk of buckling or collapsing from underneath the jumper. While concentrating on foot placement, the athlete must also work to maintain proper body position, keeping the torso upright and moving the hips forward and up to achieve the maximum distance from board contact to foot release.

There are four main styles of takeoff: the kick style, double-arm style, sprint takeoff, and the power sprint or bounding takeoff.

====Kick====
The kick style takeoff is a style of takeoff where the athlete actively cycles the leg before a full impulse has been directed into the board then landing into the pit. This requires great strength in the hamstrings. This causes the jumper to jump to large distances.

====Double-arm====
The double-arm style of takeoff works by moving both arms in a vertical direction as the competitor takes off. This produces a high hip height and a large vertical impulse.

====Sprint====
The sprint takeoff is the style most widely instructed by coaching staff. This is a classic single-arm action that resembles a jumper in full stride. It is an efficient takeoff style for maintaining velocity through takeoff.

====Power sprint or bounding====
The power sprint takeoff, or bounding takeoff, is one of the more common elite styles. Very similar to the sprint style, the body resembles a sprinter in full stride. However, there is one major difference. The arm that pushes back on takeoff (the arm on the side of the takeoff leg) fully extends backward, rather than remaining at a bent position. This additional extension increases the impulse at takeoff.

The "correct" style of takeoff will vary from athlete to athlete.
Multi-eventer Jessica Ennis during a long jump, preparing to land

===Action in the air and landing===
There are three major flight techniques for the long jump: the hang, the sail, and the hitch-kick. Each technique is to combat the forward rotation experienced from take-off but is basically down to preference from the athlete. It is important to note that once the body is airborne, there is nothing that the athlete can do to change the direction they are traveling and consequently where they are going to land in the pit. However, it can be argued that certain techniques influence an athlete's landing, which can have an impact on distance measured. For example, if an athlete lands feet first but falls back because they are not correctly balanced, a lower distance will be measured.
In the 1970s some jumpers did a forward somersault, http://si.com/vault/article/magazine/MAG1088829/index.htm that was subsequently made illegal.

==Training==
The long jump generally requires training in a variety of areas. These areas include: speed work, jumping, over distance running, weight training, plyometric training, bounding and flexibility.

===Speed work===
Speed work is essentially short distance speed training where the athlete would be running at top or near top speeds. The distances for this type of work would vary between indoor and outdoor season but are usually around 30-60m for indoors and up to 100m for outdoors.

===Jumping===
Long Jumpers tend to practice jumping 12 times a week. Approaches, or run-throughs, are repeated sometimes up to 68 times per session.
Short approach jumps are common for jumpers to do, as it allows for them to work on specific technical aspects of their jumps in a controlled environment. Using equipment such as low hurdles and other obstacles are common in long jump training, as it helps the jumper maintain and hold phases of their jump. As a common rule, it is important for the jumper to engage in full approach jumps at least once a week, as it will prepare the jumper for competition.

===Over-distance running===
Over-distance running workouts helps the athlete jump a further distance than their set goal. For example, having a 100m runner practice by running 200m repeats on a track. This is specifically concentrated in the season when athletes are working on building endurance. Specific over-distance running workouts are performed 12 times a week. This is great for building sprint endurance, which is required in competitions where the athlete is sprinting down the runway 36 times. Typical workouts would include 5x150m. Preseason workouts may be longer, including workouts like 6x300m

===Weight training===
During pre-season training and early in the competition season weight training tends to play a major role in the sport. It is customary for a long jumper to weight train up to 4 times a week, focusing mainly on quick movements involving the legs and trunk. Some athletes perform Olympic lifts in training. Athletes use low repetition and emphasize speed to maximize the strength increase while minimizing adding additional weight to their frame. Important lifts for a long jumper include the back squat, front squat, power cleans and hang cleans. The emphasis on these lifts should be on speed and explosive as those are crucial in the long jump take off phase.

===Plyometrics===
Plyometrics, including running up and down stairs and hurdle bounding, can be incorporated into workouts, generally twice a week. This allows an athlete to work on agility and explosiveness. Other plyometric workouts that are common for long jumpers are box jumps. Boxes of various heights are set up spaced evenly apart and jumpers can proceed jumping onto them and off moving in a forward direction. They can vary the jumps from both legs to single jumps. Alternatively, they can set up the boxes in front of a high jump mat if allowed, and jump over a high jump bar onto the mat mimicking a landing phase of the jump. These plyometric workouts are typically performed at the end of a workout.

===Bounding===
Bounding is any sort of continuous jumping or leaping. Bounding drills usually require single leg bounding, double-leg bounding, or some variation of the two. The focus of bounding drills is usually to spend as little time on the ground as possible and working on technical accuracy, fluidity, and jumping endurance and strength. Technically, bounding is part of plyometrics, as a form of a running exercise such as high knees and butt kicks.

===Flexibility===
Flexibility is an often forgotten tool for long jumpers. Effective flexibility prevents injury, which can be important for high impact events such as the long jump. It also helps the athlete sprint down the runway.
Hip and groin injuries are common for long jumpers who may neglect proper warm up and stretching. Hurdle mobility drills are a common way that jumpers use to improve flexibility. Common hurdle drills include setting up about 5-7 hurdles are appropriate heights and having athletes walk over them in a continuous fashion. Other variations of hurdle mobility drills are used as well including hurdle skips.
This is a crucial part of a jumper's training since they perform most exercises for a very short period of time and often aren't aware of their form and technique.
A common tool in many long jump workouts is the use of video taping. This enables the athlete to go back and watch their own progress as well as letting the athlete compare their own footage to that of some of the world class jumpers.

Training styles, duration, and intensity varies immensely from athlete to athlete and is based on the experience and strength of the athlete as well as on their coaching style.

== Culture ==
Long Jump commemorative coin

Track and field events have been selected as a main motif in numerous collectors' coins. One of the recent samples is the 10 Greek Long Jump commemorative coin, minted in 2003 to commemorate the 2004 Summer Olympics. The obverse of the coin portrays a modern athlete at the moment he is touching the ground, while the ancient athlete in the background is shown while starting off his jump, as he is seen on a black-figure vase of the 5th century BC.

==Records==
Jesse Owens set a long jump world record that was not broken for 25 years and 2 months, until 1960 by Ralph Boston. At the 1968 Summer Olympics Bob Beamon jumped at an altitude of 7349 ft, a jump not exceeded for 23 years, and which remains the second longest legal jump of all time. On August 30, 1991 Mike Powell of the United States set the current men's world record at the World Championships in Tokyo. It was in a well-known show down against Carl Lewis, who also beat Beamon's record that day but with an aiding wind (thus not legal for record purposes). Powell's record has now stood for over 22 years.

Some jumps over have been officially recorded. was recorded by Mike Powell himself (wind-aided +4.4) set at high altitude in Sestriere, Italy in 1992. A potential world record of was recorded by Ivn Pedroso, 100 Metres  men  senior  outdoor. iaaf.org. Retrieved on 2013-04-20. with a "legal" wind reading also at Sestriere, but the jump was not validated because videotape revealed someone was standing in front of the wind gauge, invalidating the reading (and costing Pedroso a Ferrari valued at $130,000the prize for breaking the record at that meet). Pedroso may lose record. The Victoria Advocate (August 4, 1995). Athlete profile for Ivn Pedroso. Iaaf.org (1972-12-17). Retrieved on 2013-04-20. Lewis himself jumped 8.91m moments before Powell's record-breaking jump with the wind exceeding the maximum allowed. This jump remains the longest ever not to win an Olympic or World Championship gold medal, or any competition in general.

The current world record for women is held by Galina Chistyakova of the former Soviet Union who leapt in Leningrad on June 11, 1988, a mark that has stood for nearly 26 years.

==All-time top ten athletes==

* Long Jump - men - senior - outdoor. IAAF. Retrieved on 2014-01-25. Long Jump - women - senior - outdoor. IAAF. Retrieved on 2014-01-25. 

===Men===

 Rank Mark Wind (m/s) Athlete Venue Date 
 1 0.3 Tokyo August 30, 1991 
 2 2.0 Mexico City October 18, 1968 
 3 0.2 Tokyo August 30, 1991 
 4 1.9 Tsakhkadzor May 22, 1987 
 5= 1.4 Indianapolis July 18, 1988 
 5= 2.0 El Paso April 2, 1994 
 5= 1.2 Eugene June 7, 2009 
 8 1.2 Hengelo May 24, 2008 
 9 1.9 Salamanca July 18, 1995 
 10 1.6 Kalamata June 2, 2007 

===Women===

 Rank Mark Wind (m/s) Athlete Venue Date 
 1 1.4 Leningrad June 11, 1988 
 2 1.3 New York May 22, 1994 
 3 1.2 Neubrandenburg July 9, 1988 
 4 1.4 Bucharest June 4, 1983 
 5 2.0 Annecy June 23, 2002 
 6 0.5 Bryansk July 18, 1987 
 7 N/A Kiev June 13, 1992 
 8 0.4 Tula July 31, 2004 
 9= 1.5 Alma Ata September 12, 1985 
 9= 0.1 Zrich August 12, 1998 

==Olympic medalists==

===Men===

===Women===

==World Championships medalists==

===Men===

 1983 Helsinki 
 1987 Rome 
 1991 Tokyo 
 1993 Stuttgart 
 1995 Gothenburg 
 1997 Athens 
 1999 Seville 
 2001 Edmonton 
 2003 Saint-Denis 
 2005 Helsinki 
 2007 Osaka 
 2009 Berlin 
 2011 Daegu 
 2013 Moscow 

===Women===

 1983 Helsinki 
 1987 Rome 
 1991 Tokyo 
 1993 Stuttgart 
 1995 Gothenburg 
 1997 Athens 
 1999 Seville 
 2001 Edmonton 
 2003 Saint-Denis 
 2005 Helsinki 
 2007 Osaka 
 2009 Berlin 
 2011 Daegu 
 2013 Moscow 

==Season's bests==

===Men's outdoor===

 Year Distance Athlete Location 
 1960 Walnut 
 1961 Moscow 
 1962 Yerevan 
 1963 8.20m (26 ft 11 in) http://onceuponatimeinthevest.blogspot.com/2013/03/june-1963-and-new-440-wr-by-adolph.html Note: This article indicates they were measuring in Imperial at Modesto in 1963 (and probably most other years in this era). Particularly notable is that this measurement under windy conditions is likely the best wind legal, but not even the winning jump of the competition (Phil Shinnick 27'4\") or Boston's best jump that day Modesto 
 1964 Note: Olympic Trials measured metrically. Also did 8.49w that day Los Angeles 
 1965 8.35m (27 ft 5 in) Note: Measured in Imperial Modesto 
 1966 Leselidze 
 1967 Mexico City 
 1968 Mexico City 
 1969 OdessaChorzw 
 1970 Stuttgart 
 1971 El Paso 
 1972 Munich 
 1973 8.35m (27 ft 1/2 in) measured imperial Westwood 
 1974 Modesto 
 1975 Montreal 
 1976 Montreal 
 1977 Nova Gorica 
 1978 Rovereto 
 1979 Montreal 
 1980 Moscow 
 1981 Sacramento 
 1982 Indianapolis 
 1983 Indianapolis 
 1984 Westwood 
 1985 Brussels 
 1986 Moscow 
 1987 Tsakhkadzor 
 1988 Indianapolis 
 1989 Houston 
 1990 Villeneuve d'Ascq 
 1991 Tokyo 
 1992 Barcelona 
 1993 Salamanca 
 1994 El Paso 
 1995 Salamanca 
 1996 Springfield 
 1997 Padua 
 1998 Bad Langensalza 
 1999 Padua 
 2000 Jena 
 2001 Turin 
 2002 Palo Alto 
 2003 Castelln de la Plana 
 2004 Linz 
 2005 Helsinki 
 2006 Rio de Janeiro 
 2007 Kalamta 
 2008 Hengelo 
 2009 Eugene 
 2010 Barcelona 
 2011 Stockholm 
 2012 Chula VistaCheboksary 
 2013 Moscow 

===Women's outdoor===

 Year Distance Athlete Location 
 1960 Erfurt 
 1961 Moscow 
 1962 Brussels 
 1963 Kurayoshi 
 1964 Tokyo 
 1965 Kiev 
 1966 Dnepropetrovsk 
 1967 Kiev 
 1968 Mexico City 
 1969 Leverkusen 
 1970 Turin 
 1971 Leipzig 
 1972 Munich 
 1973 Dresden 
 1974 East Berlin 
 1975 Nice 
 1976 Dresden 
 1977 Krasnodar 
 1978 Prague 
 1979 Potsdam 
 1980 Moscow 
 1981 Colorado Springs 
 1982 Bucharest 
 1983 Bucharest 
 1984 Dresden 
 1985 Berlin 
 1986 Tallinn 
 1987 Indianapolis 
 1988 Leningrad 
 1989 Volgograd 
 1990 Bratislava 
 1991 Sestriere 
 1992 Lausanne 
 1993 Zrich 
 1994 New York City 
 1995 Linz 
 1996 Atlanta 
 1997 Athens 
 1998 Eugene 
 1999 Bogot 
 2000 Rio de Janeiro 
 2001 Turin 
 2002 Annecy 
 2003 Milan 
 2004 Tula 
 2005 Sochi 
 2006 Novosibirsk 
 2007 Sochi 
 2008 Monaco 
 2009 Berlin 
 2010 Sochi 
 2011 Eugene 
 2012 Eugene 
 2013 Doha 

==National records==
* 

===Men===

 Nation Distance Athlete Location Date Ref. 
 Mike Powell Tokyo 1991-08-30 
 / Robert Emmiyan Tsakhkadzor 1987-05-22 
 Irving Saladino Hengelo 2008-05-24 
 Ivn Pedroso Salamanca 1995-07-18 
 Louis Tsatoumas Kalamata 2007-06-02 
 James Beckford Orlando 1997-04-05 
 Yago Lamela Turin 1999-06-24 
 Aleksandr Menkov Moscow 2013-08-16 
 / Lutz Dombrowski Moscow 1980-07-28 
 Mitchell Watt Stockholm 2011-07-29 
 Greg Rutherford Chula Vista 2014-04-24 
 Godfrey Mokoena Madrid 2009-07-04 
 Mohamed Salman Al-Khuwalidi Sotteville-ls-Rouen 2006-07-02 
 Andrew Howe Osaka 2007-08-30 
 Luis Rivera Kazan 2013-07-12 
 Cheikh Tidiane Tour Bad Langensalza 1997-06-15 
 / Nenad Steki Montreal 1975-07-25 
 Ignisious Gaisah Rome 2006-07-14 
 Salim Sdiri Pierre-Bnite 2009-06-12 
 Craig Hepburn Nassau 1993-06-17 
 Ngonidzashe Makusha Des Moines 2011-06-09 
 Douglas de Souza So Paulo 1995-02-15 
 Gregor Cankar Celje 1997-05-18 
 Lao Jianfeng Zhaoqing 1997-05-28 
 Yahya Berrabah Beyrouth 2009-10-02 
 Bogdan Tudor Bad Cannstatt 1995-07-09 
 Carlos Calado Lisbon 1997-06-20 
 Sergey LayevskiyRoman Shchurenko DnepropetrovskKiev 1988-07-162000-07-25 
 Nai Huei-Fang Shanghai 1993-05-14 
 Victor Castillo Cochabamba 2004-05-30 
 Ivaylo Mladenov Seville 1995-06-03 
 Aleksandr Glovatskiy Sestriere 1996-08-07 
 Hassine Hatem Moursal Oslo 1999-06-30 
 Lszl Szalma Budapest 1985-07-07 
 Andreas Steiner Innsbruck 1988-06-04 
 Ignisious Gaisah Moscow 2013-08-16 
 Jonathan Chimier Athens 2004-08-24 
 Grzegorz Marciniszyn Mals 2001-07-14 
 Yussuf Alli Lagos 1989-08-08 
 Gable Garenamotse Rhede 2006-08-20 
 Issam Nima Zaragoza 2007-07-28 
 Milan Mikul Prague 1988-07-16 
 Sergey Podgainiy Chisinau 1990-08-18 
 Masaki Morinaga National Records. JAAF Shizuoka 1992-05-05 
 Erik Nys Hechtel 1996-07-06 
 Morten Jensen Gothenburg 2005-07-03 
 Stephan Louw Germiston 2008-01-12 
 Sinia Ergoti Zagreb 2002-06-05 
 Michel Tornus Kuortane 2012-07-22 
 Tyrone Smith Mayagez 2010-07-26 
 Tommi Evil Gothenburg 2008-06-28 
 Kim Deok Hyeon Belgrade 2009-07-12 
 Edrick Floreal Sherbrooke 1991-07-20 
 Sergey Vasilenko Alma Ata 1988-06-18 
 Abdulrahman Faraj Al-Nubi Manila 2003-09-21 
 Erki Nool Gtzis 1995-05-27 
 Jorge McFarlane Sucre 2009-11-23 
 Aleksandr Pototskiy Bryansk 1992-06-04 
 Kumaravel Premkumar New Delhi 2013-08-05 
 Mesut Yava Istanbul 2000-06-24 
 Bob Thomas Whangarei 1968-01-20 
 Juris Tone Moscow 1983-06-21 
 Supanara Sukhasvasti Banglore 2010-06-05 
 Kristen Flgstad Bislett 1973-08-04 
 Henry Dagmil Eagle Rock 2008-06-07 2008 SCA Jim Bush Championships. Scausatf.org (2008-06-07). Retrieved on 2013-04-20. 
 Yochai Halevi Tel Aviv 2010-05-15 
 Emiliano Lasa Santiago 2014-03-14 
 Nguyen Ngoc Quan Hanoi 1997-05-02 
 Josbert Tinus Bangkok 2007-10-05 
 Agus Reza Irawan Jakarta 1995-09-21 
 Mousbeh Ali Said Latakia 1992-09-06 
 Matthew Goh Yujie Vientiane 2009-12-05 
 Mohamed Imam Bakhash Manama 2003-10-16 
 Marc Habib Lebanon 2004-07-22 
 Ross Jeffs Jersey 2012-07-01 
 Phouphet Singbandith Norwalk 1990-05-07 
 Mohammed Anwar Kabul 1940 
 Daniel Chung Kota Kinabalu 1993-08-07 

==See also==
*Triple jump

==References==

==Further reading==
*Stephen G. Miller, Ancient Greek Athletics. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2004.
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

*IAAF long jump homepage
*Powell vs Lewis Tokyo 91 (video)

*



[[Luke]]

Luke is a male given name, and less commonly, a surname.

The name Luke is derived from the Latin name or from the Greek Loukas, meaning "man from Lucania" (a region of Italy). Although the name is attested in ancient inscriptions, the best known historical use of the name is in the New Testament. The Gospel of Luke was written around 70 to 90 AD (the exact years are unknown), and was from here that the name was first popularized. Luke, who is credited with the authorship of the Gospel of Luke, was a physician who lived around 30 to 130 AD. Luke is also credited with the Book of Acts in the Bible, and also is mentioned by the Apostle Paul in some of Paul's letters to first-century churches.

Luke is the 21st most popular name for new babies in England and Wales, the 43rd most popular name for new babies in the United States, and the 2,105th most common surname in the US, with 15,000 people (0.006%) sharing the surname. 

+Popularity of name Lukein England and Wales Top 100 names for baby boys in England and Wales 
 2008 2007 2006 2005 2004 2003 1998 
 25th 21st 17th 13th 15th 14th 13th 

+Popularity of name Luke in United States Popular Baby Names (U.S. Social Security Administration) 
 2006 2005 2004 2003 2002 2001 2000 1999 1998 1997 1996 1995 1994 1993 1992 1991 1990 1989 1988 1987 
 43rd 41st 41st 46th 46th 50th 59th 67th 75th 78th 75th 82nd 91st 87th 93rd 113th 118th 121st 119th 111th 

==Variants in other languages==
*
* (Lq)
*
* (Ghukas)
*
*
*
*
* (Lk)
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*Greek:
*: Ancient: (Loukas)
*: Modern: 
*Hakka: Lu-k
*
*
*
*
*Irish: Lc, Lcs
*
*
*
*
* (Lkk)
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* Luqa
* 
*
*
*
*
*
*

== People known as Luke ==
*Luke the Evangelist, author and companion of Paul of Tarsus
*Luke Brooks (born 1994), Australian Rugby League player
*Luke Bryan, American country singer
*Luke Brookshier (born 1971), American television writer and storyboard artist
*Luke Burgess (rugby league) (born 1987), English Rugby League player
*Luther Campbell (born 1960), also known as Luke
*Luke Capewell (born 1989), Australian Rugby League player
*Luke Cutts (born 1988), British pole vaulter
*Luke Campbell Donald MBE (born 1977), English professional golfer
*Luke Evans (actor)
*Luke Edwards (born 1980), actor
*Luke Ford (born 1981), Australian actor
*Luke Gardiner, Irish landowner and politician
*Luke Goss (born 1968), singer and actor
*Luke Keary (born 1992), Australian Rugby League player
*Luke Kelly (19401984), folk singer
*Luke Kelly (rugby league) (born 1989), Australian Rugby League player
*Luke Howard (17721864), manufacturing chemist and amateur meteorologist
*Luke Johnson, drummer for Lostprophets
* Luke Loan Ba Vu and Luke Thin Viet Pham, members of the Vietnamese martyrs
*Steve Lukather (born 1957), also known as Luke
*Luke Marshall, Irish rugby player
*Luke McLean, Italian rugby player
*Luke Pasqualino, English actor
*Luke Perry, American actor
*Luke Ravenstahl (born 1980), mayor of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
*Luke Ross, comic artist
*Luke Shaw, English footballer
*Luke Short, (18541893) cowboy and gunfighter
*Luke Tan, singer and songwriter
*Luke Temple, American pop-folk singer-songwriter
*Luke Watson, rugby player
*Luke Wilson (born 1971), actor
*Luke Wright (born 1985), English cricketer
*Luke Young (born 1979), English footballer

=== Fictional people===
*Luke Skywalker, protagonist of the original Star Wars trilogy.
*Cool Hand Luke, a character played by Paul Newman.
*Lucky Luke, a comic book character who is a cowboy.
*Luke fon Fabre, the main character in the PlayStation 2 and Nintendo 3DS video game: Tales of the Abyss

==People with the surname==
*Isaac Luke (born 1987), New Zealand rugby league footballer
*Lauren Luke, English makeup artist
*Noel Luke (born 1964), footballer who notably played for Peterborough United
*Peter Luke, writer, editor, and producer
*Yudell Luke, (19181983), American mathematician

==References==



[[Lonsdaleite]]

Lonsdaleite (named in honour of Kathleen Lonsdale), also called hexagonal diamond in reference to the crystal structure, is an allotrope of carbon with a hexagonal lattice. In nature, it forms when meteorites containing graphite strike the Earth. The great heat and stress of the impact transforms the graphite into diamond, but retains graphite's hexagonal crystal lattice. Lonsdaleite was first identified in 1967 from the Canyon Diablo meteorite, where it occurs as microscopic crystals associated with diamond. 

Hexagonal diamond has also been synthesized in the laboratory (1966 or earlier; published in 1967) by compressing and heating graphite either in a static press or using explosives. It has also been produced by chemical vapor deposition, and also by the thermal decomposition of a polymer, poly(hydridocarbyne), at atmospheric pressure, under argon atmosphere, at temperature 110 C. 

It is translucent, brownish-yellow in color, and has an index of refraction of 2.40 to 2.41 and a specific gravity of 3.2 to 3.3. Its hardness is theoretically superior to that of cubic diamond (up to 58% more) according to computational simulations but natural specimens exhibited somewhat lower hardness through a large range of values (from 7 to 8 on Mohs hardness scale), a speculation based on the fact that the samples were ridden with lattice defects and impurities. Computational Methods and Experimental Measurements XV, by G. M. Carlomagno & C. A. Brebbia, WIT Press, 2011, ISBN 978-1-84564-540-3 

==Properties==
Lonsdaleite has a hexagonal unit cell, related to the diamond unit cell in the same way that the hexagonal and cubic close packed crystal systems are related. The diamond structure can be considered to be made up of interlocking rings of six carbon atoms, in the chair conformation. In lonsdaleite, some of the rings are in the boat conformation instead. In diamond, all the carbon-to-carbon bonds, both within a layer of rings and between them, are in the staggered conformation, thus causing all four cubic-diagonal directions to be equivalent; while in lonsdaleite the bonds between layers are in the eclipsed conformation, which defines the axis of hexagonal symmetry.

Lonsdaleite is simulated to be 58% harder than diamond on the index|] face and to resist indentation pressures of 152 GPa, whereas diamond would break at 97 GPa. This is still below IIa diamond's tip hardness of 162 GPa.

==Occurrence==
Lonsdaleite occurs as microscopic crystals associated with diamond in several meteorites: Canyon Diablo, Kenna, and Allan Hills 77283. It is also naturally occurring in non-bolide diamond placer deposits in the Sakha Republic. Material with d-spacings consistent with Lonsdaleite has been found in sediments with highly uncertain dates at Lake Cuitzeo, in the state of Guanajuato, Mexico, by proponents of the controversial Younger Dryas impact hypothesis. Its presence in local peat deposits is claimed as evidence for the Tunguska event being caused by a meteor rather than by a cometary fragment. 

==See also==
*Glossary of meteoritics
*List of minerals
*List of minerals named after people

==References==

==Further reading==
*.

==External links==
*Mindat.org accessed 13 March 2005.
*Webmineral accessed 13 March 2005.
*Materials Science and Technology Division, Naval Research Laboratory website accessed 14 May 2006.
*Diamond no longer nature's hardest material
*lonsdaleite 3D animation



[[Labrador duck]]

The Labrador duck (Camptorhynchus labradorius) is an extinct North American bird.

==Habitat==
The Labrador duck migrated annually, wintering off the coasts of New Jersey and New Englandwhere it favoured southern sandy coasts, bays, and inletsand breeding in Labrador in the summer. John James Audubon's son reported seeing a nest belonging to the species in Labrador, but it is uncertain where it bred. Some believe that it may have laid its eggs on the islands in the Gulf of Saint Lawrence. 

==Other names==
Illustration by John Gerrard Keulemans of a female and male
Schematic of male
Illustration by John James Audubon
The Labrador duck was also known as the pied duck and skunk duck, the former being a vernacular name that it shared with the surf scoter and the common goldeneye (and even the American oystercatcher), a fact that has led to difficulties in interpreting old records of these species. Both names refer to the male's striking white/black piebald coloration. Yet another common name was sand shoal duck, referring to its habit of feeding in shallow water. The closest evolutionary relatives of the Labrador duck are apparently the scoters (Melanitta). 

==Diet==
The Labrador duck fed on small molluscs, and some fishermen reported catching it on fishing lines baited with mussels. The structure of the bill was highly modified from that of most ducks, having a wide, flattened tip with numerous lamellae inside. In this way it is considered an ecological counterpart of the North Pacific/North Asian Steller's eider. The beak was also particularly soft, and may have been used to probe through sediment for food. 

Another, completely unrelated, duck with similar (but even more specialized) bill morphology is the Australian pink-eared duck, which feeds largely on plankton, but also mollusks; the condition in the Labrador duck probably resembled that in the blue duck most in outward appearance.

==Extinction==
It is thought that the Labrador duck was always rare, but between 1850 and 1870, populations waned further. Its extinction is still not fully explained. Although hunted for food, this duck was considered to taste bad, would rot quickly and fetched a low price. Consequently, it was not sought much by hunters. However, it is thought that the eggs may have been over-harvested, and it may have been subject to depredations by the feather trade in its breeding area as well. Another possible factor in the bird's extinction was the decline in mussels and other shellfish on which they are believed to have fed in their winter quarters, due to growth of population and industry on the Eastern Seaboard. Although all sea ducks readily feed on shallow-water molluscs, no Western Atlantic bird species seems to have been as dependent on such food as the Labrador duck. Phillips, John C. (19221926): A Natural History of Ducks. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin, volume 4, pp. 5763. 

==References==

==Further reading==
* Chilton, Glen (2009): The Curse of the Labrador Duck: My Obsessive Quest to the Edge of Extinction. Simon and Schuster, ISBN 1-43910247-3.
* Cokinos, Christopher (2000): Hope is the Thing with Feathers. New York: Putnam, pp. 281304. ISBN 1-58542-006-9
* Ducher, William (1894): The Labrador Duck  another specimen, with additional data respecting extant specimens. Auk 11: 412. PDF fulltext
* Forbush, Edward Howe (1912): A History of the Game Birds, Wild-Fowl and Shore Birds of Massachusetts and Adjacent States. Boston: Massachusetts State Board of Agriculture, pp. 411416.
* Fuller, Errol (2001): Extinct Birds, Comstock Publishing, ISBN 0-8014-3954-X, pp. 8587.
* Madge, Steve & Burn, Hilary (1988): Waterfowl. An identification guide to the ducks, geese and swans of the world. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, pp. 265266. ISBN 0-395-46727-6

==External links==
* BirdLife Species Factsheet
* The Labrador Duck from John James Audubon's Birds of America
* Environment Canada
* Swans, Geese, and Ducks of Canada
* Marine Extinction Database University of East Anglia, UK
* 3D view of specimens RMNH 110.083 and RMNH 110.084 at Naturalis, Leiden (requires QuickTime browser plugin)
* Glen Chilton, ornithologist and world's leading authority on the Labrador duck

==See also==

* List of extinct birds
* List of extinct animals



[[Lettre de cachet]]

Lettres de cachet (, lit. "letters of the sign/signet") were letters signed by the king of France, countersigned by one of his ministers, and closed with the royal seal, or cachet. They contained orders directly from the king, often to enforce arbitrary actions and judgments that could not be appealed.

In the case of organized bodies lettres de cachet were issued for the purpose of preventing assembly or accomplishing some other definite act. The provincial estates were convoked in this manner, and it was by a lettre de cachet (in this case, a lettre de jussipri ), or by showing in person in a lit de justice, that the king ordered a parlement to register a law despite that parlement's refusal to pass it.

The best-known lettres de cachet, however, were penal, by which a subject was sentenced without trial and without an opportunity of defense to imprisonment in a state prison or an ordinary jail, confinement in a convent or a hospital, transportation to the colonies, or expulsion to another part of the realm, or from the realm altogether. The wealthy sometimes bought such lettres to dispose of unwanted individuals.

In this respect, the lettres de cachet were a prominent symbol of the abuses of the ancien rgime monarchy, and as such were suppressed during the French Revolution.

==History==
Lettre de cachet ordering Jean-Franois Marmontel's detention at the Bastille, signed by Louis XV in 1759
The power to issue lettres de cachet was a royal privilege recognized by the French monarchic civil law that developed during the 13th century, as the Capetian monarchy overcame its initial distrust of Roman law. The principle can be traced to a maxim which furnished a text of the Pandects of Justinian: in their Latin version, "Rex solutus est a legibus", or "The king is released from the laws." "The French legal scholars interpreted the imperial office of the Justinian code in a generic way and arrived at the conclusion that every 'king is an emperor in his own kingdom,' that is, he possesses the prerogatives of legal absolutism that the Corpus Juris Civilis attributes to the Roman emperor." Norman F. Cantor, The Civilization of the Middle Ages 1993 

This meant that when the king intervened directly, he could decide without heeding the laws, and even contrary to the laws. This was an early conception, and in early times the order in question was simply verbal; some letters patent of Henry III of France in 1576 state that Franois de Montmorency was "prisoner in our castle of the Bastille in Paris by verbal command" of the late king Charles IX.

In the 14th century the principle was introduced that the order should be written, and hence arose the lettre de cachet. The lettre de cachet belonged to the class of lettres closes, as opposed to lettres patentes, which contained the expression of the legal and permanent will of the king, and had to be furnished with the seal of state affixed by the chancellor.

The lettres de cachet, on the contrary, were signed simply by a secretary of state for the king; they bore merely the imprint of the king's privy seal, from which circumstance they were often called, in the 14th and 15th centuries, lettres de petit signet or lettres de petit cachet, and were entirely exempt from the control of the chancellor.

==As a tool==
While serving the government as a silent weapon against political adversaries or dangerous writers and as a means of punishing culprits of high birth without the scandal of a lawsuit, the lettres de cachet had many other uses. They were employed by the police in dealing with prostitutes, and on their authority lunatics were shut up in hospitals and sometimes in prisons.

They were also often used by heads of families as a means of correction, for example, for protecting the family honour from the disorderly or criminal conduct of sons. The case of the Marquis de Sade (imprisoned 17771790 under a lettre de cachet obtained by his wealthy and influential mother-in-law) is a prominent example. Wives, too, took advantage of them to curb the profligacy of husbands and vice versa.

In reality, the secretary of state issued them in a completely arbitrary fashion, and in most cases the king was unaware of their issue. In the 18th century it is certain that the letters were often issued blank, i.e. without containing the name of the person against whom they were directed; the recipient, or mandatary, filled in the name in order to make the letter effective.

==Protests against==
Protests against the lettres de cachet were made continually by the parlement of Paris and by the provincial parlements, and often also by the Estates-General. In 1648 the sovereign courts of Paris procured their momentary suppression in a kind of charter of liberties which they imposed upon the crown, but which was ephemeral.

It was not until the reign of Louis XVI that a reaction against this abuse became clearly perceptible. At the beginning of that reign Malesherbes during his short ministry endeavoured to infuse some measure of justice into the system, and in March 1784 the baron de Breteuil, a minister of the king's household, addressed a circular to the intendants and the lieutenant of police with a view to preventing the most serious abuses connected with the issue of lettres de cachet.

The Comte de Mirabeau wrote a scathing indictment of lettres de cachet while imprisoned in the dungeon of Vincennes (by lettre de cachet obtained by his father). The treatise was published after his liberation in 1782 under the title Les Lettres de cachet et des prisons d'etat and was widely read throughout Europe.

In Paris, in 1779, the Cour des Aides demanded their suppression, and in March 1788 the parlement of Paris made some exceedingly energetic remonstrances, which are important for the light they throw upon old French public law. The crown, however, did not decide to lay aside this weapon, and in a declaration to the States-General in the royal session of 23 June 1789 (art. 15) it did not renounce it absolutely.

==Abolition and reinstatement==
Lettres de cachet were abolished after the French Revolution by the Constituent Assembly, but Napoleon reestablished their penal equivalent by a political measure in the decree of 8 March 1801 on the state prisons. This is all the more striking, given that Napoleon had pushed for measures ensuring the rule of law in the codes of laws adopted under his rule. This action was one of the acts brought up against him by the senatus-consulte of 3 April 1814, which pronounced his fall "considering that he has violated the constitutional laws by the decrees on the state prisons."

==Victims of Lettre de cachet==
* Charles Simon Favart
* Luke Joseph Hooke
* Honor Gabriel Riqueti, comte de Mirabeau
* Marguerite Monvoisin
* Charles Antoine Guillaume Pigault-Lebrun
* Alexandre Balthazar Laurent Grimod de La Reynire
* Marquis de Sade
* Comte de Sanois
* Voltaire
* Giacomo Casanova
* Marie-Anne de La Ville
* Jean-Baptiste Forqueray

==In literature==
* Honor Mirabeau, Des Lettres de Cachet et des prisons d'tat (Hamburg, 1782), written in the dungeon at Vincennes into which his father had thrown him by a lettre de cachet, one of the ablest and most eloquent of his works, which had an immense circulation and was translated into English in 1788.
* Dr. Manette, in Dickens' A Tale of Two Cities, was thrown into the Bastille prison by means of a lettre de cachet. In addition, Charles Darnay suspected that his uncle, a marquis, would have used a lettre de cachet to throw Darnay in prison if it weren't for the fact that the Marquis had fallen out of favour with the Court.
* In Alexandre Dumas' The Three Musketeers, d'Artagnan escapes prosecution for the death of Milady by means of an ambiguously worded lettre de cachet given to Milady for her own use by the Cardinal de Richelieu.
* Thomas, D. "The Marquis de Sade". (1992) de Sade's mother-in-law, Madame de Montreuil obtained multiple lettres de cachet to ensure de Sade's continuous imprisonment in the Bastille and Charenton.

==See also==

* Bill of attainder
* Divine right of kings
* National Security Letter
* Firman

==References==
 



[[Lilia Podkopayeva]]

Lilia Alexandrivna Podkopayeva (; (Liliya Aleksandrovna Podkopaeva); born August 15, 1978) is a Ukrainian former artistic gymnast, the Merited Master of Sports of Ukraine (1994). She was the 1995 World All Around champion and the 1996 Olympic All Around champion. Often thought of as a complete athlete, Podkopayeva was known for combining power, style and balletic grace. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=of0vTefAvjQ 

==Gymnastics career==

=== 1993 ===
In April, Podkopayeva competed at the World Championships in Birmingham, United Kingdom. She qualified for the vault final, but crashed on her first attempt and finished last with a score of 8.893.

=== 1994 ===
In April, Podkopayeva competed at the World Championships in Brisbane, Australia. She placed sixth in the all around final with a score of 38.942. In event finals, she placed eighth on vault scoring 9.424, fifth on uneven bars scoring 9.350, and second on balance beam scoring 9.737. http://www.gymnasticsresults.com/90/w1994w.html 

In November, Podkopayeva competed at the World Team Championships in Dortmund, Germany. She contributed an all around score of 38.099 toward the Ukrainian team's fifth place finish. http://www.gymnasticsresults.com/90/wt1994w.html 

=== 1995 ===
In October, Podkopayeva competed at the World Championships in Sabae, Japan. She helped Ukraine place fifth which meant that they qualified a full team to the Olympics. Podkopayeva then won the all around final with a score of 39.248. In event finals, she placed first on vault scoring 9.781, second on uneven bars scoring 9.837, second on balance beam scoring 9.837, and seventh on floor scoring 9.087. http://www.gymnasticsresults.com/90/w1995w.html 

=== 1996 ===
At the beginning, Podkopayeva was seriously injured when she fell from the beam in practice, fracturing two ribs.

In May, Podkopayeva competed at the European Championships in Birmingham, United Kingdom. She helped the Ukrainian team place third and individually she won the all around final with a score of 39.205. In event finals, she placed third on balance beam scoring 9.756, first on uneven bars scoring 9.825, and first on floor scoring 9.862. http://www.gymnasticsresults.com/90/e1996w.html 

==== Atlanta Olympics ====
In July, Podkopayeva competed at the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, United States. In the team final, she contributed a combined compulsory and optional score of 78.061 toward the Ukrainian team's fifth place finish. Podkopayeva then won the all around final with a score of 39.255. In event finals, she placed fifth on uneven bars scoring 9.787, second on balance beam scoring 9.825, and first on floor scoring 9.887. http://www.gymnasticsresults.com/olympics/og1996wag.html She was the fourth and to date last gymnast to win the Olympic all around title as the reigning World Champion and she is the only gymnast to win the all around without winning a team medal. Podkopayeva said, "I did feel some responsibility as the champion of the world and champion of Europe to perform well. I'm very happy I could finish with the floor." http://www.nytimes.com/specials/olympics/0726/oly-gym.html 

=== 1997 ===
Podkopayeva originally intended to continue competing after the 1996 Olympics, and she was named to the Ukrainian team for the 1997 Worlds. However, injuries forced her to sit out the competition and to later retire.

== Personal information ==
In 2002, Podkopayeva started the Golden Lilia International Sports Festival. The event is an exhibition featuring artistic and rhythmic gymnasts, acrobats and dancers and its purpose is to inspire young people. She said, "It's important to us to show outstanding people and brightest talent so that the next generation can follow the best of the best." http://www.intlgymnast.com/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=661:podkopayeva-pulls-off-golden-lilia-extravaganza&catid=2:news&Itemid=53 

In December 2004, Podkopayeva married Ukrainian businessman Timofei Nagorny. They are the parents of two children: Vadim, adopted in Ukraine in July 2006; and Karolina, born in November of the same year. However, as of 2009, Lilia has divorced Timofei and the two share custody of their children.

In 2005, Podkopayeva became United Nations Goodwill Ambassador on HIV/AIDS in Ukraine. http://www.un.org.ua/en/information-centre/news/479-2006-03-13 She is also an Ambassador of Council of Europe for Sport, Tolerance and Fair Play. http://www.un.org.ua/en/component/content/article/27 

In 2007, Podkopayeva won Ukraine's Dancing With the Stars with partner Sergey Kostetskiy. The next year she represented Ukraine in the Eurovision Dance Contest. Along with partner Kirill Khitrov, she placed third in the competition. 

==References==

==External links and sources==
*



[[Lisbon]]

Lisbon ( ; , ) is the capital and the largest city of Portugal. It is the westernmost large city located in continental Europe, as well as its westernmost capital city and the only one along the Atlantic coast. Lisbon lies in the western Iberian Peninsula on the Atlantic Ocean and the River Tagus, and has a population of 547,631 within its administrative limits Censos 2011  Resultados Preliminares on a land area of 84.8 km2. The urban area extends beyond the administrative city limits with a population of over 3 million, Demographia: World Urban Areas, March 2010 on an area of 958 km2, making it the 11th most populous urban area in the European Union. About 3,035,000 United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, World Urbanization Prospects (2009 revision), (United Nations, 2010), Table A.12. Data for 2007. people live in the Lisbon Metropolitan Area (which represents approximately 27% of the population of the country). 

Lisbon is recognised as a global city because of its importance in finance, commerce, media, entertainment, arts, international trade, education and tourism. It is one of the major economic centres on the continent, with a growing financial sector and the largest/second largest container port on Europe's Atlantic coast. "Avance del Plan Territorial Sectorial de la Red Intermodal y Logstica del Transporte de la Comunidad Autnoma del Pas Vasco"  Eusko Jaurlaritza  Gobierno Vasco Lisbon Portela Airport serves over 16 million passengers annually (2013); the motorway network and the high-speed rail system of (Alfa Pendular) link the main cities of Portugal. The city is the seventh-most-visited city in Southern Europe, after Istanbul, Rome, Barcelona, Madrid, Athens and Milan, with 1,740,000 tourists in 2009. The Lisbon region is the wealthiest NUTS II region in Portugal, GDP PPP per capita is 26,100 euros (4.7% higher than the average European Union's GDP PPP per capita). It is the tenth richest metropolitan area by GDP on the continent amounting to 110 billion euros and thus 39,375 per capita, 40% higher than the average European Union's GDP per capita. The city occupies 32nd place of highest gross earnings in the world. "Ranking: The richest cities in the world"  City Mayors.com Most of the headquarters of multinationals in the country are located in the Lisbon area and it is the 9th city in the world in terms of quantity of international conferences. "Lisboa  9 cidade que mais recebe congressos internacionais"  Agncia LUSA It is also the political centre of the country, as seat of Government and residence of the Head of State. The seat of the district of Lisbon and the centre of the NUTS II Lisbon region.

Lisbon is one of the oldest cities in the world, and the oldest city in Western Europe, predating other modern European capitals such as London, Paris and Rome by hundreds of years. Julius Caesar made it a municipium called Felicitas Julia, adding to the name Olissipo. Ruled by a series of Germanic tribes from the 5th century, it was captured by the Moors in the 8th century. In 1147, the Crusaders under Afonso Henriques reconquered the city and since then it has been a major political, economic and cultural centre of Portugal. Unlike most capital cities, Lisbon's status as the capital of Portugal has never been granted or confirmed officially  by statute or in written form. Its position as the capital has formed through constitutional convention, making its position as de facto capital a part of the Constitution of Portugal.

Lisbon enjoys a Mediterranean climate. Among all the metropolises in Europe, it has the warmest winters, with average temperatures 15 C during the day and 8 C at night from December to February. The typical summer season lasts about six months, from May to October, although also in November, March and April temperatures sometimes reach around 25 C.

==History==

===Pre-Roman===
Phoenician archaeological dig in the Lisbon Cathedral cloisters.
During the Neolithic period, the region was inhabited by Pre-Celtic tribes, who built religious and funerary monuments, megaliths, dolmens and menhirs, which still survive in areas on the periphery of Lisbon. The Indo-European Celts invaded in the first millennium BC, mixing with the Pre-Indo-European population, thus giving rise to Celtic-speaking local tribes such as the Cempsi.

Archaeological findings suggest there were Phoenician influences dating back to 1200 BC, leading some historians to believe that a Phoenician trading post might have occupied the centre of the present city (on the southern slope of the Castle hill). The sheltered harbour in the Tagus River estuary was an ideal spot for a settlement and provided a secure port for provisioning of Phoenician ships travelling to the Islands of Tin (modern Isles of Scilly) and Cornwall. The new city might have been named Allis Ubbo, Phoenician for "safe harbour", according to one of several theories on the origin of Lisbon's toponymy. Another theory suggests that the settlement took the name of the pre-Roman word for the Tagus (Lisso or Lucio). The Tagus settlement was also an important centre of commercial trade with inland tribes, providing an outlet for the valuable metals, salt and salted-fish they collected, and for the sale of the Lusitanian horses renowned in antiquity.
Although Phoenician remains from the 8th century BC were found beneath the Mediaeval S Cathedral, modern historians believe, however, that Lisbon was an ancient autochthonous settlement (Roman oppidum) and that, at most, it maintained commercial relations with the Phoenicians (accounting Phoenician pottery and artefacts).

Lisbon's name was written Ulyssippo in Latin by the geographer Pomponius Mela, a native of Hispania. It was later referenced as "Olisippo" by Pliny the Elder and to the Greeks as Olissipo () and Olissipona (). According to legend, the location was named for Ulysses, who founded the settlement after he left Troy to escape the Greek coalition. If all of Odysseus' travels were in the Atlantic as Cailleux argued, then this could mean that Odysseus founded the city coming from the north, before trying to round Cape Malea, (which Cailleux located at Cabo de So Vicente), in a southeasterly direction, to reach his homeland of Ithaca, supposedly present Cdiz. Later, the Greek name appeared in Vulgar Latin in the form Olissipona.

===Roman era===
Section of the wall of visigothic origin.
Following the defeat of Hannibal during the Punic wars, the Romans determined to deprive Carthage of its most valuable possession: Hispania (the Iberian Peninsula). The defeat of Carthaginian forces by Scipio Africanus in Eastern Hispania allowed the pacification of the west, led by Consul Decimus Junius Brutus Callaicus. Decimus obtained the alliance of Olissipo (which sent men to fight alongside the Roman Legions against the northwestern Celtic tribes) by integrating it into the empire, as the Municipium Cives Romanorum Felicitas Julia. Local authorities were granted self-rule over a territory that extended 50 km; exempt from taxes, its citizens were given the privileges of Roman citizenship, and it was then integrated with the Roman province of Lusitania (whose capital was Emerita Augusta).

Lusitanian raids and rebellions during Roman occupation necessitated the construction of a wall around the settlement. During Augustus' reign, the Romans also built a great theatre; the Cassian Baths (underneath Rua da Prata); temples to Jupiter, Diana, Cybele, Tethys and Idea Phrygiae (an uncommon cult from Asia Minor), in addition to temples to the Emperor; a large necropolis under Praa da Figueira; a large forum and other buildings such as insulae (multi-storied apartment buildings) in the area between the Castle Hill and the historic city core. Many of these ruins were first unearthed during the mid-18th century (when the recent discovery of Pompeii made Roman archaeology fashionable among Europe's upper classes). 

The city prospered as piracy was eliminated and technological advances were introduced as Felicitas Julia became a centre of trade with the Roman provinces of Britannia (particularly Cornwall) and the Rhine. Economically strong, Olissipo was known for its garum (a fish sauce highly prized by the elites of the empire and exported in amphorae to Rome), wine, salt and horse-breeding, while Roman culture permeated the hinterland. The city was connected by a broad road to Western Hispania's two other large cities, Bracara Augusta in the province of Tarraconensis (Portuguese Braga), and Emerita Augusta, the capital of Lusitania (Mrida, Spain). The city was ruled by an oligarchical council dominated by two families, the Julii and the Cassiae, although regional authority was administered by the Roman Governor of Emerita or directly by Emperor Tiberius. Among the majority of Latin speakers lived a large minority of Greek traders and slaves.

Around 80 BC, the Roman Quintus Sertorius led a rebellion against the dictator Sulla. During this period, he organised the tribes of Lusitania and Hispania and was on the verge of forming an independent province in the Sertorian War when he died.

Olissipo, like most great cities in the Western Empire, was a centre for the dissemination of Christianity. Its first attested Bishop was Potamius (c. 356), and there were several martyrs during the period of persecution of the Christians: Maxima, Verissimus and Eulalia of Mrida are the most significant examples. By the time of the Fall of Rome, Olissipo had become a notable Christian centre.

Following the disintegration of the Roman Empire there were barbarian invasions; between 409 and 429 the city was occupied successively by Sarmatians, Alans and Vandals. The Germanic Suebi, who established a kingdom in Gallaecia (modern Galicia and northern Portugal), with its capital in Bracara Augusta, also controlled the region of Lisbon until 585. In 585, the Suebi Kingdom was integrated into the Germanic Visigothic Kingdom of Toledo, which comprised all of the Iberian Peninsula: Lisbon was then called Ulishbona.

===Middle Ages===
On 6 August 711, Lisbon was taken by Muslim forces. These conquerors, who were mostly Berbers and Arabs from North Africa and the Middle East, built many mosques and houses, rebuilt the city wall (known as the Cerca Moura) and established administrative control, while permitting the diverse population (Muladi, Mozarabs, Berbers, Arabs, Jews, Zanj and Saqaliba) to maintain their socio-cultural lifestyles. Mozarabic was the native language spoken by most of the Christian population. Islam was the official religion practised by the Arabs, Berbers, Zanj, Saqaliba and Muladi (muwalladun); the Christians were allowed to keep their religion under the status as Dhimmi subjects, and were allowed rights of residence in return for jizyah taxes. In return for paying this surtax, Christians and Jews were excluded from specific duties assigned to Muslims like joining the Islamic army, and their security was guaranteed by the Islamic state, but otherwise, the Christians and Jews were equal to Muslims under the laws of property, contract and obligation.

The Muslim influence is still present in the Alfama, an old quarter of Lisbon that survived the 1755 Lisbon earthquake: many place-names are derived from Arabic and the Alfama (the oldest existing district of Lisbon) was derived from the Arabic "al-hamma".

For a brief time, Lisbon was the central town in the Regulo Eslavo of the Taifa of Badajoz, and then as an independent Taifa, as the Taifa of Lisbon.
The Moorish surrender to Afonso Henriques at the Siege of Lisbon of 1147.
In 1108 the city was raided by Norwegian crusaders led by Sigurd I on their way to the Holy Land as part of the Norwegian Crusade. Pires, Helio. "Sigurr's Attack on Lisbon: Where Exactly?" In Viking and Medieval Scandinavia 8 (2012) &ndash; Turnhout, Belgium : Brepols Publishers, c2012, pp. 199-205. It was taken by the Moorish Almoravids in 1111.

In 1147, as part of the Reconquista, crusader knights led by Afonso I of Portugal besieged and reconquered Lisbon. The city, with around 154,000 residents at the time, was returned to Christian rule. The reconquest of Portugal and re-establishment of Christianity is one of the most significant events in Lisbon's history, described in the chronicle Expugnatione Lyxbonensi, which describes, among other incidents, how the local bishop was killed by the crusaders and the city's residents prayed to the Virgin Mary as it happened. Many of the remaining Muslim residents were converted to Roman Catholicism by force, or were expelled, and their mosques were either destroyed or converted into churches. As a result, spoken Arabic gradually lost its place in the everyday life of the city.

In a raid against Lisbon in 1189, the Almohad caliph, Abu Yusuf Yaqub al-Mansur, took 3,000 female and child captives. Ibn Khaldun, 2: 213; Roudh el-Kartas Abi Zar' al-Fasi, Histoire des souverains du Maghreb, trans. M. Beaumier (Paris, 1860), 307-8. 

With its central location, Lisbon became the capital city of the new Portuguese territory in 1255. The first Portuguese university was founded in Lisbon in 1290 by King Denis I; for many years the Studium Generale (General Study) was transferred intermittently to Coimbra, where it was installed permanently in the 16th century as the University of Coimbra.

During the last centuries of the Middle Ages, the city expanded substantially and became an important trading post with both Northern European and Mediterranean cities.

=== Early Modern ===
The oldest known image of Lisbon (15001510) from the Crnica de Dom Afonso Henriques by Duarte Galvo
Most of the Portuguese expeditions of the Age of Discovery left from Lisbon during the 15th to 17th centuries, including Vasco da Gama's expedition to India in 1497. In 1506, 3,000 Jews were massacred in Lisbon. The 16th century was Lisbon's golden era: the city was the European hub of commerce between Africa, India, the Far East and later, Brazil, and acquired great riches by exploiting the trade in spices, slaves, sugar, textiles and other goods. This period saw the rise of the exuberant Manueline style in architecture, which left its mark in many 16th century monuments (including Lisbon's Belm Tower and Jernimos Monastery, which were declared UNESCO World Heritage Sites). A description of Lisbon in the 16th century was written by Damio de Gis and published in 1554. 

Portugal lost its independence to Spain after the succession crisis of 1580; the Portuguese Restoration War, which began with a coup d'tat organised by the nobility and bourgeoisie in Lisbon and executed on 1 December 1640, restored Portuguese independence. The revolution of 1640 ended the sixty-year period of dual monarchy in Portugal and Spain under the Spanish Habsburgs, Geoffrey Parker The army of Flanders and the Spanish road, London, 1972 ISBN 0-521-08462-8, p. 35 although the period from 1640 to 1668 was marked by periodic skirmishes between Portugal and Spain, as well as short episodes of more serious warfare, until the Treaty of Lisbon was signed in 1688. That period is referred to "The Fillipinean era", since all three Spanish kings during that period were called Filipe.

In the early 18th century, gold from Brazil allowed King John V to sponsor the building of several Baroque churches and theatres in the city.
The Ribeira Royal Palace in 1650, prior to its destruction.
Prior to the 18th century, Lisbon had experienced several significant earthquakes  eight in the 14th century, five in the 16th century (including the 1531 earthquake that destroyed 1,500 houses and the 1597 earthquake in which three streets vanished), and three in the 17th century. On 1 November 1755, the city was destroyed by another devastating earthquake, which killed an estimated 30,000 to 40,000 Lisbon residents of a population estimated at between 200,000 and 275,000, and destroyed 85 percent of the city's structures. Among several important buildings of the city, the Ribeira Palace and the Hospital Real de Todos os Santos were lost. In coastal areas, such as Peniche, situated about 80 km north of Lisbon, many people were killed by the following tsunami. In Setbal, 30 km south of Lisbon, the water reached the first floor (second floor, in U.S. terms) of buildings. The destruction was also great in the Algarve of southern Portugal, where the tsunami dismantled some coastal fortresses and, in the lower parts, levelled many houses. In some places the waves crested at more than 30 m. Almost all the coastal towns and villages of the Algarve were heavily damaged, except Faro, which was protected by sandy banks. In Lagos, the waves reached the top of the city walls. For many Portuguese coastal regions, the destructive effects of the tsunami were more disastrous than those of the earthquake proper.
The Marquis of Pombal's enlightened plans for rebuilding Lisbon.
By 1755, Lisbon was one of the largest cities in Europe; the catastrophic event shocked the whole of Europe and left a deep impression on its collective psyche. In southwestern Spain, the tsunami caused damage to Cdiz and Huelva, and the waves penetrated the Guadalquivir River, reaching Seville. In Gibraltar, the sea rose suddenly by about two metres. In Ceuta the tsunami was strong, but in the Mediterranean Sea, it decreased rapidly. On the other hand, it caused great damage and casualties to the western coast of Morocco, from Tangier, where the waves reached the walled fortifications of the town, to Agadir, where the waters passed over the walls, killing many. The tsunami also reached Cornwall, in England, Great Britain (present England, United Kingdom), at a height of 10 feet. Along the coast of Cornwall, the sea rose rapidly in vast waves, and then ebbed equally rapidly. A two metre tsunami also hit Galway in Ireland, and did some considerable damage to the Spanish Arch section of the city wall. Voltaire wrote a long poem, Pome sur le dsastre de Lisbonne, shortly after the quake, and mentioned it in his 1759 novel Candide (indeed, many argue that this critique of optimism was inspired by that earthquake). Oliver Wendell Holmes, Sr. also mentions it in his 1857 poem, The Deacon's Masterpiece, or The Wonderful One-Hoss Shay. In the town of Cascais, some 30 km west of Lisbon, the waves wrecked several boats and when the water withdrew, large stretches of sea bottom were left uncovered.

After the 1755 earthquake, the city was rebuilt largely according to the plans of Prime Minister Sebastio Jos de Carvalho e Melo, the 1st Marquess of Pombal; the lower town began to be known as the Baixa Pombalina (Pombaline central district). Instead of rebuilding the medieval town, Pombal decided to demolish what remained after the earthquake and rebuild the city centre in accordance with principles of modern urban design. It was reconstructed in an open rectangular plan with two great squares: the Praa do Rossio and the Praa do Comrcio. The first, the central commercial district, is the traditional gathering place of the city and the location of the older cafs, theatres and restaurants; the second became the city's main access to the River Tagus and point of departure and arrival for seagoing vessels, adorned by a triumphal arch (1873) and monument to King Joseph I.

=== Late modern and contemporary ===
The construction of the Rossio railway station at Pedro IV Square, in 1886.
In the first years of the 19th century, Portugal was invaded by the troops of Napolon Bonaparte, forcing Queen Maria I and Prince-Regent John (future John VI) to flee temporarily to Brazil. By the time the new King returned to Lisbon, many of the buildings and properties were pillaged, sacked or destroyed by the invaders.

During the 19th century, the Liberal movement introduced new changes into the urban landscape. The principal areas were in the Baixa and along the Chiado district, where shops, tobacconists shops, cafs, bookstores, clubs and theatres proliferated. The development of industry and commerce determined the growth of the city, extending north along the Avenida da Liberdade (1879), distancing itself from the Tagus River.

Lisbon was the site of the regicide of Carlos I of Portugal in 1908, an event which culminated two years later in the First Republic.

The city refounded its university in 1911 after centuries of inactivity in Lisbon, incorporating reformed former colleges and other non-university higher education schools of the city (such as the Escola Politcnica  now Faculdade de Cincias). Today there are two public universities in the city (University of Lisbon and New University of Lisbon), a public university institute (ISCTE - Lisbon University Institute) and a polytechnic institute (IPL  Instituto Politcnico de Lisboa).
The Proclamation of the Portuguese Republic in Lisbon's Municipal Square.

During World War II, Lisbon was one of the very few neutral, open European Atlantic ports, a major gateway for refugees to the U.S. and a haven for spies. More than 100,000 refugees were able to flee Nazi Germany via Lisbon. "Portugal". The Virtual Jewish History Tour. 

During the Estado Novo regime (19261974), Lisbon was expanded at the cost of other districts within the country, resulting in nationalist and monumental projects. New residential and public developments were constructed; the zone of Belm was modified for the 1940 Portuguese Exhibition, while along the periphery new districts appeared to house the growing population. The inauguration of the bridge over the Tagus allowed rapid connection between both sides of the river.

Lisbon was the site of three revolutions in the 20th century. The first, the 5 October 1910 revolution, brought an end to the Portuguese monarchy and established the highly unstable and corrupt Portuguese First Republic. The 6 June 1926 revolution would see the end of that first republic and firmly establish the Estado Novo, or the Portuguese Second Republic, as the ruling regime. The final revolution, the Carnation Revolution, would take place on 25 April 1974 and would end the right-wing Estado Novo and reform the country as the current Portuguese Third Republic.
The Elevator of Santa Justa was built in 1902
The Treaty of Lisbon was signed at the Jernimos Monastery in 2007.
In the 1990s, many of the districts were renovated and projects in the historic quarters were established to modernise those areas; architectural and patrimonial buildings were recuperated; the northern margin of the Tagus was re-purposed for leisure and residential use; the Vasco da Gama Bridge was constructed; and the eastern part of the municipality was re-purposed for Expo '98, to commemorate the 500th anniversary of Vasco da Gama's sea voyage to India, a voyage that would bring immense riches to Lisbon and cause many of Lisbon's landmarks to be built.

In 1988, a fire in the historical district of Chiado saw the destruction of many 18th century Pombaline style buildings. A series of restoration works has brought the area back to its former self and made it a high-scale shopping district.

The Lisbon Agenda was a European Union agreement on measures to revitalise the EU economy, signed in Lisbon in March 2000. In October 2007 Lisbon hosted the 2007 EU Summit, where agreement was reached regarding a new EU governance model. The resulting Treaty of Lisbon was signed on 13 December 2007 and came into force on 1 December 2009.

Lisbon has been the site for many international events and programmes. In 1994, Lisbon was the European Capital of Culture. On 3 November 2005, Lisbon hosted the MTV European Music Awards. On 7 July 2007, Lisbon held the ceremony of the "New 7 Wonders Of The World" election, in the Luz Stadium, with live transmission for millions of people all over the world. Lisbon alternates with Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, hosting the Rock in Rio music festival, the largest in the world.

Lisbon hosted the NATO summit (1920 November 2010), a summit meeting that is regarded as a periodic opportunity for Heads of State and Heads of Government of NATO member states to evaluate and provide strategic direction for Alliance activities. NATO, NATO Summit Meetings, 4 December 2006 

==Geography==
A orthophotograph of Lisbon's Metropolitan area, from a SPOT Satellite.

===Physical geography===
Lisbon is located at , situated at the mouth of the Tagus River and is the westernmost capital of a mainland European country.

The westernmost part of Lisbon is occupied by the Parque Florestal de Monsanto (English: Monsanto Forest Park), an 10 km2 urban park, one the largest in Europe, and occupying ten percent of the municipality.

The city occupies an area of 84.94 km2, and its city boundaries, unlike those of most major cities, are narrowly defined by its historical centre. The rest of the urbanised area of the Lisbon Metropolitan Area, known generically as Greater Lisbon (), is actually several administratively defined cities and municipalities, such as Amadora, Queluz, Agualva-Cacm, Odivelas, Loures, Sacavm, Almada, Barreiro, Seixal and Oeiras

===Climate===
Lisbon has a Subtropical-Mediterranean climate (Kppen climate classification: Csa) with mild winters and warm to hot summers. The average annual temperature is 21.5 C during the day and 13.5 C at night. Average annual temperature of the sea is 17.5 C.

In the coldest month  January  the high temperature during the day typically ranges from 11 to, the low temperature at night ranges from 3 to and the average sea temperature is 15 C. In the warmest month  August  the high temperature during the day typically ranges from 26 to, the low temperature at night ranges from 17 to and the average sea temperature is 20 C. 

Generally, a summer season lasts about 6 months, from May to October. Three months  March, April and November  are transitional, sometimes the temperature exceeds 25 C, with an average temperature in these three months of 18.9 C during the day and 12.0 C at night. December, January and February are the coldest months, with an average temperature of 15.5 C during the day and 8.9 C at night.

Among all metropolises (together with Valencia) and capitals (together with Malta) in Europe, Lisbon has the warmest winters, and the mildest nighttime temperatures in Europe: among the warmest in the winter  from an average of 8.3 C in the coldest month, and comfortable 18.6 C in the warmest month.

Rain occurs mainly in winter, the summers being generally dry. Sunshine hours are about 2,800 per year, from an average of 4.6 hours of sunshine duration at day in December to an average of 11.4 hours of sunshine duration at day in July.

===Civil parishes===
Location of the civil parishes () of Lisbon
The municipality of Lisbon included 53 freguesias (civil parishes) until November 2012. A new law ("Lei n. 56/2012") reduced the number of freguesias to 24.

 * Ajuda * Alcntara * Alto do Pina * Alvalade * Ameixoeira * Anjos * Beato * Benfica * Campo Grande * Campolide * Carnide * Castelo * Charneca * Corao de Jesus * Encarnao * Graa * Lapa * Lumiar * Madalena * Mrtires * Marvila * Mercs * Nossa Senhora de Ftima * Pena * Penha de Frana * Prazeres * Sacramento * Santa Catarina * Santa Engrcia * Santa Isabel * Santa Justa * Santa Maria de Belm * Santa Maria dos Olivais * Santiago * Santo Condestvel * Santo Estevo * Santos-o-Velho * So Cristvo e So Loureno * So Domingos de Benfica * So Francisco Xavier * So Joo * So Joo de Brito * So Joo de Deus * So Jorge de Arroios * So Jos * So Mamede * So Miguel * So Nicolau * So Paulo * So Sebastio da Pedreira * So Vicente de Fora * S * Socorro 

=== Districts ===
Locally, Lisbon's inhabitants may more commonly refer to the spaces of Lisbon in terms of historic bairros (neighbourhoods). These communities have no clearly defined boundaries and represent distinctive quarters of the city that have in common an historical culture, similar living standards, and identifiable architectural landmarks, as exemplified by the Bairro Alto, Alfama, Chiado, and so forth.

====Alcntara====

A view of the famous aqueduct, Aqueduto das guas Livres, in the Vale de Alcntara (Valley of Alcntara) in the parish of Campolide
Although today it is quite central, it was once a mere suburb of Lisbon, comprising mostly farms and country estates of the nobility with their palaces. In the 16th century, there was a brook there which the nobles used to promenade in their boats. During the late 19th century, Alcntara became a popular industrial area, with lots of small factories and warehouses.

In the early 1990s, Alcntara began to attract youth because of the number of pubs and discothques. This was mainly due to its outer area of mostly commercial buildings, which acted as barriers to the noise-generating nightlife (which acted as a buffer to the residential communities surrounding it). In the meantime, some of these areas began to become gentrified, attracting loft developments and new flats, which have profited from its river views and central location.

====Alfama====

The oldest district of Lisbon, it spreads down the southern slope from the Castle of So Jorge to the River Tagus. Its name, derived from the Arabic Al-hamma, means fountains or baths. During the Islamic invasion of Iberia, the Alfama constituted the largest part of the city, extending west to the Baixa neighbourhood. Increasingly, the Alfama became inhabited by fishermen and the poor: its fame as a poor neighbourhood continues to this day. While the 1755 Lisbon Earthquake caused considerable damage throughout the capital, the Alfama survived with little damage, thanks to its compact labyrinth of narrow streets and small squares. It is an historical quarter of mixed-use buildings occupied by Fado bars, restaurants, and homes with small shops downstairs. Modernising trends have invigorated the district: old houses have been re-purposed or remodelled, while new buildings have been constructed. Fado, the typically Portuguese style of melancholy music, is common (but not obligatory) in the restaurants of the district.

====Bairro Alto====

Bairro Alto (literally the upper quarter in Portuguese) is an area of central Lisbon that functions as a residential, shopping and entertainment district; it is the centre of the Portuguese capital's nightlife, attracting hipster youth and members of various music subcultures. Lisbon's Punk, Gay, Metal, Goth, Hip Hop and Reggae scenes all find a home in the Bairro with its many clubs and bars that cater to them. The crowds in the Bairro Alto are a multicultural mix of people representing a broad cross-section of modern Portuguese society, many of them being entertainment seekers and devotees of various music genres outside the mainstream, yet Fado, Portugal's national music, still survives in the midst of the new nightlife.

====Baixa====

Rua Augusta Arch, Downtown Lisbon
The heart of the city is the Baixa or city centre; the Pombaline Baixa is an elegant district, primarily constructed after the 1755 Lisbon earthquake, taking its name from its benefactor, 1st Marquess of Pombal, Sebastio Jos de Carvalho e Melo, who was the minister of Joseph I of Portugal (17501777) and a key figure during the Portuguese Enlightenment. Following the 1755 disaster, Pombal took the lead in rebuilding Lisbon, imposing strict conditions and guidelines on the construction of the city, and transforming the organic street plan that characterised the district before the earthquake into its current grid pattern. As a result, the Pombaline Baixa is one of the first examples of earthquake-resistant construction. Architectural models were tested by having troops march around them to simulate an earthquake. Notable features of Pombaline structures include the Pombaline cage, a symmetrical wood-lattice framework aimed at distributing earthquake forces, and inter-terrace walls that were built higher than roof timbers to inhibit the spread of fires.

====Belm====

Belm is famous as the place from which many of the great Portuguese explorers set off on their voyages of discovery. In particular, it is the place from which Vasco da Gama departed for India in 1497 and Pedro lvares Cabral departed for Brazil in 1499. It is also a former royal residence and features the 17th18th century Belm Palace, a former royal residence now occupied by the President of Portugal, and the Ajuda Palace, begun in 1802 but never completed.

Perhaps Belm's most famous feature is its tower, Torre de Belm, whose image is much used by Lisbon's tourist board. The tower was built as a fortified lighthouse late in the reign of Dom Manuel l (15151520) to guard the entrance to the port. It stood on a little island in right side of the Tagus, surrounded by water. Belm's other major historical building is the Mosteiro dos Jernimos (Jernimos Monastery), which the Torre de Belm was built partly to defend. Belm's most notable modern feature is the Padro dos Descobrimentos (Monument to the Discoveries) built for the Portuguese World Fair in 1940. In the heart of Belm is the Praa do Imprio: gardens centred upon a large fountain, laid out during World War II. To the west of the gardens lies the Centro Cultural de Belm. Belm is one of the most visited Lisbon districts.

====Chiado====

Statue of poet Antnio Ribeiro, the "Chiado", in the Chiado Square.

The Chiado is a traditional shopping area that mixes old and modern commercial establishments, concentrated specially in the Rua do Carmo and the Rua Garrett. Locals as well as tourists visit the Chiado to buy books, clothing and pottery as well as to have a cup of coffee. The most famous caf of Chiado is A Brasileira, famous for having had poet Fernando Pessoa among its customers. The Chiado is also an important cultural area, with several museums and theatres, including the opera. Several buildings of the Chiado were destroyed in a fire in 1988, an event that deeply shocked the country. Thanks to a renovation project that lasted more than 10 years, coordinated by celebrated architect Siza Vieira, the affected area has now virtually recovered.

====Estrela====
The ornate, late 18th-century Estrela Basilica is the main attraction of this district. The church with its large dome is located on a hill in what was at the time the western part of Lisbon and can be seen from great distances. The style is similar to that of the Mafra National Palace, late baroque and neoclassical. The faade has twin bell towers and includes statues of saints and some allegorical figures. So Bento Palace, the seat of the Portuguese parliament and the official residences of the Prime Minister of Portugal and the President of the Assembly of the Republic of Portugal, are in this district.

A view of the Parque das Naes.

====Parque das Naes====

Parque das Naes (Park of Nations) is the newest district in Lisbon, having emerged from an urban renewal programme leading to the World Exhibition of Lisbon 1998, also known as Expo'98. The area suffered massive changes giving Parque das Naes a futuristic look. A long lasting legacy of the same, the area has become another commercial and higher end residential area for the city. Central to this is the Gare do Oriente (Orient railway station), one of the main transport hubs of Lisbon for trains, buses, taxis and the metro. Its glass and steel columns are inspired by Gothic architecture, lending the whole structure a visual fascination (especially in sunlight or when illuminated at night). It was designed by the architect Santiago Calatrava from Valencia, Spain. Across the street, through Vasco da Gama Mall, is Parque das Naes (Park of the Nations), site of the 1998 World Expo.

The area is pedestrian-friendly with new buildings, restaurants, gardens, the Casino Lisbon, the FIL building (International Exhibition and Fair), the Cames Theatre, as well as the Oceanrio de Lisboa (Lisbon Oceanarium), the second largest in the world. The district's MEO Arena has become Lisbon's "jack-of-all-trades" performance arena. Seating 20,000, it has staged events from concerts to basketball tournaments.
A glimpse of Parque das Naes, Lisbon

== Demographics ==
The historical population of the city were around 35,000 in 1300 AD. Up to 60,000 in 1400 AD, and rising to 70,000 in 1500 AD. Between 1528-1590 the population went from 70,000 to 120,000. 140,000 in 1600 AD, and almost 200,000 in 1700 AD. Cities and Economic Development: From the Dawn of History to the Present The First European Description of Japan, 1585 Introduction to Global Politics 

The population of the city proper is, as of 2011, 547,631 and the metropolitan area (Lisbon Metropolitan Area) more than 2,800,000 according to the Instituto Nacional de Estatstica (National Institute of Statistics). The Lisbon Metropolitan Area incorporates two NUTS III (European statistical subdivisions): Grande Lisboa (Greater Lisbon), along the northern bank of the Tagus River, and Pennsula de Setbal (Setbal Peninsula), along the southern bank (these two subdivisions make for the Regio de Lisboa (Lisbon Region). The population density of the city itself is 6458 PD/sqkm.
Miraflores Park in Oeiras, Lisbon

=== Historical population ===

 Demographic evolution of Lisbon 
 43 900 1552 1598 1720 1755 1756 1801 1849 1900 1930 1960 1981 1991 2001 2011 
 30,000 100,000 200,000 150,000 185,000 180,000 165,000 203,999 174,668 350,919 591,939 801,155 807,937 663,394 564,657 545,245 

=== Metropolitan area ===
Like most metropolitan cities, Lisbon is surrounded by many satellite cities or suburbs, and it is estimated that more than one million people enter Lisbon every day for business or employment from these communities. Cascais and Estoril are among the most vibrant neighbouring towns for night life. Beautiful palaces, landscapes and historical sites can be found in Sintra and Mafra. Other major municipalities around Lisbon include Amadora, Oeiras, Odivelas, Loures, Vila Franca de Xira and, in the south bank of the Tagus river estuary, Almada, Barreiro and Seixal.

==Economy==
Lisbon's port, one of the largest and most important ports in Europe.
The Lisbon region is the wealthiest region in Portugal and it is well above the European Union's GDP per capita average  it produces 45% of the Portuguese GDP. Lisbon's economy is based primarily on the tertiary sector. Most of the headquarters of multinationals operating in Portugal are concentrated in the Grande Lisboa Subregion, specially in the Oeiras municipality. The Lisbon Metropolitan Area is heavily industrialized, especially the south bank of the Tagus river (Rio Tejo).

The Lisbon region is rapidly growing, each year are higher Gross Domestic Product (GDP) PPP per capita:  22,745 (2004)   23,816 (2005)   25,200 (2006)   26,100 (2007). The Lisbon metropolitan area had a GDP amounting to $95.2 billion, and $31,454 per capita. 
The Caixa Geral de Depsitos, Portugal's largest bank, is based in Lisbon.
The country's chief seaport, featuring one of the largest and most sophisticated regional markets on the Iberian Peninsula, Lisbon and its heavily populated surroundings are also developing as an important financial centre and a dynamic technological hub. Automobile manufacturers have erected factories in the suburbs, for example, AutoEuropa.

Lisbon has the largest and most developed mass media sector of Portugal, and is home to several related companies ranging from leading television networks and radio stations to major newspapers.

The Euronext Lisbon stock exchange, part of the pan-European Euronext system together with the stock exchanges of Amsterdam, Brussels and Paris, is tied with the New York Stock Exchange since 2007, forming the multinational NYSE Euronext group of stock exchanges.

Lisbonite industry has very large sectors in oil, as refineries are found just across the Tagus, textile mills, shipyards and fishing.
Partial view of Lisbon
Before Portugal's sovereign debt crisis and an history of Portugal#Economic crisis: the 2010s|EU-IMF rescue plan], for the decade of 2010 Lisbon was expecting to receive many state funded investments, including building a new airport, a new bridge, an expansion of 30 km underground, the construction of a mega-hospital (or central hospital), the creation of two lines of a TGV to join Madrid, Porto, Vigo and the rest of Europe, the restoration of the main part of the town (between the Marqus de Pombal roundabout and Terreiro do Pao), the creation of a large number of bike lanes, as well as modernization and renovation of various facilities. "Pequeno Resumo Histrico de Lisboa"  Cmara Municipal de Lisboa 

==Transport==
A Lisbon electric tram in the Chiado.
Lisbon's public transport network is extremely far-reaching and reliable. The Lisbon Metro as its main artery, connecting the city centre with the upper and eastern districts, and now reaching the suburbs. Ambitious expansion projects will increase the network by almost one third, connecting the airport, and the northern and western districts. Bus, funicular and tram services have been supplied by the Companhia de Carris de Ferro de Lisboa (Carris), for over a century.

=== Trams ===
A traditional form of public transport in Lisbon is the tram. Introduced in the 19th century, the trams were originally imported from the USA, rarely called the americanos. The earliest trams can still be seen in the Museu da Carris (the Public Transport Museum). Other than on the modern Line 15, the Lisbon tramway system still employs small (four wheel) vehicles of a design dating from the early part of the twentieth century. These distinctive yellow trams are one of the tourist icons of modern Lisbon, and their size is well suited to the steep hills and narrow streets of the central city. Information from Carris, Lisbon transportation company. Details of Lisbon's trams, from Luso Pages 

View from the train, Campolide next the station.

=== Trains ===
There are four commuter train lines departing from Lisbon: the Cascais, Sintra and Azambuja lines (operated by CP  Comboios de Portugal), as well as a fourth line to Setbal (operated by Fertagus) crossing the Tagus river, over the 25 de Abril Bridge. The major railway stations are Santa Apolnia, Rossio, Gare do Oriente, Entrecampos, and Cais do Sodr. The city does not offer a light rail service (tram line 15, although running with new and faster trams does not fall onto this category), but there are plans to build light rail lines to provide service along the city's periphery.

=== Automobiles ===
There are other commuter bus services from the city: Vimeca, Rodoviaria de Lisboa, Transportes Sul do Tejo, Boa Viagem, Barraqueiro are the main ones, operating from different terminals in the city.

Lisbon is connected to its suburbs as well as throughout Portugal by an extensive motorway network. There are three circular motorways around the city; the 2 Circular, the CRIL, and the CREL.

=== Bridges ===
The city is connected to the far side of the Tagus by two important bridges:
* The 25 de Abril Bridge, inaugurated (as Ponte Salazar) on 6 August 1966, and later renamed after the date of the Carnation Revolution, was the longest suspension bridge in Europe.
* The Vasco da Gama Bridge, inaugurated on May 1998 is, at 17.2 km, the longest bridge in Europe.

The foundations for a third bridge across the Tagus have already been laid, but the overall project has been postponed due to the economic crisis in Portugal and all of Europe.

Lisbon's 25 de Abril Bridge, the first bridge built across the Tagus at Lisbon.

=== Ferries ===
Another way of crossing the river is by taking the ferry. The company is Transtejo-Soflusa, which operates from different points in the city to Cacilhas, Seixal, Montijo, Porto Brando and Trafaria under the brand Transtejo and to Barreiro under the brand Soflusa.

=== Air travel ===
Lisbon's Portela Airport is located within the city limits. It is the headquarters and hub for TAP Portugal as well as a hub for Easyjet, SATA International, Luzair, EuroAtlantic Airways, Portuglia, White Airways, and High Fly airlines. It has been proposed that a New Lisbon Airport should be built. The project has been put on hold because of the Portuguese, and overall European, economic crisis and also because of the long discussion on whether there is a need for a new airport at all.

== Education ==
The rectory and main campus of the New University of Lisbon.
The city has several private and public secondary schools, primary schools as well as Kindergartens. In Greater Lisbon area there are also international schools such as Saint Julian's School, the Carlucci American International School of Lisbon, Saint Dominic's International School, Deutsche Schule Lissabon, Instituto Espaol de Lisboa, and Lyce Franais Charles Lepierre.

=== Higher education ===
There are two public universities in Lisbon: the University of Lisbon (the largest university in Portugal) and the New University of Lisbon (founded in 1973), providing degrees in all academic disciplines. There is also one public university institute  the ISCTE - Lisbon University Institute, and a public polytechnic institute  the Polytechnical Institute of Lisbon.

Major private institutions of higher education include the Portuguese Catholic University, as well as the Lusada University, the Universidade Lusfona, and the Universidade Autnoma de Lisboa, among others.

The total number of enrolled students in higher education in Lisbon was, for the 20072008 school year, of 125,867 students, of whom 81,507 in the Lisbon's public institutions. 

== Culture ==
The Belm Tower, one of the most famous and visited landmarks in Portugal. Its construction was initiated in 1515 and completed in 1519.
The city of Lisbon is rich in architecture; Romanesque, Gothic, Manueline, Baroque, Modern and Postmodern constructions can be found all over Lisbon. The city is also crossed by historical boulevards and monuments along the main thoroughfares, particularly in the upper districts; notable among these are the Avenida da Liberdade (Avenue of Liberty), Avenida Fontes Pereira de Melo, Avenida Almirante Reis and Avenida da Repblica (Avenue of the Republic).

There are several substantial museums one can visit in the city. The most famous ones are the Museu Nacional de Arte Antiga (National Museum of Ancient Art), the National Azulejo Museum, the Museu Calouste Gulbenkian (Calouste Gulbenkian Museum), containing varied collections of ancient and modern art, the Museu Nacional do Traje e da Moda (National Museum of Costume and Fashion), the Berardo Collection Museum (Modern Art) at the Belm Cultural Center, the Museu da Electricidade (Electricity Museum), the Museu Nacional dos Coches (National Coach Museum, containing the largest collection of royal coaches in the world), the Museum of Pharmacy, the National Museum of Natural History and Science, Museum of the Orient, the Museu do Teatro Romano (The Roman Theatre Museum), and the Lisbon City Museum.

Lisbon's Opera House, the Teatro Nacional de So Carlos, hosts a relatively active cultural agenda, mainly in autumn and winter. Other important theatres and musical houses are the Centro Cultural de Belm, the Teatro Nacional D. Maria II, the Gulbenkian Foundation, and the Teatro Cames.
D.Maria II theater, located in the Rossio Square
The monument to Christ the King (Cristo-Rei) stands on the southern bank of the Tagus River, in Almada. With open arms, overlooking the whole city, it resembles the Corcovado monument in Rio de Janeiro, and was built after World War II, as a memorial of thanksgiving for Portugal's being spared the horrors and destruction of the war.

13 June is Lisbons holiday in honour of the citys saint Anthony of Lisbon (). Saint Anthony, also known as Saint Anthony of Padua, was a wealthy Portuguese bohemian who was canonised and made Doctor of the Church after a life preaching to the poor. Ironically, although Lisbons patron saint is Saint Vincent of Saragossa, whose remains are housed in the S Cathedral, there are no festivities associated with this saint.

Eduardo VII Park, the second largest park in the city following the Parque Florestal de Monsanto (Monsanto Forest Park), extends down the main avenue (Avenida da Liberdade), with many flowering plants and greenspaces, that includes the permanent collection of subtropical and tropical plants in the winter garden (). Originally named Parque da Liberdade, it was renamed in honour of Edward VII of England who visited Lisbon in 1903.
Coats of Arms of Lisbon on street lights
The Pavilho Atlntico, Lisbon's largest and a popular entertainment venue.
Lisbon is home every year to the Lisbon Gay & Lesbian Film Festival, the Lisboarte, the DocLisboa  Lisbon International Documentary Film Festival, the Arte Lisboa  Contemporary Art Fair, the Festival of the Oceans, the International Organ Festival of Lisbon, the MOTELx  Lisbon International Horror Film Festival, the Lisbon Village Festival, the Festival Internacional de Mscaras e Comediantes, the Lisboa Mgica  Street Magic World Festival, the Monstra  Animated Film Festival, the Lisbon Book Fair, the Peixe em Lisboa  Lisbon Fish and Flavours, the Lisbon International Handicraft Exhibition, the Lisbon Photo Marathon, the IndieLisboa  International Independent Film Festival, the Alkantara Festival, the Temps dImages Festival and the Jazz in August festival. 

Lisbon hosts two agencies of the European Union: the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction (EMCDDA) and the European Maritime Safety Agency (EMSA). Called the "Capital of the Lusophone world", the Community of Portuguese Language Countries has its headquarters in the city, in the Palace of the Counts of Penafiel.

Lisbon has two sites listed by UNESCO as a World Heritage Site: Belm Tower and Jernimos Monastery. Furthermore, in 1994, Lisbon was the European Capital of Culture and in 1998 organised the Expo '98 (1998 Lisbon World Exposition).

Lisbon has been home five times (in 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010 and 2012) to Rock in Rio, one of the world's largest pop-rock festivals. Annual popular music events within the metropolitan area include the Optimus Alive! and Super Bock Super Rock festivals.

Lisbon is also home to the Lisbon Architecture Triennial, the Moda Lisboa (Fashion Lisbon), ExperimentaDesign  Biennial of Design and LuzBoa  Biennial of Light. 

In addition, the mosaic Portuguese pavement (Calada Portuguesa) was born in Lisbon, in the mid-1800s. The art has since spread to the rest of the Portuguese Speaking world. The city remains one of the most expansive examples of the technique, nearly all walkways and even many streets being created and maintained in this style.

In terms of Portuguese cities, Lisbon was considered the most livable in a survey of living conditions published yearly by Expresso. Classificao Expresso das melhores cidades portuguesas para viver em 2007, Expresso 

==Sports==
Benfica's Estdio da Luz, Portugal's largest stadium
Sporting Lisbon's Estdio Jos Alvalade
Lisbon has a long tradition in sports. It hosted several matches, including the final, of the UEFA Euro 2004 championship. The city also played host to the final of the 2001 IAAF World Indoor Championships and the European Fencing Championships in 1983 and 1992, as well as the 2003 World Men's Handball Championship, and the 2008 European Judo Championships. From 2006 to 2008, Lisbon was the starting point for the Dakar Rally. The city hosted the 2014 UEFA Champions League Final.

=== Association football ===
The city hosts three association football clubs in Portugal's highest league, the Primeira Liga. Sport Lisboa e Benfica, commonly known as just Benfica, has won 33 league titles in addition to two European Cups. Lisbon's second-most successful club is Sporting Clube de Portugal (commonly known as Sporting or in the English-speaking world as Sporting Lisbon), winner of 18 league titles and the 1964 UEFA Cup Winners' Cup.

A third club, C.F. Os Belenenses (commonly Belenenses or Belenenses Lisbon), based in the Belm quarter, has solely won one league title. Other major clubs in Lisbon include Atltico, Casa Pia, and Oriental.

=== Other sports ===
Other sports, such as indoor football, handball, basketball, roller hockey and rugby are also popular; the latter's national stadium is in Lisbon. There are many other sport facilities in Lisbon, ranging from athletics to sailing to golf to mountain-biking. Every March the city hosts the Lisbon Half Marathon, while in September the Portugal Half Marathon.

=== Facilities ===
Lisbon has two UEFA category four stadiums; Benfica's Estdio da Luz (Stadium of Light), with a capacity of over 65,000 and Sporting's Estdio Jos Alvalade, with a capacity of over 50,000. There is also Belenenses' Estdio do Restelo, with a capacity of over 30,000. The Estdio Nacional, in nearby Oeiras, has a capacity of 37,000 and was used exclusively for Portuguese international football matches and cup finals until the construction of larger stadia in the city. It held the 1967 European Cup Final.

==International relations==

===Twin towns  Sister cities===
Lisbon is twinned with the following cities: 

 City Country Date 
 Bissau 1983-05-31 
 Braslia 1985-06-28 
 Budapest 1992-09-28 
 Cacheu 1988-11-14 
 Guimares 1993-06-29 
 Luanda 1988-10-11 
 Macau 1982-05-20 
 Madrid 1979-05-31 
 Malacca 1984-01-19 
 Maputo 1982-03-20 
 Praia 1983-05-26 
 Rabat 1980-06-10 
 Rio de Janeiro 1985-04-03 
 Salvador 2007-07-10 
 So Paulo Lei Municipal de So Paulo 14471 de 2007 WikiSource 2007-07-10 
 So Tom 1983-05-26 

===Cooperation agreements===
Lisbon has cooperation agreements with the following cities: 

 City Country Date 
 gua Grande 1993-12-31 
 Algiers 1988-09-26 
 Bethlehem 1995-11-02 
 Buenos Aires 1992-10-20 
 Curitiba 2005-01-28 
 Kiev 2000-10-26 
 Miami 1987-10-30 
 Montevideo 1993-01-11 
 Moscow 1997-02-17 
 Panaji 1989-10-13 
 Paris 1998-04-03 
 Beijing 2010-10-22 
 Qingdao 2010-06-17 
 Santa Catarina 1997-03-27 
 Sofia 2001-03-15 
 Toronto 1984-03-30 
 Tunis 1993-09-03 
 Zagreb 1977-07-15 

==See also==

* List of people from Lisbon
* List of tallest buildings in Lisbon
* History of Lisbon

==References==

==External links==

*
* Visit Portugal: Lisbon Past and Present  Official page by the Government of Portugal
* Associao de Turismo de Lisboa  Official site of the Lisbon Tourism Association
* OTLIS  Official site of the Lisbon Region Transport Operators Consortium
* Portal das Naes Official site of Parque das Naes in Lisbon
* Lisbon voted European City of the Year 2012  Award  Portuguese American Journal
* Complete Holidays Destination Guide  All information about Lisbon and its surroundings 
* Lisbon Traveller - Plan your holidays in Lisbon with a local flavour to it

 



[[Local Group]]

A member of the Local Group of galaxies, irregular galaxy Sextans A is 4.3 million light-years distant. The bright Milky Way foreground stars appear yellowish in this view. Beyond them lie the stars of Sextans A with young blue star clusters clearly visible.
Distribution of the iron content (in logarithmic scale) in four dwarf neighbouring galaxies of the Milky Way.
The Local Group is the group of galaxies that includes the Milky Way, among others. It comprises more than 54 galaxies, including numerous dwarf galaxies. Its gravitational center is located somewhere between Milky Way and the Andromeda Galaxy. The Local Group covers a diameter of 10 Mly (see 1 E+23 m for distance comparisons) and has a binary (dumbbell) distribution. The group is estimated to have a total mass of 1.290.14 M and has a velocity dispersion of 618 km/s. 
The group itself is part of the Virgo Supercluster (i.e. the Local Supercluster). 

The two most massive members of the group are Milky Way and Andromeda Galaxy. These two spiral galaxies each have a system of satellite galaxies. 
* Milky Way's satellite system consists of Sagittarius Dwarf Galaxy, Large Magellanic Cloud, Small Magellanic Cloud, Canis Major Dwarf, Ursa Minor Dwarf, Draco Dwarf, Carina Dwarf, Sextans Dwarf, Sculptor Dwarf, Fornax Dwarf, Leo I, Leo II, and Ursa Major I Dwarf and Ursa Major II Dwarf.
* Andromeda's satellite system consists of M32, M110, NGC 147, NGC 185, And I, And II, And III, And IV, And V, Pegasus dSph (aka And VI), Cassiopeia Dwarf (aka And VII), And VIII, And IX, And X, And XI, And XII, And XIII, And XIV, And XV, And XVI, And XVII, And XVIII, And XIX, And XX, And XXI, And XXII, And XXIII, And XXIV, And XXV, And XXVI, And XXVII, And XXVIII, and And XXIX.
* The Triangulum Galaxy, the third largest and only unbarred spiral galaxy in the Local Group, may or may not be a companion to the Andromeda Galaxy. Pisces Dwarf is equidistant from the Andromeda Galaxy and the Triangulum Galaxy, so it may be a satellite of either. 
* The membership of NGC 3109, with its companions Sextans A and the Antlia Dwarf, is uncertain due to extreme distances from the center of the Local Group.
* The other members of the group are gravitationally secluded from these large subgroups: IC 10, IC 1613, Phoenix Dwarf, Leo A, Tucana Dwarf, Cetus Dwarf, Pegasus Dwarf Irregular, WolfLundmarkMelotte, Aquarius Dwarf, and Sagittarius Dwarf Irregular.

==History==
The term, "The Local Group" was introduced by Edwin Hubble in Chapter VI of his book The Realm of the Nebulae (Hubble 1936, pp. 124151). There, he described it as "a typical small group of nebulae which is isolated in the general field." He delineated, by decreasing luminosity, its members to be M31, Milky Way, M33, Large Magellanic Cloud, Small Magellanic Cloud, M32, NGC 205, NGC 6822, NGC 185, IC 1613 and NGC 147. He also identified IC 10 as a possible Local Group member. By 2003, the number of known Local Group members has increased from his initial twelve to thirty-six by way of the discovery of almost two dozen low-luminosity galaxies. 

==Component galaxies==
===Map===

Image:Local_Group.svg|frame|center|Local Group (clickable map)

circle 167 27 20 Sextans B
circle 120 36 23 Sextans A
circle 318 239 20 Milky Way
circle 289 197 16 Leo I (dwarf galaxy)
circle 334 201 15 Canes Dwarf
rect 303 185 318 215 Leo II (dwarf galaxy)
circle 357 289 28 NGC 6822
circle 288 323 24 Phoenix Dwarf
circle 248 391 35 Tucana Dwarf
circle 363 416 20 Wolf-Lundmark-Melotte
circle 363 383 17 Cetus Dwarf
circle 369 346 11 IC 1613
rect 381 335 393 357 SagDIG
rect 393 335 406 356 Aquarius Dwarf
circle 417 304 17 Triangulum Galaxy
circle 417 254 15 NGC 185
rect 432 237 447 260 NGC 147
circle 461 229 17 IC 10
poly 440 282 455 260 511 259 493 285 Andromeda Galaxy
poly 450 264 434 265 431 280 442 280 M110
circle 295 110 20 Leo A
circle 84 128 20 NGC 3109
circle 109 149 14 Antlia Dwarf
circle 412 332 12 LGS 3
circle 460 361 21 Pegasus Dwarf
circle 394 272 14 Andromeda II
rect 427 279 438 294 Andromeda III
rect 438 282 450 294 Andromeda I

desc bottom-left

===Galactic bodies===

 Spiral galaxies 
 name type constellation notes 
 Andromeda Galaxy (M31, NGC 224) SA(s)b Andromeda Largest member of the group, recently (2006) discovered to also be a barred spiral. May be less massive than the Milky Way. 
 Milky Way SBbc Sagittarius (centre) Second largest, though possibly most massive galaxy in the group. 
 Triangulum Galaxy (M33, NGC 598) SA(s)cd Triangulum Third largest, only unbarred spiral galaxy and possible satellite of the Andromeda Galaxy. 
 Elliptical galaxies 
 name type constellation notes 
 M32 (NGC 221) E2 Andromeda satellite of the Andromeda Galaxy 
 Irregular galaxies 
 name type constellation notes 
 WolfLundmarkMelotte (WLM, DDO 221) Ir+ Cetus 
 IC 10 KBm or Ir+ Cassiopeia 
 Small Magellanic Cloud (SMC, NGC 292) SB(s)m pec Tucana satellite of Milky Way 
 Canis Major Dwarf Irr Canis Major satellite of Milky Way 
 Pisces Dwarf (LGS3) Irr Pisces satellite of the Triangulum Galaxy? 
 IC 1613 (UGC 668) IAB(s)m V Cetus 
 Phoenix Dwarf Irr Phoenix 
 Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC) Irr/SB(s)m Dorado Fourth largest member of the group, satellite of Milky Way 
 Leo A (Leo III) IBm V Leo 
 Sextans B (UGC 5373) Ir+IV-V Sextans 
 NGC 3109 Ir+IV-V Hydra 
 Sextans A (UGCA 205) Ir+V Sextans 
 Dwarf elliptical galaxies 
 name type constellation notes 
 M110 (NGC 205) dE6p Andromeda satellite of the Andromeda Galaxy 
 NGC 147 (DDO 3) dE5 pec Cassiopeia satellite of the Andromeda Galaxy 
 SagDIG (Sagittarius Dwarf Irregular Galaxy) IB(s)m V Sagittarius Most remote from barycenter member thought to be in the Local Group. 
 NGC 6822 (Barnard's Galaxy) IB(s)m IV-V Sagittarius 
 Pegasus Dwarf (Pegasus Dwarf Irregular, DDO 216) Irr Pegasus 
 Dwarf spheroidal galaxies 
 name type constellation notes 
 Botes I dSph Botes 
 Cetus Dwarf dSph/E4 Cetus 
 Canes Venatici I Dwarf and Canes Venatici II Dwarf dSph Canes Venatici 
 Andromeda III dE2 Andromeda satellite of the Andromeda Galaxy 
 NGC 185 dE3 pec Cassiopeia satellite of the Andromeda Galaxy 
 Andromeda I dE3 pec Andromeda satellite of the Andromeda Galaxy 
 Sculptor Dwarf (E351-G30) dE3 Sculptor satellite of Milky Way 
 Andromeda V dSph Andromeda satellite of the Andromeda Galaxy 
 Andromeda II dE0 Andromeda satellite of the Andromeda Galaxy 
 Fornax Dwarf (E356-G04) dSph/E2 Fornax satellite of Milky Way 
 Carina Dwarf (E206-G220) dE3 Carina satellite of Milky Way 
 Antlia Dwarf dE3 Antlia 
 Leo I (DDO 74) dE3 Leo satellite of Milky Way 
 Sextans Dwarf dE3 Sextans satellite of Milky Way 
 Leo II (Leo B) dE0 pec Leo satellite of Milky Way 
 Ursa Minor Dwarf dE4 Ursa Minor satellite of Milky Way 
 Draco Dwarf (DDO 208) dE0 pec Draco satellite of Milky Way 
 SagDEG (Sagittarius Dwarf Elliptical Galaxy) dSph/E7 Sagittarius satellite of Milky Way 
 Tucana Dwarf dE5 Tucana 
 Cassiopeia Dwarf (Andromeda VII) dSph Cassiopeia satellite of the Andromeda Galaxy 
 Pegasus Dwarf Spheroidal Galaxy (Andromeda VI) dSph Pegasus satellite of the Andromeda Galaxy 
 Ursa Major I Dwarf and Ursa Major II Dwarf dSph Ursa Major satellite of Milky Way 
 Identification Unclear 
 name type constellation notes 
 Virgo Stellar Stream dSph (remnant)? Virgo In the process of merging with the Milky Way 
 Willman 1 dwarf Spherical galaxy or Globular cluster? Ursa Major 147,000 light-years away 
 Andromeda IV Irr? Andromeda probably not a galaxy 
 UGCA 86 (0355+66) Irr, dE or S0 Camelopardalis 
 UGCA 92 (EGB0427+63) Irr or S0 Camelopardalis 
 Probable non-members 
 name type constellation notes 
 GR 8 (DDO 155) Im V Virgo 
 IC 5152 IAB(s)m IV Indus 
 NGC 55 SB(s)m Sculptor 
 Aquarius Dwarf (DDO 210) Im V Aquarius 
 NGC 404 E0 or SA(s)0- Andromeda 
 NGC 1569 Irp+ III-IV Camelopardalis 
 NGC 1560 (IC 2062) Sd Camelopardalis 
 Camelopardalis A Irr Camelopardalis 
 Argo Dwarf Irr Carina 
 ESO 347-8 (231842) Irr Grus 
 UKS 2323-326 Irr Sculptor 
 UGC 9128 (DDO 187) Irp+ Botes 
 Sextans C 
 objects in local group no longer recognised as galaxies 
 name type constellation notes 
 Palomar 12 (Capricornus Dwarf) Capricornus a globular cluster formerly classified as a dwarf spheroidal galaxy 
 Palomar 4 (originally designated Ursa Major Dwarf) Ursa Major a globular cluster formerly classified as a dwarf spheroidal galaxy 

==Other notable objects==
* Smith's Cloud, a high-velocity cloud, between 32,000 and 49,000 light years from Earth, and 8000 light years from the disk of the Milky Way Galaxy 
* HVC 127-41-330, a high-velocity cloud, 2.3 million light-years from Earth
* Monoceros Ring, a ring of stars around the Milky Way which is proposed to consist of a stellar stream torn from the Canis Major Dwarf Galaxy

==Diagram==

==See also==
* Galaxy group
* Galaxy cluster
* List of nearest galaxies
* List of galaxy clusters
* IC 342/Maffei Group, the group of galaxies nearest to the Local Group.
* Local Supercluster
* List of Andromeda's satellite galaxies
* List of Milky Way's satellite galaxies

==References==

==External links==

* The Local Group of Galaxies, SEDS Messier pages
* A Survey of the Resolved Stellar Content of Nearby Galaxies Currently Forming Stars, Lowell Observatory
* 

 



[[Litre]]

The litre (International spelling as used by the International Bureau of Weights and Measures) or liter (American spelling) (SI symbols l or L ) is a non-SI metric system unit of volume equal to 1 cubic decimetre (dm3), 1,000 cubic centimetres (cm3) or 1/1,000 cubic metre. A cubic decimetre (or litre) occupies a volume of 10&times;10&times;10 centimetres (see figure) and is thus equal to one-thousandth of a cubic metre.

The original French metric system used the litre as a base unit. The word litre is derived from an older French unit, the litron, whose name came from Greek via Latin, and which equalled approximately 0.831 litres. The litre was also used in several subsequent versions of the metric system and is accepted for use with the SI, Bureau International des Poids et Mesures, 2006, p. 124. ("Days" and "hours" are examples of other non-SI units that SI accepts.)
 
although not an official SI unitthe SI unit of volume is the cubic metre (m3). The spelling of the word used by the International Bureau of Weights and Measures is "litre" and this is also the usual one in most English-speaking countries, but in American English the standard spelling is "liter". The Metric Conversion Act of 1985 gives the United States Secretary of Commerce the responsibility of interpreting or modifying the SI for use in the United States. The Secretary of Commerce delegated this authority to the Director of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) (Turner, 2008). In 2008, the NIST published the U.S. version (Taylor and Thompson, 2008a) of the English text of the eighth edition of the Bureau International des Poids et Mesures (BIPM) publication Le Systme International d Units (SI) (BIPM, 2006). In the NIST publication, the spellings "meter", "liter" and "deka" are used rather than "metre", "litre" and "deca" as in the original BIPM English text (Taylor and Thompson, 2008a, p. iii). The Director of the NIST officially recognized this publication, together with Taylor and Thompson (2008b), as the "legal interpretation" of the SI for the United States (Turner, 2008). 

The first name of the litre was Cadil; standards are shown at the Muse des Arts et Mtiers in Paris. 

One litre of liquid water has a mass of almost exactly one kilogram, due to the gram being defined in 1795 as one cubic centimetre of water at the temperature of melting ice. Subsequent redefinitions of the metre and kilogram mean that this relationship is no longer exact by definition. 

==Definition==
Makrge (1-litre beer mugs) during the 2006 Oktoberfest in Germany
A litre is defined as a special name for a cubic decimetre or 10 centimetres  10 centimetres  10 centimetres, (1 L  1 dm3  1000 cm3). Hence 1 L  0.001 m3  1000 cm3, and 1 m3 (i.e. a cubic metre, which is the SI unit for volume) is exactly 1000 L.

From 1901 to 1964, the litre was defined as the volume of one kilogram of pure water at maximum density and standard pressure. The kilogram was in turn specified as the mass of a platinum/iridium cylinder held at Svres in France and was intended to be of the same mass as the 1 litre of water referred to above. It was subsequently discovered that the cylinder was around 28 parts per million too large and thus, during this time, a litre was about 1.000028 dm3. Additionally, the mass-volume relationship of water (as with any fluid) depends on temperature, pressure, purity, and isotopic uniformity. In 1964, the definition relating the litre to mass was abandoned in favour of the current one. Although the litre is not an official SI unit, it is accepted by the CGPM (the standards body that defines the SI) for use with the SI. CGPM defines the litre and its acceptable symbols.

A litre is equal in volume to the millistere, an obsolete non-SI metric unit customarily used for dry measure.

==Explanation==
Litres are most commonly used for items (such as fluids and solids that can be poured) which are measured by the capacity or size of their container, whereas cubic metres (and derived units) are most commonly used for items measured either by their dimensions or their displacements. The litre is often also used in some calculated measurements, such as density (kg/L), allowing an easy comparison with the density of water.

One litre of water has a mass of almost exactly one kilogram when measured at its maximal density, which occurs at about 4 C. Similarly: 1 millilitre of water has a mass of about 1 g; 1,000 litres of water has a mass of about 1,000 kg (1 tonne). This relationship holds because the gram was originally defined as the mass of 1 mL of water; however, this definition was abandoned in 1799 because the density of water changes with temperature and, very slightly, with pressure.

It is now known that density also depends on the isotopic ratios of the oxygen and hydrogen atoms in a particular water sample. Modern measurements of Vienna Standard Mean Ocean Water, which is pure distilled water with an isotopic composition representative of the average of the worlds oceans, show it has a density of  kg/L at its point of maximum density (3.984 C) under one standard atmosphere (760 torr, 101.325 kPa) of pressure. Isotopic composition and temperature per London South Bank Universitys List of physicochemical data concerning water, density and uncertainty per NIST Standard Reference Database Number 69 (Retrieved: 2010-04-05) 

==SI prefixes applied to the litre==
The litre, though not an official SI unit, may be used with SI prefixes. The most commonly used derived unit is the millilitre, defined as one-thousandth of a litre, and also often referred to by the SI derived unit name "cubic centimetre". It is a commonly used measure, especially in medicine and cooking. Other units may be found in the table below, where the more often used terms are in bold. However, some authorities advise against some of them; for example, in the United States, NIST advocates using the millilitre or litre instead of the centilitre. Kenneth Butcher, Linda Crown, & Elizabeth J. Gentry (2006), The International System of Units (SI)  Conversion Factors for General Use, NIST Special Publication 1038 

 Multiple Name Symbols Equivalent volume Submultiple Name Symbols Equivalent volume 
 100 L litre l () L dm3 cubic decimetre 
 101 L decalitre dal daL 101 dm3 ten cubic decimetres 101 L decilitre dl dL 102 cm3 hundred cubic centimetres 
 102 L hectolitre hl hL 102 dm3 hundred cubic decimetres 102 L centilitre cl cL 101 cm3 ten cubic centimetres 
 103 L kilolitre kl kL m3 cubic metre 103 L millilitre ml mL cm3 cubic centimetre 
 106 L megalitre Ml ML dam3 cubic decametre 106 L microlitre l L mm3 cubic millimetre 
 109 L gigalitre Gl GL hm3 cubic hectometre 109 L nanolitre nl nL 106 m3 million cubic micrometres 
 1012 L teralitre Tl TL km3 cubic kilometre 1012 L picolitre pl pL 103 m3 thousand cubic micrometres 
 1015 L petalitre Pl PL 103 km3 thousand cubic kilometres 1015 L femtolitre fl fL m3 cubic micrometre 
 1018 L exalitre El EL 106 km3 million cubic kilometres 1018 L attolitre al aL 106 nm3 million cubic nanometres 
 1021 L zettalitre Zl ZL Mm3 cubic megametre 1021 L zeptolitre zl zL 103 nm3 thousand cubic nanometres 
 1024 L yottalitre Yl YL 103 Mm3 thousand cubic megametres 1024 L yoctolitre yl yL nm3 cubic nanometre 

==Non-metric conversions==

 MetricUnit Approximate Value Non-Metric Unit System Non-Metric Unit Metric Equivalency 
 1 L  0.87987699 quart Imperial 1 quart  1.1365225 L 
 1 L  1.056688 fluid quarts U.S. 1 fluid quart  0.946352946 L 
 1 L  1.75975326 pints Imperial 1 pint  0.56826125 L 
 1 L  2.11337641 fluid pints U.S. 1 fluid pint  0.473176473 L 
 1 L  0.21997 gallon Imperial 1 gallon  4.54609 L 
 1 L  0.2641720523 liquid gallon U.S. 1 liquid gallon  3.785411784 L 
 1 L  0.0353146667 cubic foot 1 cubic foot  28.316846592 L 
 1 L  61.0237441 cubic inches 1 cubic inch  0.016387064 L 
 1 L  35.1950 fluid ounces Imperial 1 fluid ounce  28.4130625 mL 
 1 L  33.8140 customary fluid ounces U.S. 1 customary fluid ounce  29.5735295625 mL 
 See also Imperial units and US customary units 

===Rough conversions===

One litre is slightly more than one U.S. liquid quart and slightly less than one imperial quart or one U.S. dry quart. A mnemonic for its volume relative to the imperial pint is "a litre of water is a pint and three quarters".

A litre is the volume of a cube with sides of 10 cm, which is slightly less than a cube of sides 4 inches (or one-third of a foot). One cubic foot would contain exactly 27 such cubes (four inches on each side), making one cubic foot approximately equal to 27 litres. One cubic foot has an exact volume of 28.316846592 litres, which is within 5% of the 27-litre approximation.

A litre of water has a mass almost exactly equal to one kilogram of water. An early definition of the kilogram was set as the mass of one litre of water. Because volume changes with temperature and pressure, and pressure uses units of mass, the definition of a kilogram was changed. At standard pressure, one litre of water has a mass of 0.999975 kg at 4 C, and 0.997 kg at 25 C. 

==Symbol==
Originally, the only symbol for the litre was l (lowercase letter L), following the SI convention that only those unit symbols that abbreviate the name of a person start with a capital letter. In many English-speaking countries, however, the most common shape of a handwritten Arabic digit 1 is just a vertical stroke; that is, it lacks the upstroke added in many other cultures. Therefore, the digit '1' may easily be confused with the letter 'l'. Further, on some typewriters, particularly older ones, the unshifted L key had to be used to type the numeral 1. Even in some computer typefaces, the two characters are barely distinguishable. This caused some concern, especially in the medical community.

As a result, L (uppercase letter L) was adopted as an alternative symbol for litre in 1979. The United States National Institute of Standards and Technology now recommends the use of the uppercase letter L, Non-SI units accepted for use with the SI by the CIPM  NIST a practice that is also widely followed in Canada and Australia. In these countries, the symbol L is also used with prefixes, as in mL and L, instead of the traditional ml and l used in Europe. In the UK and Ireland as well as the rest of Europe, lowercase l is used with prefixes, though whole litres are often written in full (so, "750 ml" on a wine bottle, but often "1 litre" on a juice carton). In 1990, the CIPM stated that it was still too early to choose a single 
symbol for the litre.

Prior to 1979, the symbol (script small l, U+2113), came into common use in some countries; for example, it was recommended by South African Bureau of Standards publication M33 and Canada in the 1970s. This symbol can still be encountered occasionally in some English-speaking countries, and its use is ubiquitous in Japan and South Korea. Fonts covering the CJK characters usually include not only the script small but also four precomposed characters: , , , and  (U+3395 to U+3398) for the microlitre, millilitre, decilitre, and kilolitre. Such usage in printed works is in conflict with the recommendations published by the BIPM on the advice of the major international standards organisations (including ISO, NIST, NPL, IAU, IUPAC and IUPAP) who state in the SI Brochure that unit symbols should be "printed in roman (upright) type regardless of the type used in the surrounding text". 

==History==
The litre was introduced in France in 1795 as one of the new "republican units of measurement" and defined as one cubic decimetre. 
 English translation: "Litre: unit of capacity for both liquids and solids which will be equivalent to a cube of sides one tenth of a metre."
 
One litre of liquid water has a mass of almost exactly one kilogram, due to the gram being defined in 1795 as one cubic centimetre of water at the temperature of melting ice. 
 English translation: "Gramme: the absolute weight of a volume of pure water equal to the cube of the hundredth part of the meter, at the temperature of melting ice."
 
The original decimetre length was 44.344 lignes, which was revised in 1798 to 44.3296 lignes. This made the original litre of today's dm3. It was against this litre that the kilogram was constructed.

In 1879, the CIPM adopted the definition of the litre, with the symbol l (lowercase letter L).

In 1901, at the 3rd CGPM conference, the litre was redefined as the space occupied by 1 kg of pure water at the temperature of its maximum density (3.98 C) under a pressure of 1 atm. This made the litre equal to about (earlier reference works usually put it at ).

In 1964, at the 12th CGPM conference, the original definition was reverted to, and thus the litre was once again defined in exact relation to the metre, as another name for the cubic decimetre, that is, exactly 1 dm3. 

In 1979, at the 16th CGPM conference, the alternative symbol L (uppercase letter L) was adopted. It also expressed a preference that in the future only one of these two symbols should be retained, but in 1990 said it was still too early to do so. 

==Colloquial and practical usage==

In spoken English, the symbol "mL" (for millilitre) is often pronounced as "mil", homophonous with the colloquial term "mil". A mil also can be interpreted as
# short for "millimetre", a unit of length equal to one-thousandth of a metre
# a unit of length (used in the United States) equal to a thousandth of an inch, or
# the Scandinavian mile, a unit of length equal to 10 kilometre with differing historic definitions
# a unit of angular measurement used in artillery and equal to 1/6400 of a complete revolution. 
 

Generally, these various meanings do not create confusion because the context is usually sufficientone being a volume, the others linear or angular measurement.

The abbreviation cc (for cubic centimetre, equal to a millilitre or mL) is a unit of the cgs system, that preceded the MKS system, that later evolved into the SI system. The abbreviation cc is still commonly used in many fields including medical dosage and sizing for small combustion engine displacement, such as those used in motorcycles.

In European countries where the metric system was established well before the adoption of the SI standard, there is still carry-over of usage from the precursor cgs and MKS systems. In the SI system, use of prefixes for powers of 1,000 is preferred and all other multiples discouraged. However, in countries where these other multiples were already established, their use remains common. In particular, use of the centi (102), deci (101), deca (10+1), and hecto (10+2) prefixes are still common. For example, in many European countries, the hectolitre is the typical unit for production and export volumes of beverages (milk, beer, soft drinks, wine, etc.) and for measuring the size of the catch and quotas for fishing boats; decilitres are common in Switzerland and Scandinavia and sometimes found in cookbooks; centilitres indicate the capacity of drinking glasses and of small bottles. In colloquial Dutch in Belgium, a 'vijfentwintiger' and a 'driendertiger' (literally 'twenty-fiver' and 'thirty-threer') are the common beer glasses, the corresponding bottles mention 25&thinsp;cL or 33&thinsp;cL. Bottles may also be 75&thinsp;cL or half size at 37.5&thinsp;cL for 'artisanal' brews or 70&thinsp;cL for wines or spirits. Cans come in 25&thinsp;cL, 33&thinsp;cL and 50&thinsp;cL aka 0.5&thinsp;L. Family size bottles as for soft drinks or drinking water use the litre (0.5&thinsp;L, 1&thinsp;L, 1.5&thinsp;L, 2&thinsp;L) as well as beer barrels (50&thinsp;L or the half-sized 25&thinsp;L). This unit is most common for all other household size containers of liquids from thermocans to buckets to bath tubs; as well as for fuel tanks and consumption for heating or by vehicles.

In countries where the metric system was adopted as the official measuring system after the SI standard was established, common usage more closely follow contemporary SI conventions. For example, in Canada, where the metric system is now in widespread use, consumer beverages are labelled almost exclusively using litres and millilitres. Hectolitres sometimes appear in industry, but centilitres and decilitres are rarely, if ever, used. Larger volumes are usually given in cubic metres (equivalent to 1 kL), or thousands or millions of cubic metres. The situation is similar in Australia, although kilolitres, megalitres, and gigalitres are commonly used for measuring water consumption, reservoir capacities and river flows.

For larger volumes of fluids, such as annual consumption of tap water, lorry (truck) tanks, or swimming pools, the cubic metre is the general unit. It is also generally for all volumes of a non-liquid nature.

Fluid flow rates may be measured in litres per unit time interval (second, minute, hour, etc.).

==Usages to indicate capacity==

Fields where the litre and millilitre are used as a measurement for non-liquid volumes, where the capacity of the container is indicated, include:
* Solid items that can be poured and are measured by their containers (such as, in many places, berries)
* Car boot/trunk size 
* Rucksacks & Climbing packs 
* Computer cases 
* Microwave ovens 
* Refrigerators 
*Bins 
*Engine displacement 

==See also==

* Acre-foot
* Claude mile Jean-Baptiste Litre
* Cubic centimetre
* Cubic metre

* Gallon
* Kilogram
* Pint

== Notes and references ==

==Bibliography==
* 
* Bureau International des Poids et Mesures. (2006). "The International System of Units (SI)" (on-line browser):
**Table 6 (Non-SI units accepted for use with the International System). Retrieved 2008-08-24
* 
* National Institute of Standards and Technology. (December 2003). The NIST Reference on Constants, Units, and Uncertainty: International System of Units (SI) (web site):
** Note on SI units. Retrieved 2008-08-24.
** Recommending uppercase letter L. Retrieved 2008-08-24.
* Taylor, B.N. and Thompson, A. (Eds.). (2008a). The International System of Units (SI). United States version of the English text of the eighth edition (2006) of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures publication Le Systme International d Units (SI) (Special Publication 330). Gaithersburg, MD: National Institute of Standards and Technology. Retrieved 2008-08-18.
* Taylor, B.N. and Thompson, A. (2008b). Guide for the Use of the International System of Units (Special Publication 811). Gaithersburg, MD: National Institute of Standards and Technology. Retrieved 2008-08-23.
* Turner, J. (Deputy Director of the National Institute of Standards and Technology). (16 May 2008)."Interpretation of the International System of Units (the Metric System of Measurement) for the United States". Federal Register Vol. 73, No. 96, p. 28432-3.
* UK National Physical Laboratory. Internationally recognised non SI units



[[Linguist (disambiguation)]]

A linguist may be 
* a specialist in linguistics
* a language professional such as a translator, interpreter or teacher; see Language interpretation.

Linguist may also refer to:
* The Linguist (magazine), bimonthly magazine of the Chartered Institute of Linguists
* Polyglot (person) or linguist, a person skilled in multiple languages

==See also==
* Linguist List, online linguistics resource
* Language education
* Language
* Translation
* Interpreting



[[Lavr Kornilov]]

Lavr Georgiyevich Kornilov (, ; 18 August 1870  13 April 1918) was a military intelligence officer, explorer, and general in the Imperial Russian Army during World War I and the ensuing Russian Civil War. He is today best remembered for the Kornilov Affair, an unsuccessful endeavor in August/September 1917 that purported to strengthen Alexander Kerensky's Provisional Government, but which led to Kerensky eventually having Kornilov arrested and charged with attempting a coup d'tat, and ultimately undermined the rule of Kerensky; strengthening the claims and power of the soviets, and the Bolshevik party. 

==Pre-revolutionary career==
One story relates how Kornilov was originally born as a Don Cossack Kalmyk named Lorya Dildinov and adopted in Ust-Kamenogorsk, Russian Turkestan (now Kazakhstan) by the family of his mother's brother, the Russian Cossack Chory George Kornilov, whose wife was of Kazakh origin. 
A. L. Bauman. Governors of Saint-Petersburg. Saint-Petersburg, 2003. p. 409  . .  -. . 409
 But his sister wrote that he had not been adopted, had not been a Don Cossack, and that their mother had Polish and Altai Oirot descent. (Though their language was not a Kalmyk/Mongolian one, but because of their Asian race and their history in the Jungar Oirot (Kalmyk) state, Altai Oirots were called Altai Kalmyks by Russians. They were not Moslems or Kazakhs.) But Boris Shaposhnikov, who served with Petr Kornilov, the brother of Lavr, in 1903, mentioned the "Kyrgyz" ancestry of their mother - this name was usually used in reference to Kazakhs in 1903. Shaposhnikov. Memoirs. 1982. p. 92 ( . . . ., 1982, . 92). Kornilov's Siberian Cossack father was a friend of Potanin (1835-1920), a prominent figure in the Siberian autonomy movement. 

Kornilov entered military school in Omsk in 1885 and went on to study at the Mikhailovsky Artillery School in St. Petersburg in 1889. In August 1892 he was assigned as a lieutenant to the Turkestan Military District, where he led several exploration missions in Eastern Turkestan, Afghanistan and Persia, learned several Central Asian languages, and wrote detailed reports about his observations.

Kornilov returned to St. Petersburg to attend the Mykolayiv General Staff Academy and graduated as a captain in 1897. Again refusing a posting at St. Peterburg, he returned to the Turkestan Military District, where he resumed his duties as a military-intelligence officer.

During the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-1905 Kornilov became the Chief of staff of the 1st Infantry Brigade, and was heavily involved in the Battle of Sandepu (January 1905) and the Battle of Mukden (February/March 1905). He was awarded the Order of St. George (4th class) for bravery and promoted to the rank of colonel.

Following the end of the war, Kornilov served as military attache in China from 1907 to 1911. He studied the Chinese language, traveled extensively (researching data on the history, traditions and customs of the Chinese, which he intended to use as material for a book about life in contemporary China), and regularly sent detailed reports to the General Staff and Foreign Ministry. Kornilov paid much attention to the prospects of cooperation between Russia and China in the Far East and met with the future president of China, Chiang Kai-shek. In 1910 Kornilov was recalled from Beijing, but remained in St. Petersburg for only five months before departing for western Mongolia and Kashgar to examine the military situation along China's border with Russia. On 2 February 1911 he became Commander of the 8th Infantry Regiment of Estonia, and was later appointed commander of the 9th Siberian Rifle Division, stationed in Vladivostok.

In 1914, at the start of World War I, Kornilov was appointed commander of the 48th Infantry Division, which saw combat in Galicia and the Carpathians. In 1915, he was promoted to the rank of major general. During heavy fighting, he was captured by the Austrians in April 1915, when his division became isolated from the rest of the Russian forces. After his capture, Field Marshal Conrad, the commander of the Austro-Hungarian Army, made a point of meeting him in person. As a major general, he was a high-value prisoner of war, but in July 1916 Kornilov managed to escape back to Russia and return to duty.

Kornilov was critical of the Russian monarchy and, after the overthrow of Czar Nicholas II he was given command of the Petrograd Military District in March 1917. In July, after commanding the only successful front in the disastrous Russian offensive of June, 1917, he became Supreme Commander-in-Chief of the Provisional Government's armed forces.

==Kornilov Affair==

In the mass discontent following the July Days, the Russian populace grew highly sceptical of the Provisional Government's abilities to alleviate the economic distress and social resentment among the lower classes. Pavel Miluikov, the Kadet leader, describes the situation in Russia in late July as, "Chaos in the army, chaos in foreign policy, chaos in industry and chaos in the nationalist questions". 
Kornilov, appointed commander-in-chief of the Russian army in July 1917, considered the Petrograd Soviet responsible for the breakdown in the military in recent times, and believed that the Provisional Government lacked the power and confidence to dissolve the Petrograd Soviet. Following several ambiguous correspondences between Kornilov and Alexander Kerensky, Kornilov commanded an assault on the Petrograd Soviet. 

Because the Petrograd Soviet was able to quickly gather a powerful army of workers and soldiers in defence of the Revolution, Kornilov's coup was an abysmal failure and he was placed under arrest. The Kornilov Affair resulted in significantly increased distrust among Russians towards the Provisional Government. 

==Russian Civil War==
After the alleged coup collapsed as his troops disintegrated, Kornilov and his fellow conspirators were placed under arrest in the Bikhov jail. On 19 November, a few weeks after the proclamation of soviet power in Petrograd, they escaped from their confinement (eased by the fact that the jail was guarded by Kornilov's supporters) and made their way to the Don region, which was controlled by the Don Cossacks. Here they linked up with General Mikhail Alekseev. Kornilov became the military commander of the anti-Bolshevik Volunteer Army with Alekseev as the political chief. Evan Mawdsley (2008) The Russian Civil War: 27 

Even before the Red Army was formed, Lavr Kornilov promised, "the greater the terror, the greater our victories." He vowed that the goals of his forces must be fulfilled even if it was needed "to set fire to half the country and shed the blood of three-quarters of all Russians." In the Don region village of Lezhanka alone, bands of Kornilov's officers killed more than 500 people. 

On 24 February 1918, as Rostov and the Don Cossack capital of Novocherkassk fell to the Bolsheviks, Kornilov led the Volunteer Army on the epic 'Ice March' into the empty steppe towards the Kuban. Although badly outnumbered, he escaped destruction from pursuing Bolshevik forces and laid siege to Ekaterinodar, the capital of the Kuban Soviet Republic, on 10 April. However, in the early morning of 13 April, a Soviet shell landed on his farmhouse headquarters and killed him. He was buried in a nearby village.

A few days later, when the Bolsheviks gained control of the village, they unearthed Kornilov's coffin, dragged his corpse to the main square and burnt his remains on the local rubbish dump. Evan Mawdsley (2008) The Russian Civil War: 29 

The Kornilov Division, one of the crack units of the White Army, was named after him, as well as many other autonomous White Army formations, such as the Kuban Cossack Kornilov Horse Regiment. The Kornilov Division became recognizable for its Totenkopf insignia, which appears on the division's flags, pennants, and soldiers' sleeve patches.

==Honours and awards==
* Order of St. Stanislaus, third degree (1901), 2nd degree (1904 and 1906 with swords)
* Order of St. Anne, 3rd degree (1903) and 2nd degree (6 December 1909)
* Order of St. George, 4th degree (9 August 1905) and 3rd degree (28 April 1915)
* Gold Sword for Bravery (9 May 1907)
* Badge of the 1st Kuban (Ice) campaign (1918)

==References==

==Bibliography==
* Asher, Harvey. "The Kornilov Affair: A Reinterpretation." Russian Review (1970) 29#3 pp: 286-300. in JSTOR
* Katkov, George. Russia 1917, the Kornilov Affair: Kerensky and the Break-up of the Russian Army (Longman, 1980)
*Mawdsley, Evan. The Russian Civil War (2008)
* White, James D. "The Kornilov affaira study in counterrevolution," EuropeAsia Studies (1968) 20#2 pp 187205.

===Historiography===
*Moncure, James A. ed. Research Guide to European Historical Biography: 1450-Present (4 vol 1992) 3:1082-90
* Yang, Ho-Hwan. "Different Ways of Interpreting the Kornilov Affair: A Review of George Katkov's The Kornilov Affair: Kerensky and the Break-up of the Russian Army, London and New York: Longman, 1980" The SNU Journal of Educarion Research (1993) pp 1728. online

==External links==

* 



[[L. L. Zamenhof]]

Ludwik Lazarus Zamenhof (15 December 1859  14 April 1917) was the creator of Esperanto, the world's most successful constructed language, and a physician by profession. He grew up fascinated by the idea of a world without war, and believed that this could happen with the help of a new international language which he first developed in 1873 while still in school. 

==Biography==
Zamenhof, around 1879

Zamenhof was born on 15 December (3 December OS) 1859 in the town of Biaystok in the Russian Partition (north-eastern Poland) in the age of national insurrections. His parents were of Lithuanian Jewish descent, and his wife was born in Kaunas, in one of the biggest Jewish centres of the time. He appears to have been natively bilingual in Yiddish and Russian, In a letter to a Th. Thorsteinsson dated 8 March 1901 he wrote, Mia gepatra lingvo estas la rusa; sed nun mi parolas pli pole... "My native language is Russian, but now I speak more Polish..." See also his biographers A. Zakrzewski and E. Wiesenfeld. presumably the Belorussian "dialect" of his home town, though it may have been only his father who spoke Russian with him at home. From his father, a teacher of German and French, he learned those languages and Hebrew as well. He also spoke Polish, one of the major languages of Bialystok alongside Yiddish, (Belo)russian, and German, and it was Polish that was to become the native language of his children. In school he studied the classical languages: Latin, Greek, Hebrew, and Aramaic. He later learned some English, though in his own words not very well, had an interest in Lithuanian and Italian, and learned Volapk when it came out in 1880, though by that point his international language project was already well developed. Christer Kiselman, "Esperanto: Its origins and early history", in Andrzej Pelczar, ed., 2008, Prace Komisji Spraw Europejskich PAU, vol. II, pp. 3956, Krakaw. 

In addition to the Yiddish-speaking Jewish majority, the population of Biaystok was made up of Poles and Belarusians, with smaller groups of Russians, Germans, Lipka Tatars and others. Zamenhof was saddened and frustrated by the many quarrels among these groups. He supposed that the main reason for the hate and prejudice lay in the mutual misunderstanding caused by the lack of one common language. If such a language existed, Zamenhof postulated, it could play the role of a neutral communication tool between people of different ethnic and linguistic backgrounds.

As a student at secondary school in Warsaw, Zamenhof made attempts to create some kind of international language with a grammar that was very rich, but also very complex. When he later studied English, he decided that the international language must have a simpler grammar. Apart from his parents' native languages Russian and Yiddish and his adopted language Polish, his linguistics attempts were also aided by his mastering of German, a good passive understanding of Latin, Hebrew and French, and a basic knowledge of Greek, English and Italian. Holzhaus, Adolf: Doktoro kaj lingvo Esperanto. Helsinki : Fondumo Esperanto. 1969 
Families Zamenhof and at the first Esperanto Congress, Boulogne 1905

By 1878, his project Lingwe uniwersala was almost finished. However, Zamenhof was too young then to publish his work. Soon after graduation from school he began to study medicine, first in Moscow, and later in Warsaw. In 1885, Zamenhof graduated from a university and began his practice as a doctor in Veisiejai and after 1886 as an ophthalmologist in Pock and Vienna. While healing people there he continued to work on his project of an international language.

For two years he tried to raise funds to publish a booklet describing the language until he received the financial help from his future wife's father. In 1887, the book titled  .     (International language: Foreword and complete textbook) was published in Russian Keith Brown and Sarah Ogilvie, Concise Encyclopedia of Languages of the World (Elsevier, 2009: ISBN 0-08-087774-5), p. 375. under the pseudonym "Doktoro Esperanto" (Doctor Hopeful). Zamenhof initially called his language "Lingvo internacia" (international language), but those who learned it began to call it Esperanto after his pseudonym, and this soon became the official name for the language. For Zamenhof this language, far from being merely a communication tool, was a way of promoting the peaceful coexistence of different people and cultures. 

===Work on Yiddish language and Jewish issues===
Zamenhof, relief by Ivan Minekov, Bulgaria

In 1879, Zamenhof wrote the first grammar of the Yiddish language, which he published in part years later in the Yiddish magazine Lebn un visnshaft. Vilnius, 1909; see Esperanto translation as Pri jida gramatiko kaj reformo en la jida in Hebreo el la geto: De cionismo al hilelismo, Eldonejo Ludovikito, vol. 5, 1976 The complete original Russian text of this manuscript with parallel Esperanto translation was only published in 1982 (translated by Adolf Holzhaus in L. Zamenhof, provo de gramatiko de novjuda lingvo, Helsinki, p. 9-36). In this work, not only does he provide a review of Yiddish grammar, but also proposes its transition to the Latin script and other orthographic innovations. In the same period, Zamenhof wrote some other works in Yiddish, including perhaps the first survey of Yiddish poetics (see p. 50 in the above-cited book).

In 1882, a wave of pogroms in the Russian empire motivated Zamenhof to take part in the early Zionist movement, the Hibbat Zion. He left the movement in 1887, and in 1901 published a statement in Russian with the title Hillelism, in which he argued that the Zionist project could not solve the problems of the Jewish people. 

In 1914, he politely declined an invitation to join a new organization of Jewish Esperantists, the TEHA. In his letter to the organizers, he said: "I am profoundly convinced that every nationalism offers humanity only the greatest unhappiness... It is true that the nationalism of oppressed peoples  as a natural self-defensive reaction  is much more excusable than the nationalism of peoples who oppress; but, if the nationalism of the strong is ignoble, the nationalism of the weak is imprudent; both give birth to and support each other..." Among the many works of Zamenhof, translated into Esperanto is the Hebrew Bible or the Old Testament.

Zamenhof died in Warsaw on 14 April 1917, and is buried in the Okopowa Street Jewish Cemetery.

Zamenhof's grave at Okopowa Street Jewish Cemetery in Warsaw, Poland

===Religious philosophy===

Besides his linguistic work, Zamenhof published a religious philosophy he called Homaranismo (loosely translated as humanitarianism), based on the principles and teachings of Hillel the Elder.

==Family==
Zamenhof and his wife Klara raised three children, a son, Adam, and two daughters, Sofia and Lidia. All three died in the Holocaust. 
, p. 116: "Between world wars, Esperanto fared worse and, sadly, became embroiled in political power moves. Adolf Hitler wrote in Mein Kampf that the spread of Esperanto throughout Europe was a Jewish plot to break down national differences so that Jews could assume positions of authority.... After the Nazis' successful Blitzkrieg of Poland, the Warsaw Gestapo received orders to 'take care' of the Zamenhof family.... Zamenhof's son was shot... his two daughters were put in Treblinka death camp." 

Lidia Zamenhof in particular took a keen interest in Esperanto, and as an adult became a teacher of the language, traveling through Europe and to America to teach classes in it. Through her friendship with Martha Root, Lidia accepted Bah'u'llh and became a member of the Bah' faith. As one of its social principles, the Bah' faith teaches that an auxiliary world language should be selected by the representatives of all the world's nations. Zamenhof's grandson, Louis-Christophe Zaleski-Zamenhof (Adam's son), has lived in France since the 1960s.

==Name discrepancy==
Obverse of medal with Ludovic Lazarus Zamenhof by Gosawski (1959)

Zamenhof was born under the Russian rule and therefore his name was first recorded in the Russian as   Leyzer Zamengov. Birth Certificate N 47: "Leyzer Zamengov, son of Mordkha Fayvelovich Zamengov and Liba Sholemovna Sofer" "Zamenhof" is pronounced in English, in Esperanto. In (Eliezer "Leyzer" Levi Zamenhof), in , in , in (Lyudvik Lazar' "Leizer" Markovich Zamengov).

Zamenhof's parents gave him the Hebrew name Eliezer, which appeared on his birth certificate in its Yiddish form Leyzer. In his adolescence he used both Leyzer and the Russian equivalent Lazar (the form Lazarus is often used in English texts). In some Russian documents Lazar was followed by the patronymic Markovich.

While at university, Zamenhof began using the Russian name Lyudovik (often transcribed Ludovic; in English the form Ludwig is also used) in place of Lazar. When his brother Leon became a doctor and started signing his name "Dr L. Zamenhof", Ludwik reclaimed his birth name Lazar and from 1901 signed his name "Dr L. L. Zamenhof". The two L's do not seem to have specifically represented either name, and the order Ludwik Lazar is a modern convention.

Zamenhof may have chosen the name Ludwik in honor of Francis Lodwick (or Lodowyck), who in 1652 had published an early conlang proposal. 

His family name was originally written Samenhof, in German orthography; the spelling Zamenhof reflects the romanization of the Yiddish spelling , as well as the Esperanto and Polish spellings.

==Honours and namesakes==
L. L. Zamenhof Statue in Prilep, Republic of Macedonia
In 1910, Zamenhof was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize, by four British Members of Parliament (including James O'Grady, Philip Snowden) and Professor Stanley Lane Poole. Nobel Prize nomnination database (The Prize was instead awarded to the International Peace Bureau.) On the occasion of the 5th Universala Kongreso de Esperanto in Barcelona, Zamenhof was made a Commander of the Order of Isabella the Catholic by King Alfonso XIII of Spain. Olaizola, Borja. "Chatear en Esperanto, vigsimo idioma del mundo ms usado en la red." El Correo. 30/03/2011. 

The minor planet 1462 Zamenhof is named in his honor. It was discovered on 6 February 1938, by Yrj Visl. Also, hundreds of city streets, parks, and bridges worldwide have been named after Zamenhof. See the list of Zamenhof/Esperanto Objects on the Wikipedia in Esperanto In Lithuania, the best-known Zamenhof Street is in Kaunas, where he lived and owned a house for some time. There are others in England, France, Hungary, Poland, the Czech Republic, Spain (mostly in Catalonia), Italy, Israel, Belgium and Brazil. There are Zamenhof Hills in Hungary and Brazil, and a Zamenhof Island in the Danube River. Hommages au Dr Zamenhof,  l'espranto et  ses pionniers. 

Eliezer Zamenhof street in Tel Aviv: the street sign in Hebrew and Esperanto states he is the creator of the international language Esperanto.
Commemorative plaque at 5 Zamenhofa Street in Warsaw where the house in which Zamenhof lived and worked in 1898-1915 stood
In some Israeli cities, street signs identify Esperanto's creator and give his birth and death dates, but refer to him solely by his Jewish name Eliezer (a variant of which, El'azar, is the origin of Lazarus). Zamenhof is honored as a deity by the Japanese religion Oomoto, which encourages the use of Esperanto among its followers. Also, a genus of lichen has been named Zamenhofia rosei in his honour. Zamenhofia rosei: Francis' lichen. Range, habitat, biology. 

His birthday, 15 December, is celebrated annually as Zamenhof Day by users of Esperanto. On 15 December 2009, Esperanto's green-starred flag flew on the Google search web page, in a commemorative Google Doodle to mark Zamenhof's 150th birthday. Google logos 4thQ'09 archive page. Retrieved 2010-04-01. 

The house of the Zamenhof family, dedicated to Ludwik Zamenhof and the Biaystok Esperanto Centre, are sites of the Jewish Heritage Trail in Biaystok, which was opened in June 2008 by volunteers at The University of Biaystok Foundation. Jewish Heritage Trail in Biaystok accessed 25 July 2009. 

==See also==
* Polish people
* 1462 Zamenhof, a minor planet named in Zamenhof's honour
* 1421 Esperanto, another minor planet, similarly named
* Ho, mia kor'
* The Life of Zamenhof
* The Ludwik Zamenhof Centre in Biaystok

==Notes==

==References==

* 
* Le Petit Robert: 'Zamenhof'. Paris; Montral: Dictionnaires Le Robert, 1990. ISBN 2-85036-074-0.
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* Zamenhof, Esperanto's founder (in English) on lernu!, an Esperanto study portal
* Zamenhof: The Life, Works, and Ideas of the Author of Esperanto by Aleksandr Korzhenkov  a 53 pages scholarly text abridged from a 2009 book (in English)
* (in Esperanto)
* ZAMENHOF, LAZARUS LUDWIG by Joseph Jacobs, Isidore Harris. Jewish Encyclopedia, 1906 ed.
* L.L. Zamenhof and the Shadow People by Esther Schor, The New Republic, 30 December 2009



[[Linear map]]

In mathematics, a linear map (also called a linear mapping, linear transformation or, in some contexts, linear function) is a mapping V  W between two modules (including vector spaces) that preserves (in the sense defined below) the operations of addition and scalar multiplication. An important special case is when V W, in which case the map is called a linear operator, or an endomorphism of V. Sometimes the definition of a linear function coincides with that of a linear map, while in analytic geometry it does not.

A linear map always maps linear subspaces to linear subspaces (possibly of a lower dimension); for instance it maps a plane through the origin to a plane, straight line or point.

In the language of abstract algebra, a linear map is a homomorphism of modules. In the language of category theory it is a morphism in the category of modules over a given ring.

== Definition and first consequences ==
Let V and W be vector spaces over the same field K. A function f: V  W is said to be a linear map if for any two vectors x and y in V and any scalar  in K, the following two conditions are satisfied:

 additivity 
 homogeneity of degree 1 

This is equivalent to requiring the same for any linear combination of vectors, i.e. that for any vectors x1, ..., xm  V and scalars a1, ..., am  K, the following equality holds:

: 

Denoting the zero elements of the vector spaces V and W by 0V and 0W respectively, it follows that f(0V) = 0W because letting  = 0 in the equation for homogeneity of degree 1,
:

Occasionally, V and W can be considered to be vector spaces over different fields. It is then necessary to specify which of these ground fields is being used in the definition of "linear". If V and W are considered as spaces over the field K as above, we talk about K-linear maps. For example, the conjugation of complex numbers is an R-linear map C  C, but it is not C-linear.

A linear map from V to K (with K viewed as a vector space over itself) is called a linear functional.

These statements generalize to any left-module R'M over a ring R without modification.

== Examples ==
* The zero map is always linear
* The identity map of any vector space is a linear operator
* Any homothecy centered in the origin of a vector space, where c is a scalar, is a linear operator.
* For real numbers, the map is not linear.
* For real numbers, the map is not linear (but is an affine transformation; is a linear equation, as used in analytic geometry.)
* If A is a real m &times; n matrix, then A defines a linear map from Rn to Rm by sending the column vector x  Rn to the column vector Ax  Rm. Conversely, any linear map between finite-dimensional vector spaces can be represented in this manner; see the following section.
* Differentiation defines a linear map from the space of all differentiable functions to the space of all functions. It also defines a linear operator on the space of all smooth functions.
* The (definite) integral over some interval I is a linear map from the space of all real-valued integrable functions on I to R
* The (indefinite) integral (or antiderivative) with a fixed starting point defines a linear map from the space of all real-valued integrable functions on R to the space of all real-valued functions on R. Without fixed starting point it does not define a mapping at all, as the presence of a constant of integration in the result means it produces an infinite number of outputs for a single input.
* If V and W are finite-dimensional vector spaces over a field F, then functions that send linear maps f : V  W to dimF(W)  dimF(V) matrices in the way described in the sequel are themselves linear maps (indeed linear isomorphisms).
* The expected value of a random variable (which is in fact a function, and as such member of a vector space) is linear, as for random variables X and Y we have E+ Y = E + E and E = aE, but the variance of a random variable is not linear.

== Matrices ==

If V and W are finite-dimensional vector spaces and a basis is defined for each vector space, then every linear map from V to W can be represented by a matrix. This is useful because it allows concrete calculations. Matrices yield examples of linear maps: if A is a real m  n matrix, then 
f(x) = Ax describes a linear map Rn  Rm (see Euclidean space).

Let {v1, ..., vn} be a basis for V. Then every vector v in V is uniquely determined by the coefficients c1, ..., cn in the field R:

: 

If f : V  W is a linear map,

: 

which implies that the function f is entirely determined by the vectors f(v1), ..., f(vn). Now let {w1, ..., wm} be a basis for W. Then we can represent each vector f(vj) as

: 

Thus, the function f is entirely determined by the values of aij. If we put these values into an m  n matrix M, then we can conveniently use it to compute the vector output of f for any vector in V. To get M, every column j of M is a vector whose coordinates are

: 

corresponding to f(vj) as defined above. To define it more clearly, for some column j that corresponds to the mapping f(vj),

: 

where M is the matrix of f. The symbol * denotes that there are other columns which together with column j make up a total of n columns of M. In other words, every column j = 1,...,n has a corresponding mapping f(vj) whose coefficients a1j,...,amj are the elements of column j, and vj is a basis vector of the vector space V. It can be shown that M has full column rank. A single linear map may be represented by many matrices. This is because the values of the elements of a matrix depend on the bases chosen.

== Examples of linear transformation matrices ==
In two-dimensional space R2 linear maps are described by 2  2 real matrices. These are some examples:

* rotation by 90 degrees counterclockwise:
*: 
* rotation by angle  counterclockwise:
*: 
* reflection against the x axis:
*: 
* reflection against the y axis:
*: 
* scaling by 2 in all directions:
*: 
* horizontal shear mapping:
*: 
* squeeze mapping:
*: 
* projection onto the y axis:
*: 

== Forming new linear maps from given ones ==
The composition of linear maps is linear: if f : V  W and g : W  Z are linear, then so is their composition g  f : V  Z. It follows from this that the class of all vector spaces over a given field K, together with K-linear maps as morphisms, forms a category.

The inverse of a linear map, when defined, is again a linear map.

If f1 : V  W and f2 : V  W are linear, then so is their sum f1 + f2 (which is defined by 1=(f1 + f2)(x) = f1(x) + f2(x)).

If f : V  W is linear and a is an element of the ground field K, then the map af, defined by 1=(af)(x) = a(f(x)), is also linear.

Thus the set L(V, W) of linear maps from V to W itself forms a vector space over K, sometimes denoted Hom(V, W). Furthermore, in the case that 1=V = W, this vector space (denoted End(V)) is an associative algebra under composition of maps, since the composition of two linear maps is again a linear map, and the composition of maps is always associative. This case is discussed in more detail below.

Given again the finite-dimensional case, if bases have been chosen, then the composition of linear maps corresponds to the matrix multiplication, the addition of linear maps corresponds to the matrix addition, and the multiplication of linear maps with scalars corresponds to the multiplication of matrices with scalars.

== Endomorphisms and automorphisms ==
A linear transformation f: V  V is an endomorphism of V; the set of all such endomorphisms End(V) together with addition, composition and scalar multiplication as defined above forms an associative algebra with identity element over the field K (and in particular a ring). The multiplicative identity element of this algebra is the identity map id: V  V.

An endomorphism of V that is also an isomorphism is called an automorphism of V. The composition of two automorphisms is again an automorphism, and the set of all automorphisms of V forms a group, the automorphism group of V which is denoted by Aut(V) or GL(V). Since the automorphisms are precisely those endomorphisms which possess inverses under composition, Aut(V) is the group of units in the ring End(V).

If V has finite dimension n, then End(V) is isomorphic to the associative algebra of all n  n matrices with entries in K. The automorphism group of V is isomorphic to the general linear group GL(n, K) of all n  n invertible matrices with entries in K.

== Kernel, image and the ranknullity theorem ==
If f : V  W is linear, we define the kernel and the image or range of f by

: 
: 

ker(f) is a subspace of V and im(f) is a subspace of W. The following dimension formula is known as the ranknullity theorem:

: 

The number dim(im(f)) is also called the rank of f and written as rank(f), or sometimes, (f); the number dim(ker(f)) is called the nullity of f and written as null(f) or (f). If V and W are finite-dimensional, bases have been chosen and f is represented by the matrix A, then the rank and nullity of f are equal to the rank and nullity of the matrix A, respectively.

== Cokernel ==

A subtler invariant of a linear transformation is the cokernel, which is defined as

: 

This is the dual notion to the kernel: just as the kernel is a subspace of the domain, the co-kernel is a quotient space of the target.
Formally, one has the exact sequence

: 

These can be interpreted thus: given a linear equation f(v) = w to solve,

* the kernel is the space of solutions to the homogeneous equation f(v) = 0, and its dimension is the number of degrees of freedom in a solution, if it exists;
* the co-kernel is the space of constraints that must be satisfied if the equation is to have a solution, and its dimension is the number of constraints that must be satisfied for the equation to have a solution.

The dimension of the co-kernel and the dimension of the image (the rank) add up to the dimension of the target space. For finite dimensions, this means that the dimension of the quotient space W/f(V) is the dimension of the target space minus the dimension of the image.

As a simple example, consider the map f: R2  R2, given by f(x, y) = (0, y). Then for an equation f(x, y) = (a, b) to have a solution, we must have a = 0 (one constraint), and in that case the solution space is (x, b) or equivalently stated, (0, b) + (x, 0), (one degree of freedom). The kernel may be expressed as the subspace (x, 0) < V: the value of x is the freedom in a solution  while the cokernel may be expressed via the map W  R, given a vector (a, b), the value of a is the obstruction to there being a solution.

An example illustrating the infinite-dimensional case is afforded by the map f: R  R, with b1 = 0 and b'n + 1 = an for n > 0. Its image consists of all sequences with first element 0, and thus its cokernel consists of the classes of sequences with identical first element. Thus, whereas its kernel has dimension 0 (it maps only the zero sequence to the zero sequence), its co-kernel has dimension 1. Since the domain and the target space are the same, the rank and the dimension of the kernel add up to the same sum as the rank and the dimension of the co-kernel ( ), but in the infinite-dimensional case it cannot be inferred that the kernel and the co-kernel of an endomorphism have the same dimension (0  1). The reverse situation obtains for the map h: R  R, with cn = a'n + 1. Its image is the entire target space, and hence its co-kernel has dimension 0, but since it maps all sequences in which only the first element is non-zero to the zero sequence, its kernel has dimension 1.

=== Index ===
For a linear operator with finite-dimensional kernel and co-kernel, one may define index as:

: 

namely the degrees of freedom minus the number of constraints.

For a transformation between finite-dimensional vector spaces, this is just the difference dim(V)  dim(W), by ranknullity. This gives an indication of how many solutions or how many constraints one has: if mapping from a larger space to a smaller one, the map may be onto, and thus will have degrees of freedom even without constraints. Conversely, if mapping from a smaller space to a larger one, the map cannot be onto, and thus one will have constraints even without degrees of freedom.

The index comes of its own in infinite dimensions: it is how homology is defined, which is a central theory in algebra and algebraic topology; the index of an operator is precisely the Euler characteristic of the 2-term complex 0  V  W  0. In operator theory, the index of Fredholm operators is an object of study, with a major result being the AtiyahSinger index theorem.

== Algebraic classifications of linear transformations ==
No classification of linear maps could hope to be exhaustive. The following incomplete list enumerates some important classifications that do not require any additional structure on the vector space.

Let V and W denote vector spaces over a field, F. Let T: V  W be a linear map.

* T is said to be injective or a monomorphism if any of the following equivalent conditions are true:
** T is one-to-one as a map of sets.
** kerT = {0V}
** T is monic or left-cancellable, which is to say, for any vector space U and any pair of linear maps R: U  V and S: U  V, the equation TR = TS implies R = S.
** T is left-invertible, which is to say there exists a linear map S: W  V such that ST is the identity map on V.

* T is said to be surjective or an epimorphism if any of the following equivalent conditions are true:
** T is onto as a map of sets.
** coker T = {0W}
** T is epic or right-cancellable, which is to say, for any vector space U and any pair of linear maps R: W  U and S: W  U, the equation RT = ST implies R = S.
** T is right-invertible, which is to say there exists a linear map S: W  V such that TS is the identity map on W.

* T is said to be an isomorphism if it is both left- and right-invertible. This is equivalent to T being both one-to-one and onto (a bijection of sets) or also to T being both epic and monic, and so being a bimorphism.

* If T: V  V is an endomorphism, then:
** If, for some positive integer n, the n-th iterate of T, Tn, is identically zero, then T is said to be nilpotent.
** If T2 = T, then T is said to be idempotent
** If T = kI, where k is some scalar, then T is said to be a scaling transformation or scalar multiplication map; see scalar matrix.

== Change of basis ==
Given a linear map whose matrix is A, in the basis B of the space it transforms vectors coordinates as = A. As vectors change with the inverse of B, its inverse transformation is = B.

Substituting this in the first expression
:
hence
:

Therefore the matrix in the new basis is A = B1AB, being B the matrix of the given basis.

Therefore linear maps are said to be 1-co 1-contra -variant objects, or type (1, 1) tensors.

== Continuity ==

A linear transformation between topological vector spaces, for example normed spaces, may be continuous. If its domain and codomain are the same, it will then be a continuous linear operator. A linear operator on a normed linear space is continuous if and only if it is bounded, for example, when the domain is finite-dimensional. An infinite-dimensional domain may have discontinuous linear operators. 

An example of an unbounded, hence discontinuous, linear transformation is differentiation on the space of smooth functions equipped with the supremum norm (a function with small values can have a derivative with large values, while the derivative of 0 is 0). For a specific example, sin(nx)/n converges to 0, but its derivative cos(nx) does not, so differentiation is not continuous at 0 (and by a variation of this argument, it is not continuous anywhere).

== Applications ==
A specific application of linear maps is for geometric transformations, such as those performed in computer graphics, where the translation, rotation and scaling of 2D or 3D objects is performed by the use of a transformation matrix. Linear mappings also are used as a mechanism for describing change: for example in calculus correspond to derivatives; or in relativity, used as a device to keep track of the local transformations of reference frames. 

Another application of these transformations is in compiler optimizations of nested-loop code, and in parallelizing compiler techniques.

== See also ==

* Affine transformation
* Linear equation
* Bounded operator
* Antilinear map
* Semilinear transformation
* Continuous linear operator

== References ==

* 
* 



[[Leyden jar]]

A Leyden jar, or Leiden jar, is a device that "stores" static electricity between two electrodes on the inside and outside of a glass jar. It was the original form of a capacitor (originally known as a "condenser").

It was invented independently by German cleric Ewald Georg von Kleist on 11 October 1745 and by Dutch scientist Pieter van Musschenbroek of Leiden (Leyden) in 17451746. Biography, Pieter (Petrus) van Musschenbroek The invention was named for the city.

The Leyden jar was used to conduct many early experiments in electricity, and its discovery was of fundamental importance in the study of electricity. Previously, researchers had to resort to insulated conductors of large dimensions to store a charge. The Leyden jar provided a much more compact alternative.

A famous use of the Leyden jar was Benjamin Franklin's kite experiment, which gave rise to the phrase "capture lightning in a bottle".

== History ==
Discovery of the Leyden jar in Musschenbroek's lab. The static electricity produced by the rotating glass sphere electrostatic generator was conducted by the chain through the suspended bar to the water in the glass held by assistant Andreas Cuneus. A large charge accumulated in the water and an opposite charge in Cuneus' hand on the glass. When he touched the wire dipping in the water, he received a powerful shock. 
A battery of four water-filled Leyden jars, Museum Boerhaave, Leiden

The Ancient Greeks already knew that pieces of amber could attract lightweight particles after being rubbed. The amber becomes electrified by triboelectric effect, mechanical separation of charge in a dielectric. The Greek word for amber is  ("elektron") and is the origin of the word "electricity".

Around 1650, Otto von Guericke built a crude electrostatic generator: a sulphur ball that rotated on a shaft. When Guericke held his hand against the ball and turned the shaft quickly, a static electric charge built up. This experiment inspired the development of several forms of "friction machines", that greatly helped in the study of electricity.

The idea for the Leyden jar was discovered independently by two parties: German scientist and jurist Ewald Georg von Kleist, and Dutchmen Pieter van Musschenbroek and Andreas Cunaeus. Man or Matter by Ernst Lehrs, Project Gutenberg These scientists developed the Leyden jar while working under a theory of electricity that saw electricity as a fluid, and hoped to develop the jar to "capture" this fluid. Thomas S. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press, 1996) page 17. In 1744 von Kleist lined a glass jar with silver foil, and charged the foil with a friction machine. Kleist was convinced that a substantial electric charge could be collected when he received a significant shock from the device. The effects of this "Kleistian jar" were independently discovered around the same time by Dutch scientists Pieter van Musschenbroek and Cunaeus at the University of Leiden. Van Musschenbroek communicated on it with the French scientific community where it was called the Leyden jar.

Daniel Gralath was the first to combine several jars in parallel into a capacitor "battery" to increase the total possible stored charge. The Leyden Jar Discovered. World Wide School The term "battery" was coined by Benjamin Franklin, Benjamin Franklin et al.; Leonard W. Labaree, ed., The Papers of Benjamin Franklin (New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1961) vol. 3, page 352: 
Letter to Peter Collinson, April 29, 1749. paragraph 18 who likened it to a battery of cannon (cannons grouped in a common place). The term was later used for arrangements of multiple electrochemical cells. By the middle of the 19th century, the Leyden jar had become common enough for writers to assume their readers knew of and understood its basic operation.

Around the turn of the century it began to be widely used in spark-gap transmitters and medical electrotherapy equipment. By the early 20th century, improved dielectrics and the need to reduce their size and undesired inductance and resistance for use in the new technology of radio caused the Leyden jar to evolve into the modern compact form of capacitor.

== Design ==
Leyden jar construction.
A typical design consists of a glass jar with conducting tin foil coating the inner and outer surfaces. The foil coatings stop short of the mouth of the jar, to prevent the charge from arcing between the foils. A metal rod electrode projects through the stopper at the mouth of the jar, electrically connected by some means (usually a hanging chain) to the inner foil, to allow it to be charged. The jar is charged by an electrostatic generator, or other source of electric charge, connected to the inner electrode while the outer foil is grounded. The inner and outer surfaces of the jar store equal but opposite charges. http://electronics.howstuffworks.com/capacitor3.htm 

The original form of the device was just a glass bottle partially filled with water, with a metal wire passing through a cork closing it. The role of the outer plate was provided by the hand of the experimenter. Soon it was found that it was better to coat the exterior of the jar with metal foil (Watson, 1746), leaving the (accidentally) impure water inside acting as a conductor, connected by a chain or wire to an external terminal, a sphere to avoid losses by corona discharge. Later the water inside was replaced with a second metal foil lining. Early experimenters found that the thinner the dielectric, the closer the plates, and the greater the surface, the greater the charge that could be stored at a given voltage.

Further developments in electrostatics revealed that the dielectric material was not essential, but increased the storage capability (capacitance) and prevented arcing between the plates. Two plates separated by a small distance also act as a capacitor, even in vacuum.

Originally, the amount of capacitance was measured in number of 'jars' of a given size, or through the total coated area, assuming reasonably standard thickness and composition of the glass. A typical Leyden jar of one pint size has a capacitance of about 1 nF.

== Storage of the charge ==
"Dissectible" Leyden jar, 1876

It was initially believed that the charge was stored in the water in early Leyden jars. In the 1700s American statesman and scientist Benjamin Franklin performed extensive investigations of both water-filled and foil Leyden jars, which led him to conclude that the charge was stored in the glass, not in the water. A popular experiment, due to Franklin, which seems to demonstrate this involves taking a jar apart after it has been charged and showing that little charge can be found on the metal plates, and therefore it must be in the dielectric. The first documented instance of this demonstration is in a 1749 letter by Franklin. Letter IV: Benjamin Franklin to Peter Collinson, April 29, 1749 (Bigelow vol II p. 237-253) (PDF containing extracts) Franklin designed a "dissectible" Leyden jar (right), which was widely used in demonstrations. The jar is constructed out of a glass cup nested between two fairly snugly fitting metal cups. When the jar is charged with a high voltage and carefully dismantled, it is discovered that all the parts may be freely handled without discharging the jar. If the pieces are re-assembled, a large spark may still be obtained from it.

This demonstration appears to suggest that capacitors store their charge inside their dielectric. This theory was taught throughout the 1800s. However, this phenomenon is a special effect caused by the high voltage on the Leyden jar. In the dissectible Leyden jar, charge is transferred to the surface of the glass cup by corona discharge when the jar is disassembled; this is the source of the residual charge after the jar is reassembled. Handling the cup while disassembled does not provide enough contact to remove all the surface charge. Soda glass is hygroscopic and forms a partially conductive coating on its surface, which holds the charge. Addenbrook (1922) found that in a dissectible jar made of paraffin wax, or glass baked to remove moisture, the charge remained on the metal plates. Zeleny (1944) confirmed these results and observed the corona charge transfer. In capacitors generally, the charge is not stored in the dielectric, but on the inside surfaces of the plates, as can be observed from capacitors that can function with a vacuum between their plates. 

== Residual charge ==
Measuring Leyden jar

If a charged Leyden jar is discharged by shorting the inner and outer coatings and left to sit for a few minutes, the jar will recover some of its previous charge, and a second spark can be obtained from it. Often this can be repeated, and a series of 4 or 5 sparks, decreasing in length can be obtained at intervals. This effect is caused by dielectric absorption. 

== See also ==

* Franklin bells
* Leyden ball

== References ==

== External links ==

* 
* Leyden Jar - Interactive Java Tutorial National High Magnetic Field Laboratory
* Dissectable Leyden Jar Capacitor



[[Large-scale structure of the Cosmos]]

#redirect Observable universe#Large-scale structure 

 



[[Lennon Wall]]

Lennon Wall in August 1981.
Portion of the John Lennon Wall, 1993
2009

The Lennon Wall or John Lennon Wall, is a wall in Prague, Czech Republic. Once a normal wall, since the 1980s it has been filled with John Lennon-inspired graffiti and pieces of lyrics from Beatles songs. 

In 1988, the wall was a source of irritation for the communist regime of Gustv Husk. Young Czechs would write grievances on the wall and in a report of the time this led to a clash between hundreds of students and security police on the nearby Charles Bridge. The movement these students followed was described ironically as "Lennonism" and Czech authorities described these people variously as alcoholics, mentally deranged, sociopathic, and agents of Western capitalism.

The wall continuously undergoes change and the original portrait of Lennon is long lost under layers of new paint. Even when the wall was repainted by some authorities, on the second day it was again full of poems and flowers. Today, the wall represents a symbol of global ideals such as love and peace.

The wall is owned by the Knights of Malta, who allowed the graffiti to continue on the wall, and is located at Velkopevorsk nmst (Grand Priory Square), Mal Strana.

==See also==
* Tsoi Wall  a similar wall near Arbat Street in Moscow
* List of famous walls
* John Lennon Park

==External links==

*Picture in August 2010
* Photography of the wall in 2007
*Image of the wall in 2005
*Article about the Lennon Wall in the Erasmuspc World CityPoem collection
*Book of Lennon Wall



[[Los Angeles]]

Los Angeles (, or , meaning The Angels), officially the City of Los Angeles, often known by its initials L.A., is the most populous city in the U.S. state of California and the second-most populous in the United States, after New York City, with a population at the 2010 United States Census of 3,792,621. It has a land area of 469 sqmi, and is located in Southern California.

The city is the focal point of the larger Los AngelesLong BeachSanta Ana metropolitan statistical area and Greater Los Angeles Area region, which contain 13 million Annual Estimates of the Population of Metropolitan and Micropolitan Statistical Areas (CBSA)  United States Census Bureau and over 18 million people in Combined statistical area respectively as of 2010, making it one of the most populous metropolitan areas in the world and the second-largest in the United States. Los Angeles is also the seat of Los Angeles County, the most populated and one of the most ethnically diverse counties in the United States, while the entire Los Angeles area itself has been recognized as the most diverse of the nation's largest cities. The city's inhabitants are referred to as Angelenos. 

Los Angeles was founded on September 4, 1781, by Spanish governor Felipe de Neve. It became a part of Mexico in 1821 following the Mexican War of Independence. In 1848, at the end of the MexicanAmerican War, Los Angeles and the rest of California were purchased as part of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, thereby becoming part of the United States. Los Angeles was incorporated as a municipality on April 4, 1850, five months before California achieved statehood. 

Nicknamed the City of Angels, Los Angeles is a global city, with strengths in business, international trade, entertainment, culture, media, fashion, science, sports, technology, education, medicine and research and has been ranked sixth in the Global Cities Index and 9th Global Economic Power Index. The city is home to renowned institutions covering a broad range of professional and cultural fields and is one of the most substantial economic engines within the United States. The Los Angeles combined statistical area (CSA) has a gross metropolitan product (GMP) of $831 billion (as of 2008), making it the third-largest in the world, after the Greater Tokyo and New York metropolitan areas. Los Angeles includes Hollywood and leads the world in the creation of television productions, video games, and recorded music; it is also one of the leaders in motion picture production. Additionally, Los Angeles hosted the Summer Olympic Games in 1932 and 1984.

==History==

Los Angeles City Hall, shown here in 1931, was built in 1928 and was the tallest structure in the city until 1964, when height restrictions were removed.
The Los Angeles coastal area was first settled by the Tongva (or Gabrieleos) and Chumash Native American tribes thousands of years ago. A Gabrielino settlement in the area was called iyang (written Yang-na by the Spanish), meaning "poison oak place". 

Juan Rodrguez Cabrillo, a Portuguese-born explorer, claimed the area of southern California for the Spanish Empire in 1542. Gaspar de Portol and Franciscan missionary Juan Cresp, reached the present site of Los Angeles on August 2, 1769. 

In 1771, Franciscan friar Junpero Serra directed the building of the Mission San Gabriel Arcngel, the first mission in the area. On September 4, 1781, a group of forty-four settlers known as "Los Pobladores" founded the pueblo called "El Pueblo de Nuestra Seora la Reina de los ngeles del Ro de Porcincula"; in English it is "The Town of Our Lady the Queen of Angels of the Porcincula River". The Queen of Angels is an honorific of the Virgin Mary. Two-thirds of the settlers were mestizo or mulatto with a mixture of African, indigenous and European ancestry. The settlement remained a small ranch town for decades, but by 1820, the population had increased to about 650 residents. Today, the pueblo is commemorated in the historic district of Los Angeles Pueblo Plaza and Olvera Street, the oldest part of Los Angeles. 

New Spain achieved its independence from the Spanish Empire in 1821, and the pueblo continued as a part of Mexico. During Mexican rule, Governor Po Pico made Los Angeles Alta California's regional capital. Mexican rule ended during the MexicanAmerican War: Americans took control from the Californios after a series of battles, culminating with the signing of the Treaty of Cahuenga on January 13, 1847. 

Railroads arrived with the completion of the Southern Pacific line to Los Angeles in 1876. Oil was discovered in 1892, and by 1923, the discoveries had helped California become the country's largest oil producer, accounting for about one-quarter of the world's petroleum output. 

By 1900, the population had grown to more than 102,000, putting pressure on the city's water supply. The completion of the Los Angeles Aqueduct in 1913, under the supervision of William Mulholland, assured the continued growth of the city. 

In 1910, not only had the city of Los Angeles annexed Hollywood, but there were already at least 10 movie companies operating in the city. By 1921, more than 80 percent of the world's film industry was concentrated in L.A. The money generated by the industry kept the city insulated from much of the economic pain suffered by the rest of the country during the Great Depression. 

By 1930, the population surpassed one million. In 1932, the city hosted the Summer Olympics.
The Los Angeles Coliseum hosted the Olympic Games in 1932 and 1984. 
Following the end of World War II, Los Angeles grew more rapidly than ever, sprawling into the San Fernando Valley. In 1969, Los Angeles became one of the birthplaces of the Internet, as the first ARPANET transmission was sent from the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) to SRI in Menlo Park. 

In 1984, the city hosted the Summer Olympic Games for the second time. Despite being boycotted by 14 Communist countries, the 1984 Olympics became more financially successful than any previous, and the second Olympics to turn a profit until then  the other, according to an analysis of contemporary newspaper reports, being the 1932 Summer Olympics, also held in Los Angeles. 

Racial tensions erupted on April 29, 1992, with the acquittal by a Simi Valley jury of the police officers captured on videotape beating Rodney King, culminating in large-scale riots. In 1994, the 6.7 Northridge earthquake shook the city, causing $12.5 billion in damage and 72 deaths. The century ended with the Rampart scandal, one of the most extensive documented cases of police misconduct in American history. 

In 2002, voters defeated efforts by the San Fernando Valley and Hollywood to secede from the city. 

==Geography==

===Cityscape===

Hollywood, a well-known district of Los Angeles, is often mistaken for an independent city (as West Hollywood is).

The city is divided into over 80 districts and neighborhoods, many of which were incorporated places or communities that were annexed by the city. Greater Los Angeles includes a number of enclaves and nearby communities. Generally, the city is divided into the following areas: Downtown Los Angeles, East Los Angeles and Northeast Los Angeles, South Los Angeles, the Harbor Area, Greater Hollywood, Wilshire, the Westside, and the San Fernando and Crescenta Valleys.

Some well-known communities within Los Angeles include West Adams, Watts, Leimert Park, Baldwin Hills, Venice, the Downtown Financial District, Silver Lake, Hollywood, Koreatown, Westwood and the more affluent areas of Bel Air, Benedict Canyon, Hollywood Hills, Los Feliz, Hancock Park, Pacific Palisades, Century City, and Brentwood.

====Landmarks====

Important landmarks in Los Angeles include Walt Disney Concert Hall, the Cathedral of Our Lady of the Angels, Angels Flight, the Kodak Theatre, the Griffith Observatory, the Getty Center, the Getty Villa, the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum, the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, Grauman's Chinese Theatre, the Hollywood Sign, the Bradbury Building, Hollywood Boulevard, the Capitol Records Building, Los Angeles City Hall, the Hollywood Bowl, the Theme Building, Battleship , the Watts Towers, the Staples Center, Dodger Stadium, La Placita Olvera/Olvera Street and the Children's Hospital Los Angeles Sunset Bridge.

File:Staples Center LA Live.jpg|L.A. Live
File:Grauman's Chinese Theatre, by Carol Highsmith fixed & straightened.jpg|TCL Chinese Theatre
File:Griffith 9136.jpg|Griffith Observatory
File:Capitol Records Building LA.jpg|Capitol Records Building
File:Angels Flight East.jpg|Angels Flight
File:USS_Iowa_(BB-61)_superstructure.jpg Battleship Iowa

===Topography===
The Los Angeles Basin
Los Angeles is irregularly shaped and covers a total area of 502.7 sqmi, comprising 468.7 sqmi of land and 34.0 sqmi of water. The city extends for 44 mi longitudinally and for 29 mi latitudinally. The perimeter of the city is 342 mi.

Los Angeles is both flat and hilly. The highest point in the city is 5074 ft Mount Lukens, located at the northeastern end of the San Fernando Valley. The eastern end of the Santa Monica Mountains stretches from Downtown to the Pacific Ocean and separates the Los Angeles Basin from the San Fernando Valley. Other hilly parts of Los Angeles include the Mt. Washington area north of Downtown, eastern parts such as Boyle Heights, the Crenshaw district around the Baldwin Hills, and the San Pedro district.

The Los Angeles River, which is largely seasonal, is the primary drainage channel. It was straightened and lined in 51 miles of concrete by the Army Corps of Engineers to act as a flood control channel. The river begins in the Canoga Park district of the city, flows east from the San Fernando Valley along the north edge of the Santa Monica Mountains, and turns south through the city center, flowing to its mouth in the Port of Long Beach at the Pacific Ocean. The smaller Ballona Creek flows into the Santa Monica Bay at Playa del Rey.

The Los Angeles area is rich in native plant species due in part to a diversity in habitats, including beaches, wetlands, and mountains. The most prevalent botanical environment is coastal sage scrub, which covers the hillsides in combustible chaparral. Native plants include: California poppy, matilija poppy, toyon, Coast Live Oak, and Giant Wildrye. Many of these native species, such as the Los Angeles sunflower, have become so rare as to be considered endangered. Though it is not native to the area, the official tree of Los Angeles is the Coral Tree (Erythrina caffra) and the official flower of Los Angeles is the Bird of Paradise (Strelitzia reginae). 
Mexican Fan Palms, Canary Island Palms, and California Fan Palms are common in the Los Angeles area, although only the last is native.

===Geology===
Los Angeles is subject to earthquakes due to its location on the Pacific Ring of Fire. The geologic instability has produced numerous faults, which cause approximately 10,000 earthquakes annually in Southern California. One of the major faults is the San Andreas Fault. Located at the boundary between the Pacific Plate and the North American Plate, it is predicted to be the source of Southern California's next big earthquake. Major earthquakes to have hit the Los Angeles area include the 1994 Northridge earthquake, the 1987 Whittier Narrows earthquake, the 1971 San Fernando earthquake near Sylmar, and the 1933 Long Beach earthquake. Nevertheless, all but a few quakes are of low intensity and are not felt. The Los Angeles basin and metropolitan area are also at risk from blind thrust earthquakes. Parts of the city are also vulnerable to tsunamis; harbor areas were damaged by waves from the Valdivia earthquake in 1960. 

===Climate===

MacArthur Park
Los Angeles has a Subtropical-Mediterranean climate (Kppen climate classification Csb on the coast, Csa inland), and receives just enough annual precipitation to avoid either Kppen's BSh or BSk (semi-arid climate) classification. Los Angeles has plenty of sunshine throughout the year, with an average of only 35 days with measurable precipitation annually. 

The average annual temperature in downtown is 66 F: 75 F during the day and 57 F at night. In the coldest month, January, the temperature typically ranges from 59 to during the day and 45 to at night. In the warmest month  August  the temperature typically ranges from 79 to during the day and around 64 F at night.

Temperatures exceed 90 F on a dozen or so days in the year, from one day a month in April, May, June and November to three days a month in July, August, October and to five days in September. Temperatures are subject to substantial daily swings; in inland areas the difference between the average daily low and the average daily high is over 30 Fahrenheit (16 Celsius) degrees. The average annual temperature of the sea is 63 F, from 58 F in January to 68 F in August. Hours of sunshine total more than 3,000 per year, from an average of 7 hours of sunshine per day in December to an average of 12 in July. 

The Los Angeles area is also subject to phenomena typical of a microclimate, causing extreme variations in temperature in close physical proximity to each other. For instance, the average July maximum temperature at the Santa Monica Pier is 75 F whereas it is 95 F in Canoga Park. The city, like much of the southern California coast, is subject to a late spring/early summer weather phenomenon called "June Gloom." This involves overcast or foggy skies in the morning which yield to sun by early afternoon. 

Downtown Los Angeles averages 15.14 in of precipitation annually, which mainly occurs during the winter and spring (November through April), generally in the form of moderate rain showers, but often as heavy rainfall and thunderstorms during winter storms. The coast gets slightly less rainfall, while the mountains get slightly more. However the San Fernando Valley Region of Los Angeles can get between 16 and of rain per year. Years of average rainfall are rare; the usual pattern is bimodal, with a short string of dry years (perhaps 7 ) followed by one or two wet years that make up the average. Snowfall is extremely rare in the city basin, but the mountains within city limits typically receive snowfall every winter. The greatest snowfall recorded in downtown Los Angeles was 2 in in 1932. The highest recorded temperature in downtown Los Angeles is 113 F on September 27, 2010 and the lowest recorded temperature is 24 F on December 22, 1944.

===Environmental issues===
A view of Los Angeles covered in smog

A Gabrielino settlement in the area was called iyang (written Yang-na by the Spanish), which has been translated as "poison oak place". Yang-na has also been translated as "the valley of smoke." According to Gordon J. MacDonald, geophysicist and professor formerly with the University of California, San Diego, quoted in Owing to geography, heavy reliance on automobiles, and the Los Angeles/Long Beach port complex, Los Angeles suffers from air pollution in the form of smog. The Los Angeles Basin and the San Fernando Valley are susceptible to atmospheric inversion, which holds in the exhausts from road vehicles, airplanes, locomotives, shipping, manufacturing, and other sources. 

The smog season lasts from May to October. Unlike other large cities that rely on rain to clear smog, Los Angeles gets only 15 in of rain each year: pollution accumulates over many consecutive days. Issues of air quality in Los Angeles and other major cities led to the passage of early national environmental legislation, including the Clean Air Act. More recently, the state of California has led the nation in working to limit pollution by mandating low-emission vehicles. Smog is expected to continue to drop in the coming years due to aggressive steps to reduce it, which include electric and hybrid cars, improvements in mass transit, and other measures.

The number of Stage 1 smog alerts in Los Angeles has declined from over 100 per year in the 1970s to almost zero in the new millennium. Despite improvement, the 2006 and 2007 annual reports of the American Lung Association ranked the city as the most polluted in the country with short-term particle pollution and year-round particle pollution. In 2008, the city was ranked the second most polluted and again had the highest year-round particulate pollution. The city met its goal of providing 20 percent of the city's power from renewable sources in 2010. 

The American Lung Association's 2013 survey ranks the metro area as having the nation's worst smog, and fourth in both short term and year round pollution amounts. 

==Demographics==

Map of Los Angeles County showing percentage of population self-identified as Mexican in ancestry or national origin by census tracts. Heaviest concentrations are in East L.A, Echo Lake/Silver Lake, South Central, San Fernando and San Pedro/Wilmington.

The 2010 United States Census reported that Los Angeles had a population of 3,792,621. The population density was 7,544.6 people per square mile (2,913.0/km). The Census reported that 3,708,020 people (97.8% of the population) lived in households, 58,186 (1.5%) lived in non-institutionalized group quarters, and 26,415 (0.7%) were institutionalized.

The age distribution was 874,525 people (23.1%) under 18, 434,478 people (11.5%) from 18 to 24, 1,209,367 people (31.9%) from 25 to 44, 877,555 people (23.1%) from 45 to 64, and 396,696 people (10.5%) who were 65 or older. The median age was 34.1 years. For every 100 females there were 99.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 97.6 males. 

There were 1,413,995 housing unitsup from 1,298,350 during 20052009 at an average density of 2,812.8 households per square mile (1,086.0/km), of which 503,863 (38.2%) were owner-occupied, and 814,305 (61.8%) were occupied by renters. The homeowner vacancy rate was 2.1%; the rental vacancy rate was 6.1%. 1,535,444 people (40.5% of the population) lived in owner-occupied housing units and 2,172,576 people (57.3%) lived in rental housing units.

According to the 2010 United States Census, Los Angeles had a median household income of $49,745, with 21.2% of the population living below the federal poverty line. 

===Race and ethnicity===

 Racial composition 2010 1990 1970 1940 
 White 49.8% 52.8% 77.2% 93.5% 
 Non-Hispanic 28.7% 37.3% 61.1% From 15% sample 86.3% 
 Black or African American 9.6% 14.0% 17.9% 4.2% 
 Hispanic or Latino (of any race) 48.5% 39.9% 17.1% 7.1% Hispanic origin based on the White population of Spanish mother tongue. 
 Asian 11.3% 9.8% 3.6% 2.2% 

Los Angeles is home to people from more than 140 countries speaking 224 different identified languages. Ethnic enclaves like Chinatown, Historic Filipinotown, Koreatown, Little Armenia, Little Ethiopia, Tehrangeles, Little Tokyo, and Thai Town provide examples of the polyglot character of Los Angeles.

According to the 2010 Census, the racial makeup of Los Angeles included: 1,888,158 Whites (49.8%), 365,118 African Americans (9.6%), 28,215 Native Americans (0.7%), 426,959 Asians (11.3%), 5,577 Pacific Islanders (0.1%), 902,959 from other races (23.8%), and 175,635 (4.6%) from two or more races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 1,838,822 persons (48.5%).

Non-Hispanic whites were 28.7% of the population in 2010, compared to 86.3% in 1940. Mexicans make up the largest ethnic group of Latinos at 31.9% of Los Angeles' population, followed by Salvadorans (6.0%) and Guatemalans (3.6%). The Latino population is spread throughout the city of Los Angeles and its metropolitan area but it is most heavily concentrated in the East Los Angeles region, which has a long established Mexican American and Central American community.

The largest Asian ethnic groups are Filipinos (3.2%) and Koreans (2.9%), which have their own established ethnic enclavesKoreatown in the Wilshire Center and Historic Filipinotown. Chinese people, which make up 1.8% of Los Angeles' population, reside mostly outside of Los Angeles city limits and rather in the San Gabriel Valley of eastern Los Angeles County, but make a sizable presence in the city, notably in Chinatown. Chinatown and Thaitown are also home to many Thais and Cambodians, which make up 0.3% and 0.1% of Los Angeles' population, respectively. Japanese comprise 0.9% of L.A.'s population, and have an established Little Tokyo in the city's downtown, and another significant community of Japanese Americans is located in the Sawtelle district of West Los Angeles. Vietnamese make up 0.5% of Los Angeles' population. Indians make up 0.9% of the city's population.

The city of Los Angeles and its metropolitan area are home to a large Middle Eastern population, including Armenians and Iranians, partially residing in enclaves like Little Armenia and Tehrangeles.

African Americans have the largest establishment in South Los Angeles, including the industrial neighborhoods of Crenshaw and Watts. Ray, MaryEllen Bell; The City of Watts, California: 1907 to 1926, Los Angeles: Rising Publications, 1985. A definitive early history. In 1970, the Census Bureau reported city's population as 17.9% black, 61.1% non-Hispanic white and 17.1% Hispanic. However, since the 1980s, there has been a large influx of immigration from Mexico and Central America which have outnumbered the blacks in South Los Angeles. South Los Angeles, as well as neighboring communities such as the city of Compton that were home to predominant African American populations are now transforming into Hispanic communities. 

Pacific Islanders make up 0.1% of Los Angeles' population, and are concentrated in southwestern Los Angeles County, namely in Long Beach and Carson, which are home to thousands of Samoan Americans. 

===Religion===
Cathedral of Our Lady of the Angels is the mother cathedral for the Los Angeles archdiocese

The Roman Catholic Archbishop of Los Angeles leads the largest archdiocese in the country. Cardinal Roger Mahony oversaw construction of the Cathedral of Our Lady of the Angels, which opened in September 2002 in downtown Los Angeles. Construction of the cathedral marked a coming of age of the city's Catholic, heavily Latino community. There are numerous Catholic churches and parishes throughout Los Angeles.

With 621,000 Jews in the metropolitan area (490,000 in city proper), the region has the second largest population of Jews in the United States. Many of Los Angeles' Jews now live on the Westside and in the San Fernando Valley, though Boyle Heights and Northwest Los Angeles once had large Jewish populations. Many varieties of Judaism are represented in the area, including Reform, Conservative, Orthodox, and Reconstructionist. The Breed Street Shul in East Los Angeles, built in 1923, was the largest synagogue west of Chicago in its early decades. (It is no longer a sacred space and is being converted to a museum and community center.) The Kabbalah Centre also has a presence in the city. 

Built in 1956, the Los Angeles California Temple of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the second largest Mormon temple in the world
The Los Angeles California Temple, the second largest temple operated by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, is on Santa Monica Boulevard in the Westwood district of Los Angeles. Dedicated in 1956, it was the first Mormon temple built in California and it was the largest in the world when completed. 

The Hollywood region of Los Angeles also has several significant headquarters, churches, and the Celebrity Center of Scientology.

Because of Los Angeles' large multi-ethnic population, a wide variety of faiths are practiced, including Islam, Buddhism, Hinduism, Zoroastrianism, Sikhism, Bah', various Eastern Orthodox Churches, Sufism and others. Immigrants from Asia for example, have formed a number of significant Buddhist congregations making the city home to the greatest variety of Buddhists in the world.

==Economy==

Companies such as US Bancorp, Ernst & Young, Aon, Manulife Financial, City National Bank, Wells Fargo, Bank of America, Deloitte, KPMG and the Union Bank of California have offices in the Downtown Financial District.

The economy of Los Angeles is driven by international trade, entertainment (television, motion pictures, video games, recorded music), aerospace, technology, petroleum, fashion, apparel, and tourism. Los Angeles is also the largest manufacturing center in the western United States. The contiguous ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach together comprise the fifth-busiest port in the world and the most significant port in the Western Hemisphere and is vital to trade within the Pacific Rim. Other significant industries include media production, finance, telecommunications, law, healthcare, and transportation.

The Los AngelesLong BeachSanta Ana metropolitan statistical area (MSA) has a gross metropolitan product (GMP) of $735.7 billion (as of 2010), making it the third largest economic center in the world, after the Greater Tokyo Area and the New York-Newark-Bridgeport CSA. If counted as a country, the surrounding CSA has the 15th largest economy in the world in terms of nominal GDP. Los Angeles has been classified an "Alpha world city" according to a 2012 study by a research group at Loughborough University in England. 

The city is home to six Fortune 500 companies. They are energy company Occidental Petroleum, healthcare provider Health Net, metals distributor Reliance Steel & Aluminum, engineering firm AECOM, real estate group CBRE Group and builder Tutor Perini.

Other companies headquartered in Los Angeles include 20th Century Fox, American Apparel, California Pizza Kitchen, The Capital Group, Capstone Turbine, The Cheesecake Factory, Cathay Bank, City National Bank, The Coffee Bean & Tea Leaf, DeviantArt, Far East National Bank, Farmers Insurance Group, Fox Entertainment Group, Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher, Guess?, Hanmi Bank, Herbalife, J2 Global Communications, The Jim Henson Company, KB Home, Korn/Ferry, Latham & Watkins, Mercury Insurance Group, Oaktree Capital Management, OMelveny & Myers, Pabst Brewing Company, Paul, Hastings, Janofsky & Walker, Premier America, Premiere Radio Networks, Rentech, Sunkist, The TCW Group, Tokyopop, Triton Media Group, United Online, VCA Antech, and Viking Cruises.

The University of Southern California (USC) is the city's largest private sector employer and contributes $4 billion annually to the local economy. 

According to the city's 2010 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the top ten employers in the city as of 2009 were, in descending order, the City of Los Angeles, the County of Los Angeles, University of California, Los Angeles, University of Southern California, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Kaiser Permanente, Fox Entertainment Group, Farmers Insurance Group, TeamOne, and Northrop Grumman. 

==Culture==
The Dolby Theatre; venue for the Academy Awards
Walt Disney Concert Hall

Los Angeles is often billed as the "Creative Capital of the World," due to the fact that one in every six of its residents works in a creative industry. According to the USC Stevens Institute for Innovation, "there are more artists, writers, filmmakers, actors, dancers and musicians living and working in Los Angeles than any other city at any time in the history of civilization." 

Los Angeles is home to Hollywood, globally recognized as the epicenter of the motion picture industry. A testament to its preeminence in film, the city plays host to the annual Academy Awards, the oldest and one of the most prominent award ceremonies in the world. Finally, Los Angeles is home to the USC School of Cinematic Arts, the oldest film school in the United States. 

The performing arts play a major role in Los Angeles' cultural identity. According to the USC Stevens Institute for Innovation, "there are more than 1,100 annual theatrical productions and 21 openings every week." The Los Angeles Music Center is "one of the three largest performing arts centers in the nation," with more than 1.3 million visitors per year. The Walt Disney Concert Hall, centerpiece of the Music Center, is home to the prestigious Los Angeles Philharmonic. Notable organizations such as Center Theatre Group, the Los Angeles Master Chorale, and the Los Angeles Opera are also resident companies of the Music Center. Talent is locally cultivated at premier institutions such as the Colburn School and the USC Thornton School of Music.

===Museums and galleries===

There are 841 museums and art galleries in Los Angeles County. In fact, Los Angeles has more museums per capita than any other city in the world. Some of the notable museums are the Los Angeles County Museum of Art (the largest art museum in the Western United States ), the Getty Center (part of the larger J. Paul Getty Trust, the world's wealthiest art institution ), the Battleship Iowa, and the Museum of Contemporary Art. A significant number of art galleries are located on Gallery Row, and tens of thousands attend the monthly Downtown Art Walk there. 

The Fox Plaza in Century City, headquarters for 20th Century Fox

==Sports==
Dodger Stadium is the home of the Los Angeles Dodgers

The city of Los Angeles is the home of several major league professional sports teams. These Los Angeles teams include the Los Angeles Dodgers of Major League Baseball, the Los Angeles Clippers and Los Angeles Lakers of the National Basketball Association, and the Los Angeles Kings of the National Hockey League.

The Los Angeles metro area include additional major league teams. The Los Angeles Galaxy and Club Deportivo Chivas USA of Major League Soccer are based in Carson.
The Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim of Major League Baseball and the Anaheim Ducks of the National Hockey League are in the Los Angeles media market and are based in Anaheim in Orange County. The Angels began as an expansion franchise team in Los Angeles in 1961 before moving to Anaheim in 1966. The Ducks, who have played in Anaheim since their inception as an expansion team in 1993, were originally owned by Disney. The team adopted its current name in 2006, a year after Disney sold the franchise. 

Other notable sports teams include the Los Angeles Sparks of the Women's National Basketball Association. Los Angeles is also home to the USC Trojans and the UCLA Bruins in the NCAA, both of which are Division I teams in the Pacific-12 Conference.

Los Angeles is the second-largest television market in the United States but has no NFL team. At one time Los Angeles area had two NFL teams, the Rams and the Raiders. Both left the city in 1995, with the Rams moving to St. Louis, and the Raiders heading back to their original home of Oakland. Prior to 1995, the Rams called Memorial Coliseum home (19461979) and the Raiders played their home games at Memorial Coliseum from 1982 to 1994.
Staples Center is a sports arena home to the Los Angeles Lakers, Los Angeles Clippers, and Los Angeles Kings

Since the franchises' departures, the NFL and individual NFL owners have attempted to relocate a team to the city. Following the 1995 NFL season, the Seattle Seahawks planned to play in the Rose Bowl under a new team name and logo for the 1996 season, but the State of Washington filed a lawsuit to prevent the move. 
Despite the failure to build a new stadium for an NFL team, Los Angeles is still expected to return to the league through expansion or relocation. On August 9, 2011, the LA City Council approved plans to build Farmers Field, which may become home to an NFL team in the future. 

Los Angeles has twice played host to the Summer Olympic Games, in 1932 and in 1984. When the tenth Olympic Games were hosted in 1932, the former 10th Street was renamed Olympic Blvd. Super Bowls I and VII were also held in the city as well as multiple FIFA World Cup games in 1994 including the final. Los Angeles will host the Special Olympics World Summer Games in 2015. 

Los Angeles boasts a number of sports venues, including Dodger Stadium, Los Angeles Coliseum, The Forum, the StubHub Center, and the Staples Center. Staples Center also serves as the home arena for the Los Angeles Clippers and Los Angeles Lakers of the NBA, the Los Angeles Sparks of the WNBA, and the Los Angeles Kings of the NHL. It was also home to the Los Angeles Avengers of the original AFL, a team that did not participate in that league's ongoing revival.

==Government==

Los Angeles is a charter city as opposed to a general law city. The elected government consists of the Los Angeles City Council and the Mayor of Los Angeles which operate under a mayor-council government, as well as the city attorney (not to be confused with the district attorney, a county office) and controller. The current mayor is Eric Garcetti. There are 15 city council districts.

The city has many departments and appointed officers, including the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD), the Los Angeles Board of Police Commissioners, the Los Angeles Fire Department (LAFD), the Housing Authority of the City of Los Angeles (HACLA), the Los Angeles Department of Transportation (LADOT), and the Los Angeles Public Library (LAPL).

The Charter of the City of Los Angeles ratified by voters in 1999 created a system of advisory neighborhood councils that would represent the diversity of stakeholders, defined as those who live, work or own property in the neighborhood. The neighborhood councils are relatively autonomous and spontaneous in that they identify their own boundaries, establish their own bylaws, and elect their own officers. There are currently about 90 neighborhood councils.

Residents of Los Angeles elect supervisors for the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th supervisorial districts. They also elect the 45th, 46th, 50th, 51st, 52nd, 54th, 59th, 64th, and 70th district State Assemblymen, the 18th, 27th, 30th, and 35th district State Senators, and the 28th, 29th, 30th, 33rd, 37th, and 44th district U.S. Representatives.

===Crime===

The LAPD on May Day 2006 in front of the new Caltrans District 7 Headquarters
Like most American cities, Los Angeles has been experiencing significant decline in crime since the mid-1990s, and reached a 50-year low in 2009 with 314 homicides. Northeast Edition. This is a rate of 7.85 per 100,000 populationa major decrease from 1993, when the all-time high homicide rate of over 21.1 per 100,000 was reported for the year. This included 15 officer-involved shootings. One shooting led to the death of a SWAT team member, Randal Simmons, the first in LAPD's history. Los Angeles in the year of 2013 totaled 251 murders, a decrease of 16 percent from the previous year. Police speculate that the drop resulted from a number of factors, including young people spending more time online. 

The Los Angeles crime family dominated organized crime in the city during the Prohibition era and reached its peak during the 1940s and 1950s as part of the American Mafia but has gradually declined since then with the rise of various black and Hispanic gangs. 

According to the Los Angeles Police Department, the city is home to 45,000 gang members, organized into 450 gangs. Among them are the Crips and Bloods, which are both African American street gangs that originated in South Los Angeles. Latino street gangs such as the Sureos, a Mexican American street gang, and Mara Salvatrucha, which has mainly members of Salvadoran descent, all originated in Los Angeles. The 18th Street has a predominately Latino membership but is multiethnic. This has led to the city being referred to as the "Gang Capital of America". 

==Education==

===Colleges and universities===
Second branch of the California State Normal School in downtown Los Angeles opened its doors in 1882.
There are three public universities located within the city limits: California State University, Los Angeles (CSULA), California State University, Northridge (CSUN) and University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA).

Private colleges in the city include the American Film Institute Conservatory, Alliant International University, Syracuse University (Los Angeles Campus), American InterContinental University, American Jewish University, The American Musical and Dramatic Academy  Los Angeles campus, Antioch University's Los Angeles campus, Biola University, Charles R. Drew University of Medicine and Science, Fashion Institute of Design & Merchandising's Los Angeles campus (FIDM), Los Angeles Film School, Loyola Marymount University (LMU is also the parent university of Loyola Law School located in Los Angeles), Marymount College, Mount St. Mary's College, National University of California, Occidental College ("Oxy"), Otis College of Art and Design (Otis), Southern California Institute of Architecture (SCI-Arc), Southwestern Law School, and University of Southern California (USC).

The community college system consists of nine campuses governed by the trustees of the Los Angeles Community College District: East Los Angeles College (ELAC), Los Angeles City College (LACC), Los Angeles Harbor College, Los Angeles Mission College, Los Angeles Pierce College, Los Angeles Valley College (LAVC), Los Angeles Southwest College, Los Angeles Trade-Technical College and West Los Angeles College.

===Schools and libraries===
The Los Angeles Central Library located in downtown Los Angeles.

Los Angeles Unified School District serves almost all of the city of Los Angeles, as well as several surrounding communities, with a student population around 800,000. After Proposition 13 was approved in 1978, urban school districts had considerable trouble with funding. LAUSD has become known for its underfunded, overcrowded and poorly maintained campuses, although its 162 Magnet schools help compete with local private schools. Several small sections of Los Angeles are in the Las Virgenes Unified School District. The Los Angeles County Office of Education operates the Los Angeles County High School for the Arts. The Los Angeles Public Library system operates 72 public libraries in the city. Enclaves of unincorporated areas are served by branches of the County of Los Angeles Public Library, many of which are within walking distance to residents.

==Media==

The major daily English-language newspaper in the area is the Los Angeles Times. La Opinin is the city's major daily Spanish-language paper, The Korea Times is the city's major daily Korean language paper, and The Los Angeles Sentinel is the city's major African-American weekly paper, boasting the largest Black readership in the Western United States. Investor's Business Daily is distributed from its L.A. corporate offices, which are headquartered in Playa Del Rey.

Los Angeles Times Headquarters
There are also a number of smaller regional newspapers, alternative weeklies and magazines, including the Los Angeles Register, Daily News (which focuses coverage on the San Fernando Valley), LA Weekly, L.A. Record (which focuses coverage on the music scene in the Greater Los Angeles Area), Los Angeles magazine, Los Angeles Business Journal, Los Angeles Daily Journal (legal industry paper), The Hollywood Reporter and Variety (entertainment industry papers), and Los Angeles Downtown News. In addition to the major papers, numerous local periodicals serve immigrant communities in their native languages, including Armenian, English, Korean, Persian, Russian, Chinese, Japanese, Hebrew, and Arabic. Many cities adjacent to Los Angeles also have their own daily newspapers whose coverage and availability overlaps into certain Los Angeles neighborhoods. Examples include The Daily Breeze (serving the South Bay), and The Long Beach Press-Telegram.

Los Angeles and New York City are the only two media markets to have seven VHF allocations assigned to them. 

The city has major broadcast channels as well as three PBS stations. World TV operates on two channels and the area has several Spanish-language television networks. KTBN 40 is the flagship station of the religious Trinity Broadcasting Network, based out of Santa Ana. A variety of independent television stations also operate in the area.

==Transportation==

===Freeways===

The city and the rest of the Los Angeles metropolitan area are served by an extensive network of freeways and highways. The Texas Transportation Institute, which publishes an annual Urban Mobility Report, ranked Los Angeles road traffic as the most congested in the United States in 2005 as measured by annual delay per traveler. The average traveler in Los Angeles experienced 72 hours of traffic delay per year according to the study. Los Angeles was followed by San Francisco/Oakland, Washington, D.C. and Atlanta, (each with 60 hours of delay). Despite the congestion in the city, the mean travel time for commuters in Los Angeles is shorter than other major cities, including New York City, Philadelphia and Chicago. Los Angeles' mean travel time for work commutes in 2006 was 29.2 minutes, similar to those of San Francisco and Washington, D.C. 

Among the major highways that connect LA to the rest of the nation include Interstate 5, which runs south through San Diego to Tijuana in Mexico and north through Sacramento, Portland, and Seattle to the Canadian border; Interstate 10, the southernmost eastwest, coast-to-coast Interstate Highway in the United States, going to Jacksonville, Florida; and U.S. Route 101, which heads to the California Central Coast, San Francisco, the Redwood Empire, and the Oregon and Washington coasts.

===Transit systems===

Current Los Angeles Metro Rail and Metro Transitway map showing existing lines.

The LA County Metropolitan Transportation Authority and other agencies operate an extensive system of bus lines, as well as subway and light rail lines across Los Angeles County, with a combined monthly ridership (measured in individual boardings) of 38.8 million as of September 2011. The majority of this (30.5 million) is taken up by the city's bus system, the second busiest in the country. The subway and light rail combined average the remaining roughly 8.2 million boardings per month. In 2005, 10.2% of Los Angeles commuters rode some form of public transportation. 

The city's subway system is the ninth busiest in the United States and its light rail system is the country's second busiest. The rail system includes the Red and Purple subway lines, as well as the Gold, Blue, Expo, and Green light rail lines. The Metro Orange and Silver lines are bus rapid transit lines with stops and frequency similar to those of light rail. The city is also central to the commuter rail system Metrolink, which links Los Angeles to all neighboring counties as well as many suburbs.

Besides the rail service provided by Metrolink and the Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority, Los Angeles is served by inter-city passenger trains from Amtrak. The main rail station in the city is Union Station just north of Downtown.

===Airports===
The Theme Building at LAX
The main Los Angeles airport is Los Angeles International Airport , commonly referred to by its airport code, LAX. The sixth busiest commercial airport in the world and the third busiest in the United States, LAX handled over 66 million passengers and close to 2 million tons of cargo in 2013.

Other major nearby commercial airports include:
* LA/Ontario International Airport, owned by the city of Los Angeles; serves the Inland Empire.
* Bob Hope Airport, formerly known as Burbank Airport; serves the San Fernando and San Gabriel Valleys
* Long Beach Airport, serves the Long Beach/Harbor area
* John Wayne Airport of Orange County

One of the world's busiest general-aviation airports is also located in Los Angeles, Van Nuys Airport . 

===Seaports===
A view of the Vincent Thomas Bridge reaching Terminal Island

The Port of Los Angeles is located in San Pedro Bay in the San Pedro neighborhood, approximately 20 mi south of Downtown. Also called Los Angeles Harbor and WORLDPORT LA, the port complex occupies 7500 acre of land and water along 43 mi of waterfront. It adjoins the separate Port of Long Beach.

The sea ports of the Port of Los Angeles and Port of Long Beach together make up the Los Angeles/Long Beach Harbor. Facilities  The Port of Los Angeles site Together, both ports are the fifth busiest container port in the world, with a trade volume of over 14.2 million TEU's in 2008. Singly, the Port of Los Angeles is the busiest container port in the United States and the largest cruise ship center on the West Coast of the United States  The Port of Los Angeles' World Cruise Center served about 800,000 passengers in 2009. About the Port  The Port of Los Angeles site 

There are also smaller, non-industrial harbors along Los Angeles' coastline. The port includes four bridges: the Vincent Thomas Bridge, Henry Ford Bridge, Gerald Desmond Bridge, and Commodore Schuyler F. Heim Bridge. Passenger ferry service from San Pedro to the city of Avalon on Santa Catalina Island is provided by Catalina Express.

==Notable people==

As home to Hollywood and its entertainment industry, numerous singers, actors and other entertainers live in various districts of Los Angeles.

==Twin towns  Sister cities==

A sign near City Hall points to the sister cities of Los Angeles
Los Angeles has 25 sister cities, listed chronologically by year joined:

* Eilat, Israel (1959)
* Nagoya, Japan (1959)
* Salvador, Bahia, Brazil (1962)
* Bordeaux, France (1964) 
* Berlin, Germany (1967) 
* Lusaka, Zambia (1968)
* Mexico City, Mexico (1969)
* Auckland, New Zealand (1971)
* Busan, South Korea (1971)
* Mumbai, India (1972)
* Tehran, Iran (1972)
* Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China (1979)
* Guangzhou, People's Republic of China (1981) 
* Athens, Greece (1984)
* Saint Petersburg, Russia (1984)
* Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada (1986) 
* Giza, Egypt (1989)
* Jakarta, Indonesia (1990)
* Kaunas, Lithuania (1991)
* Makati, Philippines (1992)
* Split, Croatia (1993) 
* San Salvador, El Salvador (2005)
* Beirut, Lebanon (2006)
* Ischia, Campania, Italy (2006)
* Yerevan, Armenia (2007) 

In addition, Los Angeles has the following "friendship cities": 
* London, England, United Kingdom
* d, Poland
* Manchester, England, United Kingdom

* Los Angeles also has an exchange partnership with Tel Aviv, Israel. 

==See also==

* 1992 Los Angeles riots
* East Los Angeles (region)
* Largest cities in the Americas
* Largest cities in Southern California
* List of hotels in Los Angeles
* List of museums in Greater Los Angeles County
* List of museums in Los Angeles, California
* List of people from Los Angeles
* List of tallest buildings in Los Angeles
* Los Angeles in popular culture
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Los Angeles, California

==References==

==Further reading==
;General
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

;Architecture and urban theory
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

;Race relations
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

;LGBT
* 
* 

;Environment
* 
* 

;Art and literature
* 
* 

==External links==

* City of Los Angeles Official Website
* Los Angeles Then and Now  slideshow by Life magazine

 



[[Lepus (constellation)]]

Lepus (, colloquially ) is a constellation lying just south of the celestial equator, immediately south of Orion. Its name is Latin for hare. Although the hare does not represent any particular figure in Greek mythology, Lepus was one of the 48 constellations listed by the 2nd century astronomer Ptolemy, and it remains one of the 88 modern constellations. It is located below the constellation Orion (the hunter), and is sometimes represented as a hare being chased by Orion or, alternatively, by Orion's hunting dogs. "Skys & Telescope: March 2008", Southern Hemisphere Highlights: by Shermend 

This constellation should not be confused with Lupus, the wolf.

== History and mythology ==
Lepus as seen in Urania's Mirror (1825)
Lepus is most often represented as a rabbit being hunted by Orion, whose hunting dogs (Canis Major and Canis Minor) pursue it. The constellation is also associated with some lunar mythology, including the Moon rabbit.

Four stars of this constellation (, , ,  Lep) form a quadrilateral and are known as Arsh al-Jawz', "the Throne of Jawz'" or Kursiyy al-Jawz' al-Mu'akhkhar, "the Hindmost Chair of Jawz'" and al-Nihl, "the Camels Quenching Their Thirst" in Arabic.

== Notable features ==
The constellation Lepus as it can be seen by the naked eye.

===Stars===

There are a fair number of bright stars, both single and double, in Lepus. Alpha Leporis, the brightest star of Lepus, is a white supergiant of magnitude 2.6, 1300 light-years from Earth. Its traditional name, Arneb, means "hare". Beta Leporis, called Nihal, is a yellow giant of magnitude 2.8, 159 light-years from Earth. Gamma Leporis is a double star divisible in binoculars. The primary is a yellow star of magnitude 3.6, 29 light-years from Earth. The secondary is an orange star of magnitude 6.2. Delta Leporis is a yellow giant of magnitude 3.8, 112 light-years from Earth. Epsilon Leporis is an orange giant of magnitude 2.2, 227 light-years from Earth. Kappa Leporis is a double star divisible in medium aperture amateur telescopes, 560 light-years from Earth. The primary is a blue-white star of magnitude 4.4 and the secondary is a star of magnitude 7.4.

There are several variable stars in Lepus. R Leporis is a Mira variable star also called "Hind's Crimson Star" for its striking red color. It varies in magnitude from a minimum of 9.8 to a maximum of 7.3, with a period of 420 days. R Leporis is at a distance of 1500 light-years. The color intensifies as the star brightens. It can be as dim as magnitude 12 and as bright as magnitude 5.5. It was named for John Russell Hind. T Leporis is also a Mira variable observed in detail by ESO's Very Large Telescope Interferometer. Unique Details Of Double Star In Orion Nebula And Star T Leporis Captured By 'Virtual' Telescope. ScienceDaily. Retrieved February 19, 2009, /releases/2009/02/090218103517.htm RX Leporis is a semi-regular red giant that has a period of 2 months. It has a minimum magnitude of 7.4 and a maximum magnitude of 5.0.

===Deep-sky objects===
There is one Messier Object in Lepus, M79. It is a globular cluster of magnitude 8.0, 42,000 light-years from Earth. One of the few globular clusters visible in the Northern Hemisphere winter, it is a Shapley class V cluster, which means that it has an intermediate concentration towards its center. It is often described as having a "starfish" shape. M79 was discovered in 1780 by Pierre Mchain.

==Notes==

== References ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Ian Ridpath and Wil Tirion (2007). Stars and Planets Guide, Collins, London. ISBN 978-0-00-725120-9. Princeton University Press, Princeton. ISBN 978-0-691-13556-4.

== External links ==

The star T Leporis as seen with VLTI. Credit: ESO/J.-B. Le Bouquin et al.
* Hundred metre virtual telescope captures unique detailed colour image  ESO's Organisational Release
* The Deep Photographic Guide to the Constellations: Lepus
* Star Tales  Lepus
* Lepus Constellation at Constellation Guide

 



[[Lupus (constellation)]]

Lupus is a constellation in the southern sky. Its name is Latin for wolf. Lupus was one of the 48 constellations listed by the 2nd century astronomer Ptolemy, and it remains one of the 88 modern constellations. It lies between Centaurus and Scorpius.

==Notable features==
The constellation Lupus as it can be seen by the naked eye.

===Stars===
Lupus has around 30 stars of 2nd and 3rd magnitude and 70 of greater than 6th, including a number of binary or multiple stars. In his catalogue, Patrick Moore gives the names Men for  Lupi, the brightest star in Lupus, and KeKouan for the blue giant  Lupi. They also have the Chinese names and .

Most of the brightest stars in Lupus are massive members of the nearest OB association, Scorpius-Centaurus. 

===Deep-sky objects===
Towards the north of the constellation are globular clusters NGC 5824 and NGC 5986, and close by the dark nebula B 228. To the south are two open clusters, NGC 5822 and NGC 5749, as well as globular cluster NGC 5927 on the eastern border with Norma. On the western border are two spiral galaxies and the Wolf-Rayet planetary nebula IC 4406, containing some of the hottest stars in existence. IC 4406, also called the Retina Nebula, is a cylindrical nebula at a distance of 5,000 light-years. It has dust lanes throughout its center. Another planetary nebula, NGC 5882, is towards the centre of the constellation. The transiting exoplanet Lupus-TR-3b lies in this constellation. The historic supernova SN 1006 is described by various sources as appearing on April 30 to May 1, 1006, in the constellation of Lupus.

ESO 274-1 is a spiral galaxy seen from edge-on that requires an amateur telescope with at least 12 inches of aperture to view. It can be found by using Lambda Lupi and Mu Lupi as markers, and can only be seen under very dark skies. It is 9 arcminutes by 0.7 arcminutes with a small, elliptical nucleus.

==Mythology and history==
In ancient times, the constellation was considered an asterism within Centaurus, and was considered to have been an arbitrary animal, killed, or about to be killed, on behalf of, or for, Centaurus. Mark R. Chartrand III (1983) Skyguide: A Field Guide for Amateur Astronomers, p. 160 (ISBN 0-307-13667-1). An alternative visualization, attested by Eratosthenes, saw this constellation as a wineskin held by Centaurus. Chartrand, p. 172. It was not separated from Centaurus until Hipparchus of Bithynia named it Therion (meaning beast) in the 200s BC. No particular animal was associated with it until the Latin translation of Ptolemy's work identified it with the wolf.

The Greek constellation is probably based on the Babylonian figure known as the Mad Dog (UR.IDIM). This was a strange hybrid creature that combined the head and torso of a man with the legs and tail of a lion (the cuneiform sign 'UR' simply refers to a large carnivore; lions, wolves and dogs are all included). It is often found in association with the sun god and another mythical being called the Bison-man, which is supposedly related to the Greek constellation of Centaurus. Babylonian Star-lore by Gavin White, Solaria Pubs, 2008, page 145 & 59ff 

== Notes ==

== See also ==
* Traditional Chinese star names
* Lupus (Chinese astronomy)

==References==
* 
* Ian Ridpath and Wil Tirion (2007). Stars and Planets Guide, Collins, London. ISBN 978-0-00-725120-9. Princeton University Press, Princeton. ISBN 978-0-691-13556-4.

==External links==

* Star Tales  Lupus
* Lupus Constellation at Constellation Guide

 



[[Lyra]]

Lyra (; Latin for lyre, from Greek ) Lesley Brown: The New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary. Vol. 1: AM. Clarendon Press, Oxford 1993, p. 1651 is a small constellation. It is one of 48 listed by the 2nd century astronomer Ptolemy, and is one of the 88 constellations recognized by the International Astronomical Union. Its principal star, Vega (Abhijit in Sanskrit), a corner of the Summer Triangle, is one of the brightest stars in the sky. Beginning at the north, Lyra is bordered by Draco, Hercules, Vulpecula, and Cygnus. 

Lyra is visible from the northern hemisphere from spring through autumn, and nearly overhead, in temperate latitudes, during the summer months. From the southern hemisphere, it is visible low in the northern sky during the winter months.

==Notable features==
The constellation Lyra as it can be seen by the naked eye.

===Stars===

Lyra's brightest stars include the following: Autostar Suite Astronomer Edition. CD-ROM. Meade, April 2006. 
*  Lyr (Vega). With an apparent brightness of 0.03m, this is the third brightest star of the northern hemisphere (after Arcturus) and the fifth brightest star in all; its spectral class is A0 V and it lies at a distance of only 25.3 ly.
*  Lyr (Sheliak). A group of eclipsing binaries is named after this variable star (3.45m, spectral class B8 II), the Beta-Lyrae-stars.
*  Lyr (Sulafat). The main star of this multiple star system is of magnitude 3.24m and spectral class B9 III.
* 1 Lyr. A double star consisting of a blue-white star of mag. 6m and a semi-regular red giant.
*  Lyr. A well-known quadruple star, also called "the Double Double" because each of the two brighter components is a double star.
*  Lyr. Another double star, which can be split using binoculars.
* RR Lyr lends its name to a class of pulsating variable, RR Lyrae-stars.
* DM Lyr is a dwarf nova, namely a close binary consisting of a white dwarf and a low mass star where the former strips off material from the latter, forming an accretion disc which explodes brightly from time to time.
* Kepler-37 - star with smallest extrasolar planet known so far (February 2013)
* Kepler-62 - star with a five-planet system discovered by Kepler spacecraft in April 2013.

===Deep-sky objects===
Messier 56 is composed of a large number of stars, tightly bound to each other by gravity. In Lyra are the objects M56, M57, and Kuiper 90. M56 is a rather loose globular cluster at a distance of approximately 32,900 light-years, with a diameter of about 85 light years. Its apparent brightness is 8.3m.
M57, also known as the "Ring Nebula" and NGC 6720, has a diameter of one light-year and is at a distance of 2,000 light-years from Earth. It is one of the best known planetary nebulae and the second to be discovered; its integrated magnitude is 8.8. It was discovered in 1779 by Antoine Darquier, 15 years after Charles Messier discovered the Dumbbell Nebula. Astronomers have determined that it is between 6,000 and 8,000 years old; it is approximately one light-year in diameter. The outer part of the nebula appears red in photographs because of emission from ionized hydrogen. The middle region is colored green; doubly-ionized oxygen emits greenish-blue light. The hottest region, closest to the central star, appears blue because of emission from helium. The central star itself is a white dwarf with a temperature of 120,000 Kelvin. In telescopes, the nebula appears as a visible ring with a green tinge; it is slightly elliptical because its three-dimensional shape is a torus or cylinder seen from a slight angle. It can be found halfway between Gamma Lyrae and Beta Lyrae.

Kuiper 90 is also known as 17 Lyrae C (Gliese 747AB), a red dwarf system near 17 Lyrae, but 26 light years from the Sun. Its period is 5 years, and its magnitude is 11.26 in the V band. 

BD +36 3317 , a white star in the young open cluster Stephenson 1, was discovered as a binary eclipsing system by Violat-Bordonau in 2008; its period is 4.30216 days; its other name is VSX J185422.2+365107. 

NGC 6745 is an irregular spiral galaxy in Lyra that is at a distance of 208 million light-years. Several million years ago, it collided with a smaller galaxy, which created a region filled with young, hot, blue stars. Astronomers do not know if the collision was simply a glancing blow or a prelude to a full-on merger, which would end with the two galaxies incorporated into one larger, probably elliptical galaxy. 

===Exoplanets===
An image showing Lyra

Exoplanets including WASP-3b, HAT-P-5b, GJ 758 b and c, HD 178911 Bb, HD 177830 b, TrES-1, and HD 173416 b have been discovered in Lyra. In January 2010 the Kepler Mission announced the discovery of the additional planets Kepler-7b, Kepler-8b, and three planets around Kepler-9 are expected to be the first of many discovered by the mission, which has a significant part of its field of view in Lyra.

In April 2013, it was announced that of the five planets orbiting Kepler-62, at least two -- Kepler-62e and Kepler-62fare within the boundaries of the habitable zone of that star, where scientists think liquid water could exist, and are both candidates for being a solid, rocky, earth-like planet. The exoplanets are 1.6 and 1.4 times the diameter of Earth respectively, with their star Kepler-62 at a distance of 1,200 light-years. 

==History==
In the past, Lyra was often represented on star maps as a vulture or an eagle carrying a lyre, either enclosed in its wings, or in its beak. It was sometimes referred to as Aquila Cadens or Vultur Cadens (falling eagle or falling vulture). This historical association is preserved in the name of its brightest star, Vega, which is derived from an Arabic term meaning "swooping eagle." Ian Ridpath (2002) Stars and Planets, p. 108 0-7894-8988-0. 

==Mythology==
300px
In Greek mythology, Lyra was associated with the myth of Orpheus, the musician who was killed by the Bacchantes. After his death, his lyre was thrown into the river; Zeus sent an eagle to retrieve the lyre, and ordered both of them to be placed in the sky. In Wales, Lyra is known as King Arthur's Harp (Talyn Arthur), and King David's harp . The Persian Hafiz called it the Lyre of Zurah. 
It has been called the Manger of the Infant Saviour, Praesepe Salvatoris .

In Japanese mythology, originating from the Chinese Qixi festival, Vega is sometimes called Tanabata (or Orihime), a celestial princess or goddess. She falls in love with a mortal, Kengyu (or Hikoboshi), represented by the star Altair. But when Tanabatas father finds out, he is enraged and forbids her to see this mere mortal. Thus the two lovers are placed in the sky, where they are separated by the Celestial River, known to us as Milky Way. Yet the sky gods are kind. Each year, on the 7th night of the 7th moon, a bridge of magpies forms across the Celestial River, and the two lovers are reunited. Sometimes Kengyus annual trip across the Celestial River is treacherous, though, and he doesnt make it. In that case, Tanabatas tears form raindrops that fall over Japan.

Many Japanese celebrations of Tanabata are held in July, but sometimes they are held in August. If it rains, the raindrops are thought to be Tanabatas tears because Kengyu could not meet her. Sometimes the meteors of the Perseid shower are said to be Tanabatas tears.
 

==Equivalents in other astronomical systems==

Vega and its surrounding stars are also treated as a constellation in other cultures.

In Australian Aboriginal astronomy, Lyra is known by the Boorong people in Victoria as the Malleefowl constellation. 

Lyra was known as Urcuchillay by the Incas and was worshipped as an animal deity. 

==In History==

* John Adams left a family tradition that Lyra was intended to be the "new constellation" of the thirteen stars in the original flag of the United States. "The Evolution of the Stars and Stripes" in State Service magazine, June 1919, page 61|http://books.google.com/books?id=hw0UAAAAIAAJ&pg=RA4-PA61&lpg=RA4-PA61&dq=lyra+13+star+flag&source=bl&ots=IP5RaZyv9G&sig=yb--iEcHSLKCdHpFxNXl5sGaijk&hl=en&sa=X&ei=OOqGUrbmHcjm2gWSvIGQAw&ved=0CEYQ6AEwCQ#v=onepage&q=lyra%2013%20star%20flag&f=false 

==In popular culture==

* In the book series His Dark Materials by Philip Pullman, Lyra Belacqua is the protagonist of all three books. Science and astronomy feature prominently in this dystopian adventure saga.
* In the poem Aniara by the Nobel laureate Harry Martinson, the space ship Aniara was travelling at high speed towards the stars of Lyra after having been shipwrecked by collisions with asteroids.
* In the film K-PAX, the constellation of Lyra is the location of the planet K-PAX, an inhabited world that orbits twin stars and has seven moons.
* In the film Contact, the message intercepted by Jodi Foster's character is coming from Vega, the brightest star in the Lyra constellation.
* In the T.V. and video game series Mega Man Star Force, Lyra is the alien that accompanies Sonia Sky, who is otherwise known as Sonia Strumm in the game series, but Lyra is sometimes known as Harp, most commonly found in the original Japanese version, Ryuusei no Rockman.
* In the anime Fairy Tail, Lyra is a silver key that belongs to Lucy Heartfilia, a celestial spirit mage. Lyra's ability is to portray emotion through singing.
* In the TV show , there is a background character who fans have named Lyra.
*In the Watty Winner for Fantasy - On The Rise 2012 on Wattpad.com, http://www.wattpad.com/story/1091660 The Lores of Lyra - Rising Star Lyra is the watcher over earth and its inhabitants.

==Namesakes==
USS Lyra (AK-101) was a United States Navy Crater-class cargo ship named after the constellation.

== Citations ==

 



[[Legnica]]

Promenade - ul. Najwitszej Marii Panny
Hotel Qubus
Jewish Cemetery
Goat Pond with the restaurant "Venice"
House "Under the Quail Basket"
Cemetery
Legnica (archaic Polish: Lignica, , , ) is a town in southwestern Poland, in Silesia, in the central part of Lower Silesia, on the plain of Legnica, riverside: Kaczawa (left tributary of the Oder) and the Czarna Woda. Between 1 June 1975 and 31 December 1998 Legnica was the capital of the Legnica Voivodeship. It is currently the seat of the county. Since 1992 the city has been the seat of the Diocese of Legnica.

==Population==
 Legnica has 104,178 inhabitants and is the third largest city in the voivodeship (after Wrocaw and Wabrzych) and 38th in Poland. It also constitutes the southernmost and the largest urban center of Legnicko-Gogowski Okrg Miedziowy with agglomeration of 448,617 inhabitants. Legnica is the largest city of the Legnicko-Gogowski Okrg Miedziowy conurbation. Legnica is a member of the Association of Polish Cities.

== History ==

===Early history===
A settlement of the Lusatian culture people existed in the 8th century B.C. Around the 5th century B.C. the area of Legnica was inhabited by Celtic tribes. Tacitus and Ptolemy recorded the Lugii (Lygii) in the area, and mentioned their town of Lugidunum, which has been attributed to both Legnica Pierre Deschamps. Dictionnaire de gographie ancienne et moderne. Straubling & Mller, 1922. and Gogw. James Cowles Prichard. Researches Into the Physical History of Mankind. Sherwood, Gilbert, and Piper. London, 1841. Slavic Lechitic tribes (most likely the Trzebowianie, Trebouane) moved into the area in the 8th century A.D. and were the first group to settle it permanently.

The city was first officially mentioned in chronicles from 1004, although settlement dates to the 7th century. It is mentioned in 1149 when the High Duke of Poland Bolesaw IV the Curly funded a chapel at the St. Benedict monastery. Legnica was the most likely place of residence for Bolesaw and it became the residence of the High Dukes of Poland in 1163 and was the seat of a principality ruled from 12481675.

===Battle of Legnica===

Legnica became famous for the battle that took place at Legnickie Pole near the city on 9 April 1241 during the Mongol invasion of Europe. The Christian army of the Polish duke Henry II the Pious of Silesia, supported by feudal nobility, which included in addition to Poles, Bavarian miners and military orders and Czech troops, was decisively defeated by the Mongols. Although the Mongols killed Henry and destroyed his forces, their advance into Europe was halted. The Mongols then turned to Hungary via Moravia.

===Duchy of Legnica===

As the capital of the Duchy of Legnica at the beginning of the 14th century, Legnica was one of the most important cities of Central Europe, having a population of approximately 16,000 residents. The city began to expand quickly after the discovery of gold in the Kaczawa River between Legnica and Zotoryja (Goldberg).
Unfortunately, such a growth rate can not be maintained long. Shortly after the city reached its maximum population growth, it was devastated by a huge fire which halted any significant further development for many years.

===Holy Roman Empire===

Legnica, along with other Silesian duchies, became a vassal of the Kingdom of Bohemia during the 14th century and was included within the Holy Roman Empire. The Protestant Reformation was introduced in the duchy as early as 1522 and the population became Lutheran. After the death of King Louis II of Hungary and Bohemia at Mohcs in 1526, Legnica was inherited by the Habsburg Monarchy of Austria. The first map of Silesia was made by native son Martin Helwig.
In 1676, Legnica passed to direct Habsburg rule after the death of the last Silesian Piast duke, Georg Wilhelm (son of Duke Christian of Brieg), despite the earlier inheritance pact by Brandenburg and Silesia, by which it was to go to Brandenburg. Silesian aristocracy was trained at the Liegnitz Ritter-Akademie.

===War of the Austrian Succession===

In 1742 most of Silesia, including Liegnitz, became part of the Kingdom of Prussia after King Frederick the Great's defeat of Austria in the War of the Austrian Succession. In 1760 during the Seven Years' War, Liegnitz was the site of the Battle of Liegnitz when Frederick's army defeated an Austrian army led by Laudon.

===Congress of Vienna===

In 1813 during the Napoleonic Wars, the Prussians, under Field Marshal Blcher, defeated the French forces of MacDonald in the Battle of Katzbach nearby.
After the administrative reorganization of the Prussian state following the Congress of Vienna, Liegnitz and the surrounding territory (Landkreis Liegnitz) were incorporated into the Regierungsbezirk (administrative district) of Liegnitz, within the Province of Silesia on 1 May 1816. Along with the rest of Prussia, the town became part of the German Empire in 1871 during the unification of Germany. On 1 January 1874 Liegnitz became the third city in Lower Silesia (after Breslau and Grlitz) to be raised to an urban district, although the district administrator of the surrounding Landkreis of Liegnitz continued to have his seat in the city. Its military garrison was home to Knigsgrenadier-Regiment Nr. 7 a military unit formed almost exclusively out of Polish soldiers. Sedan 1870
Ryszard Dzieszysk, page 52, Bellona 2009 

===The 20th century===
The census of 1910 gave Liegnitz's population as 95.86% German, 0.15% German and Polish, 1.27% Polish, 2.26% Wendish, and 0.19% Czech. On 1 April 1937 parts of the Landkreis of Liegnitz communities of Alt Beckern, Gro Beckern, Hummel, Liegnitzer Vorwerke, Pfaffendorf und Prinkendorf were incorporated into the city of Liegnitz. After the Treaty of Versailles following World War I, Liegnitz was part of the newly created Province of Lower Silesia from 1919 to 1938, then of the Province of Silesia from 1938 to 1941, and again of the Province of Lower Silesia from 1941 to 1945.

After the defeat of Nazi Germany during World War II, Liegnitz and all of Silesia east of the Neisse was transferred to Poland following the Potsdam Conference in 1945. The German population was expelled from between 1945 and 1947 and replaced with Poles and, as the medieval Polish name Lignica was considered archaic, the town was renamed Legnica. The transfer to Poland decided at Potsdam in 1945 was officially recognized by East Germany in 1950, by West Germany under Chancellor Willy Brandt in the Treaty of Warsaw signed in 1970, and finally by the reunited Germany by the Two Plus Four Agreement in 1990. By 1990 only a handful of Polonized Germans, prewar citizens of Liegnitz, remained of the pre-1945 German population. In 2010 the city celebrated the 65th anniversary of the "return of Legnica to Poland" and its liberation from the Nazis. 65. rocznica wyzwolenia Legnicy - foto relacja 

The city was only partly damaged in World War II. After 1965 most parts of the preserved old town with its town houses were demolished, the historical layout was abolished, and the city was rebuilt in modern form. Dehio - Handbuch der Kunstdenkmler in Polen: Schlesien, Herder-Institut Marburg and Krajowy Osrodek Badan i Dokumentacji Zabytkow Warszawa, Deutscher Kunstverlag 2005, ISBN 3-422-03109-X, page 521 

From 1945 to 1990, during the Cold War, the headquarters of the Soviet forces in Poland, the so-called Northern Group of Forces, was located in the city. This fact had a strong influence on the life of the city. For much of the period, the city was divided into Polish and Soviet areas, with the latter closed to the public. These were first established in July 1945, when the Soviets forcibly ejected newly arrived Polish inhabitants from the parts of the city they wanted for their own use. The ejection was perceived by some as a particularly brutal action, and rumours circulated exaggerating its severity, though no evidence of anyone being killed in the course of it has come to light. In April 1946 city officials estimated that they were 16,700 Poles, 12,800 Germans, and 60,000 Soviets in Legnica. The last Russian units left the city in 1993.

== Economy ==
In the 1950s and 1960s the local copper and nickel industries became a major factor in the economic development of the area. Legnica houses industrial plants belonging to KGHM Polska Mied, one of the largest producers of copper and silver in the world. The company owns a large copper mill on the western outskirts of town. There is a Special Economic Zone in Legnica, where Lenovo was going to open a factory in summer 2008. 

== Education ==
Legnica is a regional academic center with seven universities enrolling approximately 16,000 students.
* State-run colleges and universities
** Witelon University of Applied Sciences (Pastwowa Wysza Szkoa Zawodowa im. Witelona) 
** Wrocaw University of Technology 
** Foreign Language Teacher Training College 
* Other
** Wysza Szkoa Zarzdzania / The Polish Open University 
** Wysza Szkoa Menederska 
** Wysze Seminarium Duchowne 

==International relations==

===Twin towns  sister cities===

As of 2007, Legnica is twinned with five other European towns.

 * Blansko, Czech Republic * Drohobych, Ukraine * Orenburg, Russia * Wuppertal, Germany * Roanne, France 

== Environment ==

Legnica is noted for its parks and gardens, and has seven hundred hectares of green space, mostly along the banks of the Kaczawa; the Tarninow district is particularly attractive. Legnica: Welcome to Legnica 

==Roads==
To the south of Legnica is the A4 motorway. Legnica has also a district, which is a part of national road no 3. The express road S3 building has been planned nearby.

== Public transport ==

In the city there are 20 regular bus lines, 1 belt-line, 2 night lines and 3 suburban.

The town has an airport (airport code EPLE) with a 1600-metre runway, the remains of a former Soviet air base, but it is () in a poor state and not used for commercial flights.

Until the winter of 2003, the longest train service in Poland ran from Katowice to Legnica (via Kdzierzyn-Kole, Nysa, and Jaworzyna lska).

== Sports ==
* Mied Legnica - men's football team (Polish Cup winner 1992; 3rd league in seasons 2003/04 and 2004/05)

==Films produced in Legnica==

In recent years Legnica has been frequently used as a film set for the following films as a result of its well preserved German-built old town, proximity to Germany and low costs:
Przebacz (dir. M. Stacharski) - 2005
Anonyma - Eine Frau in Berlin (dir. M. Frberbck) - 2007
Wilki (dir. F. Fromm) - 2007
Little Moscow (dir. W. Krzystek) - 2008
Moje ycie (dir. D. Zahavi) - 2008

== Politics ==

=== Municipal politics ===
Legnica tends to be a left-of-center town with a considerable influence of workers' unions. The Municipal Council of Legnica (Rada miejska miasta Legnica) is the legislative branch of the local government and is composed of 25 members elected in local elections every five years. The mayor or town president (Prezydent miasta) is the executive branch of the local government and is directly elected in the same municipal elections.

=== Legnica - Jelenia Gra constituency ===
Members of Parliament (Sejm) elected from Legnica-Jelenia Gora constituency:
* Ryszard Bonda, Samoobrona
* Bronisawa Kowalska, SLD-UP
* Adam Lipiski, PiS
* Tadeusz Makaa, PO
* Ryszard Maraszek, SLD-UP
* Olgierd Poninik, SLD-UP
* Wadysaw Rak, SLD-UP
* Tadeusz Samborski, PSL
* Jerzy Szmajdziski, SLD-UP
* Halina Szustak, LPR
* Micha Turkiewicz, SLD-UP
* Ryszard Zbrzyzny, SLD-UP .

== Notable residents ==
*Henry II the Pious (1196/12071241), ruler of several duchies
*Witelo (1230?), philosopher and scientist
*Bolesaw II the Bald (12201278), ruler of several Polish duchies
*Hans Amann Freiherr von Abschatz (16461699), lyricist and translator
*Georg Rudolf Bhmer (17231803), pharmacist and botanist
*Benjamin Bilse (18161902), conductor and composer
*Paul Lbe (18751967), social democratic politician
*Erich von Manstein (18871973) field marshal
*Gnter Reich (19211989), opera singer
*Hugo Rhle (18241888), physician
*Aleksandra Klejnowska, weightlifter

==References==

==External links==

* Map of Silesia with town of Li(e)gnitz in 1600
* Li(e)gnitz on HRE Germany map in 1600
* Jewish Community in Legnica on Virtual Shtetl
* Municipal website 
* Lca.pl 
* City hall 
* Legnica 

 



[[Liverpool F.C.]]

Liverpool Football Club is an English Premier League football club based in Liverpool. Liverpool F.C. is one of the most successful clubs in England and has won more European trophies than any other English team with five European Cups, three UEFA Cups and three UEFA Super Cups. The club has also won eighteen League titles, seven FA Cups and a record eight League Cups.

Liverpool was founded in 1892 and joined the Football League the following year. The club has played at Anfield since its formation. The most successful period in Liverpool's history was the 1970s and '80s when Bill Shankly and Bob Paisley led the club to eleven league titles and seven European trophies.

The club's supporters have been involved in two major tragedies. The first was the Heysel Stadium disaster in 1985, in which charging Liverpool fans caused a wall to collapse, killing 39 Juventus supporters and resulting in English clubs being banned from European competitions for five years. In the 1989 Hillsborough disaster, 96 Liverpool supporters lost their lives in a crush against perimeter fencing.

Liverpool has long-standing rivalries with neighbours Everton and with Manchester United. The team changed from red shirts and white shorts to an all-red home strip in 1964. The club's anthem is "You'll Never Walk Alone".

==History==

alt=Black and white photograph of a man.
Liverpool F.C. was founded following a dispute between the Everton committee and John Houlding, club president and owner of the land at Anfield. After eight years at the stadium, Everton relocated to Goodison Park in 1892 and Houlding founded Liverpool F.C. to play at Anfield. Originally named "Everton F.C. and Athletic Grounds Ltd" (Everton Athletic for short), the club became Liverpool F.C. in March 1892 and gained official recognition three months later, after The Football Association refused to recognise the club as Everton. The team won the Lancashire League in its dbut season, and joined the Football League Second Division at the start of the 189394 season. After finishing in first place the club was promoted to the First Division, which it won in 1901 and again in 1906. 

Liverpool reached its first FA Cup Final in 1914, losing 10 to Burnley It won consecutive League championships in 1922 and 1923, but did not win another trophy until the 194647 season, when the club won the First Division for a fifth time under the control of ex West Ham Utd centre half George Kay. Liverpool suffered its second Cup Final defeat in 1950, playing against Arsenal. The club was relegated to the Second Division in the 195354 season. Soon after Liverpool lost 21 to non-league Worcester City in the 195859 FA Cup, Bill Shankly was appointed manager. Upon his arrival he released 24 players and converted a boot storage room at Anfield into a room where the coaches could discuss strategy; here, Shankly and other "Boot Room" members Joe Fagan, Reuben Bennett, and Bob Paisley began reshaping the team. 

The club was promoted back into the First Division in 1962 and won it in 1964, for the first time in 17 years. In 1965, the club won its first FA Cup. In 1966, the club won the First Division but lost to Borussia Dortmund in the European Cup Winners' Cup final. Liverpool won both the League and the UEFA Cup during the 197273 season, and the FA Cup again a year later. Shankly retired soon afterwards and was replaced by his assistant, Bob Paisley. In 1976, Paisley's second season as manager, the club won another League and UEFA Cup double. The following season, the club retained the League title and won the European Cup for the first time, but it lost in the 1977 FA Cup Final. Liverpool retained the European Cup in 1978 and regained the First Division title in 1979. During Paisley's nine seasons as manager Liverpool won 21 trophies, including three European Cups, a UEFA Cup, six League titles and three consecutive League Cups; the only domestic trophy he did not win was the FA Cup. 

Paisley retired in 1983 and was replaced by his assistant, Joe Fagan. Liverpool won the League, League Cup and European Cup in Fagan's first season, becoming the first English side to win three trophies in a season. Liverpool reached the European Cup final again in 1985, against Juventus at the Heysel Stadium. Before kick-off, Liverpool fans breached a fence which separated the two groups of supporters, and charged the Juventus fans. The resulting weight of people caused a retaining wall to collapse, killing 39 fans, mostly Italians. The incident became known as the Heysel Stadium disaster. The match was played in spite of protests by both managers, and Liverpool lost 10 to Juventus. As a result of the tragedy, English clubs were banned from participating in European competition for five years; Liverpool received a ten-year ban, which was later reduced to six years. Fourteen Liverpool fans received convictions for involuntary manslaughter. 

The Hillsborough memorial, which is engraved with the names of the 96 people who died in the Hillsborough disaster.
Fagan had announced his retirement just before the disaster and Kenny Dalglish was appointed as player-manager. During his tenure, the club won another three League Championships and two FA Cups, including a League and Cup "Double" in the 198586 season. Liverpool's success was overshadowed by the Hillsborough disaster: in an FA Cup semi-final against Nottingham Forest on 15 April 1989, hundreds of Liverpool fans were crushed against perimeter fencing. Ninety-four fans died that day; the 95th victim died in hospital from his injuries four days later and the 96th died nearly four years later, without regaining consciousness. After the Hillsborough disaster there was a government review of stadium safety. The resulting Taylor Report paved the way for legislation that required top-division teams to have all-seater stadiums. The report ruled that the main reason for the disaster was overcrowding due to a failure of police control. 

Liverpool was involved in the closest finish to a league season during the 198889 season. Liverpool finished equal with Arsenal on both points and goal difference, but lost the title on total goals scored when Arsenal scored the final goal in the last minute of the season. 

Dalglish cited the Hillsborough disaster and its repercussions as the reason for his resignation in 1991; he was replaced by former player Graeme Souness. Under his leadership Liverpool won the 1992 FA Cup Final, but their league performances slumped, with two consecutive sixth place finishes, eventually resulting in his dismissal in January 1994. Souness was replaced by Roy Evans, and Liverpool went on to win the 1995 Football League Cup Final. While they made some title challenges under Evans, third place finishes in 1996 and 1998 were the best they could manage, and so Grard Houllier was appointed co-manager in the 199899 season, and became the sole manager in November 1998 after Evans resigned. In 2001, Houllier's second full season in charge, Liverpool won a "Treble": the FA Cup, League Cup and UEFA Cup. Houllier underwent major heart surgery during the 200102 season and Liverpool finished second in the League, behind Arsenal. They won a further League Cup in 2003, but failed to mount a title challenge in the two seasons that followed.

Houllier was replaced by Rafael Bentez at the end of the 200304 season. Despite finishing fifth in Bentez's first season, Liverpool won the 200405 UEFA Champions League, beating A.C. Milan 32 in a penalty shootout after the match ended with a score of 33. The following season, Liverpool finished third in the Premier League and won the 2006 FA Cup Final, beating West Ham United in a penalty shootout after the match finished on 33. American businessmen George Gillett and Tom Hicks became the owners of the club during the 200607 season, in a deal which valued the club and its outstanding debts at 218.9 million. The club reached the 2007 UEFA Champions League Final against Milan, as it had in 2005, but this time Liverpool lost 21. During the 200809 season Liverpool achieved 86 points, its highest Premier League points total, and finished as runners up to Manchester United. 

In the 200910 season, Liverpool finished seventh in the Premier League and failed to qualify for the Champions League. Bentez subsequently left by mutual consent and was replaced by Fulham manager Roy Hodgson. At the start of the 201011 season Liverpool was on the verge of bankruptcy and the club's creditors asked the High Court to allow the sale of the club, overruling the wishes of Hicks and Gillett. John W. Henry, owner of the Boston Red Sox and of New England Sports Ventures, bid successfully for the club and took ownership in October 2010. Poor results during the start of that season led to Hodgson leaving the club by mutual consent and former manager Kenny Dalglish taking over. 
After finishing in 8th position in the 201112 season, the worst league finish in 18 years, Dalglish was sacked. He was replaced by Brendan Rodgers. 

==Colours and badge==

For much of Liverpool's history its home colours have been all red, but when the club was founded its kit was more like the contemporary Everton kit. The blue and white quartered shirts were used until 1894, when the club adopted the city's colour of red. The city's symbol of the liver bird was adopted as the club's badge in 1901, although it was not incorporated into the kit until 1955. Liverpool continued to wear red shirts and white shorts until 1964, when manager Bill Shankly decided to change to an all red strip. Liverpool played in all red for the first time against Anderlecht, as Ian St. John recalled in his autobiography:

:

The Liverpool away strip has more often than not been all yellow or white shirts and black shorts, but there have been several exceptions. An all grey kit was introduced in 1987, which was used until the 199192 centenary season, when it was replaced by a combination of green shirts and white shorts. After various colour combinations in the 1990s, including gold and navy, bright yellow, black and grey, and ecru, the club alternated between yellow and white away kits until the 200809 season, when it re-introduced the grey kit. A third kit is designed for European away matches, though it is also worn in domestic away matches on occasions when the current away kit clashes with a team's home kit. The current kits are designed by Warrior Sports, who became the club's kit providers at the start of the 201213 season. The only other branded shirts worn by the club were made by Umbro until 1985, when they were replaced by Adidas, who produced the kits until 1996 when Reebok took over. They produced the kits for ten years before Adidas made the kits from 2006 to 2012. 

Liverpool was the first English professional club to have a sponsor's logo on its shirts, after agreeing a deal with Hitachi in 1979. Since then the club has been sponsored by Crown Paints, Candy, Carlsberg and Standard Chartered Bank. The contract with Carlsberg, which was signed in 1992, was the longest-lasting agreement in English top-flight football. The association with Carlsberg ended at the start of the 201011 season, when Standard Chartered Bank became the club's sponsor. 

The Liverpool badge is based on the city's liver bird, which in the past had been placed inside a shield. In 1992, to commemorate the centennial of the club, a new badge was commissioned, including a representation of the Shankly Gates. The next year twin flames were added at either side are symbolic of the Hillsborough memorial outside Anfield, where an eternal flame burns in memory of those who died in the Hillsborough disaster. In 2012, Warrior Sports' first Liverpool kit removed the shield and gates, returning the badge to what had adorned Liverpool shirts in the 1970s; the flames were moved to the back collar of the shirt, surrounding the number 96 for number who died at Hillsborough. 

==Stadiums ==

Anfield, home of Liverpool F.C.
Anfield was built in 1884 on land adjacent to Stanley Park. It was originally used by Everton before the club moved to Goodison Park after a dispute over rent with Anfield owner John Houlding. Left with an empty ground, Houlding founded Liverpool in 1892 and the club has played at Anfield ever since. The capacity of the stadium at the time was 20,000, although only 100 spectators attended Liverpool's first match at Anfield. 

In 1906 the banked stand at one end of the ground was formally renamed the Spion Kop after a hill in KwaZulu-Natal. The hill was the site of the Battle of Spion Kop in the Second Boer War, where over 300 men of the Lancashire Regiment died, many of them from Liverpool. At its peak, the stand could hold 28,000 spectators and was one of the largest single-tier stands in the world. Many stadia in England had stands named after Spion Kop, but Anfield's was the largest of them at the time; it could hold more supporters than some entire football grounds. 

Anfield could accommodate more than 60,000 supporters at its peak, and had a capacity of 55,000 until the 1990s. The Taylor Report and Premier League regulations obliged Liverpool to convert Anfield to an all-seater stadium in time for the 199394 season, reducing the capacity to 45,276. The findings of the Taylor Report precipitated the redevelopment of the Kemlyn Road Stand, which was rebuilt in 1992, coinciding with the centenary of the club, and is now known as the Centenary Stand. An extra tier was added to the Anfield Road end in 1998, which further increased the capacity of the ground but gave rise to problems when it was opened. A series of support poles and stanchions were inserted to give extra stability to the top tier of the stand after movement of the tier was reported at the start of the 19992000 season. 

Because of restrictions on expanding the capacity at Anfield, Liverpool announced plans to move to the proposed Stanley Park Stadium in May 2002. Planning permission was granted in July 2004, and in September 2006, Liverpool City Council agreed to grant Liverpool a 999-year lease on the proposed site. Following the takeover of the club by George Gillett and Tom Hicks in February 2007, the proposed stadium was redesigned. The new design was approved by the Council in November 2007. The stadium was scheduled to open in August 2011 and would hold 60,000 spectators, with HKS, Inc. contracted to build the stadium. Construction was halted in August 2008, as Gillett and Hicks had difficulty in financing the 300 million needed for the development. 

==Support==
Kopites in The Kop Stand
Liverpool is one of the best supported clubs in the world. The club states that its worldwide fan base includes more than 200 officially recognised branches of the Association of International Branches (AIB) in at least 30 countries. The club takes advantage of this support through its worldwide summer tours. Liverpool fans often refer to themselves as Kopites, a reference to the fans who once stood, and now sit, on the Kop at Anfield. In 2008 a group of fans decided to form a splinter club, A.F.C. Liverpool, to play matches for fans who had been priced out of watching Premier League football. 

The song "You'll Never Walk Alone", originally from the Rodgers and Hammerstein musical Carousel and later recorded by Liverpool musicians Gerry & The Pacemakers, is the club's anthem and has been sung by the Anfield crowd since the early 1960s. It has since gained popularity among fans of other clubs around the world. The song's title adorns the top of the Shankly Gates, which were unveiled on 2 August 1982 in memory of former manager Bill Shankly. The "You'll Never Walk Alone" portion of the Shankly Gates is also reproduced on the club's crest.

alt=Design of the top of a set of gates, with the sky visible. The inscription on the gates reads "You'll Never Walk Alone".
The club's supporters have been involved in two stadium disasters. The first was the 1985 Heysel Stadium disaster, in which 39 Juventus supporters were killed. They were confined to a corner by Liverpool fans who had charged in their direction; the weight of the cornered fans caused a wall to collapse. UEFA laid the blame for the incident solely on the Liverpool supporters, and banned all English clubs from European competition for five years. Liverpool was banned for an additional year, preventing it from participating in the 199091 European Cup, even though it won the League in 1990. Twenty-seven fans were arrested on suspicion of manslaughter and were extradited to Belgium in 1987 to face trial. In 1989, after a five-month trial in Belgium, 14 Liverpool fans were given three-year sentences for involuntary manslaughter; half of the terms were suspended. 

The second disaster took place during an FA Cup semi-final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield, on 15 April 1989. Ninety-six Liverpool fans died as a consequence of overcrowding at the Leppings Lane end, in what became known as the Hillsborough disaster. In the following days The Sun newspaper published an article entitled "The Truth", in which it claimed that Liverpool fans had robbed the dead and had urinated on and attacked the police. Subsequent investigations proved the allegations false, leading to a boycott of the newspaper by Liverpool fans across the city and elsewhere; many still refuse to buy The Sun more than 20 years later. Many support organisations were set up in the wake of the disaster, such as the Hillsborough Justice Campaign, which represents bereaved families, survivors and supporters in their efforts to secure justice. 

===Rivalries===

The Merseyside derby at Anfield in 2006
Liverpool's longest-established rivalry is with fellow Merseyside team Everton, against whom the club contest the Merseyside derby. Their rivalry stems from Liverpool's formation and the dispute with Everton officials and the then owners of Anfield. Unlike other rivalries, there is no political, geographical or religious split between Liverpool and Everton. The Merseyside derby is usually sold out. It is one of the few local derbies which do not enforce fan segregation, and hence was known as the "friendly derby". Since the mid-1980s, the rivalry has intensified both on and off the field and, since the inception of the Premier League in 1992, the Merseyside derby has had more players sent off than any other Premier League game. It has been referred to as "the most ill-disciplined and explosive fixture in the Premier League". 

Liverpool's rivalry with Manchester United is viewed as a manifestation of the cities' competition during the Industrial Revolution of the 19th century. The rivalry between the clubs intensified during the 1960s, after Manchester United became the first English team to win the European Cup in 1968, an achievement surpassed by Liverpool's four European Cup victories in the 1970s and 1980s. Manchester United started to dominate English football during the 1990s, making the rivalry all the more intense. The last player to be transferred between the two clubs was Phil Chisnall, who moved to Liverpool from Manchester United in 1964. 

==Ownership and finances==
As the owner of Anfield and founder of Liverpool, John Houlding was the club's first chairman, a position he held from its founding in 1892 until 1904. John McKenna took over as chairman after Houlding's departure. McKenna subsequently became President of the Football League. The chairmanship changed hands many times before John Smith, whose father was a shareholder of the club, took up the role in 1973. He oversaw the most successful period in Liverpool's history before stepping down in 1990. His successor was Noel White who became Chairman in 1990 In August 1991 David Moores, whose family had owned the club for more than 50 years became Chairman. His uncle John Moores was also a shareholder at Liverpool and was chairman of Everton from 1961 to 1973. Moores owned 51 percent of the club, and in 2004 expressed his willingness to consider a bid for his shares in Liverpool. 

John W. Henry of Fenway Sports Group, the parent company of Liverpool
Moores eventually sold the club to American businessmen George Gillett and Tom Hicks on 6 February 2007. The deal valued the club and its outstanding debts at 218.9 million. The pair paid 5,000 per share, or 174.1m for the total shareholding and 44.8m to cover the club's debts. Disagreements between Gillett and Hicks, and the fans' lack of support for them, resulted in the pair looking to sell the club. Martin Broughton was appointed chairman of the club on 16 April 2010 to oversee its sale. In May 2010, accounts were released showing the holding company of the club to be 350m in debt (due to leveraged takeover) with losses of 55m, causing auditor KPMG to qualify its audit opinion. The group's creditors, including the Royal Bank of Scotland, took Gillett and Hicks to court to force them to allow the board to proceed with the sale of the club, the major asset of the holding company. A High Court judge, Mr Justice Floyd, ruled in favour of the creditors and paved the way for the sale of the club to Fenway Sports Group (formerly New England Sports Ventures), although Gillett and Hicks still had the option to appeal. Liverpool was sold to Fenway Sports Group on 15 October 2010 for 300m. 

Liverpool has been described as a global brand; a 2010 report valued the club's trademarks and associated intellectual property at 141m, an increase of 5m on the previous year. Liverpool was given a brand rating of AA (Very Strong). In April 2010 business magazine Forbes ranked Liverpool as the sixth most valuable football team in the world, behind Manchester United, Real Madrid, Arsenal, Barcelona and Bayern Munich; they valued the club at $822m (532m), excluding debt. Accountants Deloitte ranked Liverpool eighth in the Deloitte Football Money League, which ranks the world's football clubs in terms of revenue. Liverpool's income in the 200910 season was 225.3m. 

Liverpool reported a 49.4m annual loss in 2011, although this figure does not include a new 25m kit deal with Warrior Sports. In the 201011 season it spent 142m on wages, nearly the same amount as Bayern Mnchen, and 2.5 times the amount of Borussia Dortmund. Lohnkosten ausgewhlter Fussballclubs, in Europas Fuballelite  Einnahmen & Lohnkosten der Fuballclubs, 2013-01-05. 

==Liverpool in popular culture==
Because of its successful history, Liverpool is often featured when football is depicted in British culture and has appeared in a number of media firsts. The club appeared in the first edition of the BBC's Match of the Day, which screened highlights of its match against Arsenal at Anfield on 22 August 1964. The first football match to be televised in colour was between Liverpool and West Ham United, broadcast live in March 1967. Liverpool fans featured in the Pink Floyd song "Fearless", in which they sang excerpts from "You'll Never Walk Alone". To mark the club's appearance in the 1988 FA Cup Final, Liverpool released a song known as the "Anfield Rap", featuring John Barnes and other members of the squad. 

A documentary drama on the Hillsborough disaster, written by Jimmy McGovern, was screened in 1996. It featured Christopher Eccleston as Trevor Hicks, whose story is the focus of the script. Hicks, who lost two teenage daughters in the disaster, went on to campaign for safer stadiums and helped to form the Hillsborough Families Support Group. Liverpool featured in the film The 51st State (also known as Formula 51), in which ex-hitman Felix DeSouza (Robert Carlyle) is a keen supporter of the team and the last scene takes place at a match between Liverpool and Manchester United. The club was featured in a children's television show called Scully; the plot revolved around a young boy, Francis Scully, who tried to gain a trial match with Liverpool. The show featured prominent Liverpool players of the time such as Kenny Dalglish. 

==Players==
===Current squad===

 

===Reserve/Academy squad===

===Former players===
:For details of former players, see List of Liverpool F.C. players and F.C. players]

===Player records===

==Club officials==

* Owner: Fenway Sports Group
* Honorary Life President: David Moores

;Liverpool Football and Athletics Grounds Limited 
* Principal Owner: John W. Henry
* Chairman: Tom Werner
* Vice-Chairman: David Ginsberg
* Chief Executive Officer: Ian Ayre
* Chief Commercial Officer: Billy Hogan 
* Chief Financial Officer: Philip Nash

;Liverpool Football Club
* Directors: John W. Henry, Tom Werner, Ian Ayre, David Ginsberg, Philip Nash, Michael Gordon
* Club Secretary: Ian Silvester
* Operations Director: Andrew Parkinson
* Chief Groundsman: Terry Forsyth
* Stadium Manager: Ged Poynton
* Director of Communications: Susan Black
* Chief Media Officer: Matthew Baxter
* Head of Recruitment: Dave Fallows
* Head of Analysis: Michael Edwards
* Chief Scout: Barry Hunter

;Coaching and Medical Staff 
* Manager: Brendan Rodgers
* Assistant Manager: Colin Pascoe
* First Team Coach: Mike Marsh
* Goalkeeping Coach: John Achterberg
* Performance Analyst: Glen Driscoll
* Fitness and Conditioning Analyst: Ryland Morgans
* Opposition Analyst: Chris Davies
* Director of Player Development/Academy Manager: vacant
* Head of Academy Coaching: vacant
* U21's Manager: Alex Inglethorpe
* First Team Doctor: Zaf Iqbal
* Physiotherapist: Chris Morgan

==Honours==

Liverpool's first trophy was the Lancashire League, which it won in the club's first season. In 1901, the club won its first League title, while its first success in the FA Cup was in 1965. In terms of the number of trophies won, Liverpool's most successful decade was the 1980s, when the club won six League titles, two FA Cups, four League Cups, five Charity Shields (one shared) and two European Cups. Liverpool has won the English League Championship eighteen times, the FA Cup seven times and the League Cup a record eight times. The club achieved a League and FA Cup "double" in 1986 and won the League and European Cup double both in 1977 and in 1984. Liverpool also won the League Cup in 1984 to complete a treble, a feat repeated (albeit with different trophies) in 2001, when the club won the FA Cup, League Cup and UEFA Cup. 

Liverpool has one of the best records in the history of top-level football. The club has accumulated more top-flight wins than any other English team. Liverpool also has the second-highest average league finishing position for the period 19001999, with an average league placing of 8.7. Liverpool has won the European Cup, Europe's premier club competition, five times, an English record and only surpassed by Real Madrid and A.C. Milan. Liverpool's fifth European Cup win, in 2005, meant that the club was awarded the trophy permanently and was also awarded a multiple-winner badge. Liverpool has won the UEFA Cup, Europe's secondary club competition, three times, a record the club shares with Juventus and Internazionale. 

+Honours won by Liverpool F.C. Honour No. Years 
 Football League First Division 18 190001, 190506, 192122, 192223, 194647, 196364, 196566, 197273, 197576, 197677, 197879, 197980, 198182, 198283, 198384, 198586, 198788, 198990 
 Football League Second Division 4 189394, 189596, 190405, 196162 
 Lancashire League 1 189293 
 FA Cup 7 1965, 1974, 1986, 1989, 1992, 2001, 2006 
 League Cup 8 1981, 1982, 1983, 1984, 1995, 2001, 2003, 2012 
 FA Charity Shield/FA Community Shield 15 1964*, 1965*, 1966, 1974, 1976, 1977*, 1979, 1980, 1982, 1986*, 1988, 1989, 1990*, 2001, 2006 (* shared) 
 Super Cup 1 198586 
 European Cup/UEFA Champions League 5 1977, 1978, 1981, 1984, 2005 
 UEFA Cup 3 1973, 1976, 2001 
 UEFA Super Cup 3 1977, 2001, 2005 

===Doubles and trebles===

+Doubles and trebles won by Liverpool F.C. Double/Treble Doubles won in conjunction with the treble such as a FA Cup and League Cup double in 2001, are not included in the Doubles section. No. Years 
 League and FA Cup 1 198586 
 League and League Cup 2 198182, 198283 
 European Double (League and European Cup) 1 197677 
 League and UEFA Cup 2 197273, 197576 
 League Cup and European Cup 1 198081 
 League, League Cup and European Cup 1 198384 
 FA Cup, League Cup and UEFA Cup 1 200001 

Especially short competitions such as the Charity/Community Shield and UEFA Super Cup are not generally considered to contribute towards a Double or Treble. 

==See also==

* Liverpool F.C. in European football

==Notes==
Footnotes

Citations

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* 
* 
* 

;Independent sites
* LFCHistory.net Statistics website
* Liverpool at Sky Sports
* Liverpool at Premier League
* LSBF is a new partner of Liverpool FC

 



[[Lysosome]]

Lysosome (derived from the Greek words lysis, meaning "to loosen", and soma, "body") is a membrane-bound cell organelle found in animal cells (they are absent in red blood cells). They are structurally and chemically spherical vesicles containing acid hydrolases, which are capable of breaking down virtually all kinds of biomolecules, including proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates, lipids, and cellular debris. They are known to contain more than fifty different enzymes which are all active at an acidic environment of about pH 5. Thus they act as waste disposal system of the cell by digesting unwanted materials in the cytoplasm, both from outside of the cell and obsolete components inside the cell. For this function they are popularly referred to as "suicide bags" or "suicide sacs" of the cell. Further, lysosomes are responsible for cellular homeostasis for their involvements in secretion, plasma membrane repair, cell signalling and energy metabolism, which are related to health and diseases. Depending on their functional activity their sizes can be very different, as the biggest ones can be more than 10 times bigger than the smallest ones. They were discovered and named by Belgian biologist Christian de Duve, who eventually received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1974.

Enzymes of the lysosomes are synthesised in the rough endoplasmic reticulum. The enzymes are released from Golgi apparatus in small vesicles which ultimately fuse with acidic vesicles called endosomes, thus becoming full lysosomes. In the process the enzymes are specifically tagged with mannose 6-phosphate to differentiate them from other enzymes. Lysosomes are interlinked with three intracellular processes namely phagocytosis, endocytosis and autophagy. Extracellular materials such as microorganisms taken up by phagocytosis, macromolecules by endocytosis, and unwanted cell organelles are fused with lysosomes in which they are broken down to their basic molecules. Thus lysosomes are the recycling units of a cell. 

Synthesis of lysosomal enzymes are controlled by nuclear genes. Mutations in the genes for these enzymes are responsible for more than 30 different human genetic diseases, which are collectively known as lysosomal storage diseases. These diseases are due to deficiency in a single lysosomal enzyme that prevent break down of target molecules, and consequently undegraded materials accumulate within the lysosomes often giving rise to severe clinical symptoms. Further, these genetic defects are related to several neurodegenerative disorders, cancer, cardiovascular diseases, and ageing-related diseases. 

==Discovery==

Christian de Duve, then chairman of the Laboratory of Physiological Chemistry at the Catholic University of Louvain in Belgium, had been studying the mechanism of action of a pancreatic hormone insulin in liver cells. By 1949 he and his team had focused on the enzyme called glucose 6-phosphatase, which is the first crucial enzyme in sugar metabolism and the target of insulin. They already suspected that this enzyme played a key role in regulating blood sugar levels. However, even after a series of experiments, they failed to purify and isolate the enzyme from the cellular extracts. Therefore they tried a more arduous procedure of cell fractionation, by which cellular components are separated based on their sizes using centrifugation. They succeeded in detecting the enzyme activity from the microsomal fraction. This was the crucial step in the serendipitous discovery. To estimate the enzyme activity, they used that of standardised enzyme acid phosphatase, and found that the activity was quite low (10% of the expected value). One day, the enzyme activity of purified cell fractions which had been refrigerated for five days was measured. Surprisingly the enzyme activity was increased to normal of that of the fresh sample. The result was the same no matter how many times they repeated the estimation. This led to the conclusion that a membrane-like barrier limited the accessibility of the enzyme to its substrate, so that the enzymes were able to diffuse after a few days. They described the membrane-like barrier as a "saclike structure surrounded by a membrane and containing acid phosphatase." It became obvious that an unrelated enzyme from the cell fraction came from a membranous fractions which were definitely cell organelles, and in 1955 De Duve named them "lysosomes" to reflect their digestive properties. That same year, Alex B. Novikoff from the University of Vermont visited de Duves laboratory, and successfully obtained the first electron micrographs of the new organelle. Using a staining method for acid phosphatase, de Duve and Novikoff confirmed the location of the hydrolytic enzymes of lysosomes using light and electron microscopic studies. de Duve won the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1974 for this discovery.

== Function and structure ==
Lysosomes are cellular organelles that contain acid hydrolase enzymes that break down waste materials and cellular debris. They can be described as the stomach of the cell. Lysosomes digest excess or worn-out organelles, food particles, and engulfed viruses or bacteria. The membrane around a lysosome allows the digestive enzymes to work at the pH they require. Lysosomes fuse with autophagic vacuoles (phagosomes) and dispense their enzymes into the autophagic vacuoles, digesting their contents. They are frequently nicknamed "suicide bags" or "suicide sacs" by cell biologists due to their autolysis.

The size of lysosomes varies from 0.1&ndash;1.2 m. At pH 4.8, the interior of the lysosomes is acidic compared to the slightly basic cytosol (pH 7.2). The lysosome maintains this pH differential by pumping protons (H+ ions) from the cytosol across the membrane via proton pumps and chloride ion channels. Vacuolar H+-ATPases are responsible for transport of protons, while the counter transport of chloride ions is performed by ClC-7 Cl-/H+ antiporter. In this way a steady acidic environment is maintained. The lysosomal membrane protects the cytosol, and therefore the rest of the cell, from the degradative enzymes within the lysosome. The cell is additionally protected from any lysosomal acid hydrolases that drain into the cytosol, as these enzymes are pH-sensitive and do not function well or at all in the alkaline environment of the cytosol. This ensures that cytosolic molecules and organelles are not destroyed in case there is leakage of the hydrolytic enzymes from the lysosome.

== Formation ==
Many components of animal cells are recycled by transferring them inside or embedded in sections of membrane. For instance, in endocytosis, a portion of the cells plasma membrane pinches off to form a vesicle that will eventually fuse with an organelle within the cell. Without active replenishment, the plasma membrane would continuously decrease in size. It is thought that lysosomes participate in this dynamic membrane exchange system and are formed by a gradual maturation process from endosomes. 

The production of lysosomal proteins suggests one method of lysosome sustainment. Lysosomal protein genes are transcribed in the nucleus. mRNA transcripts exit the nucleus into the cytosol, where they are translated by ribosomes. The nascent peptide chains are translocated into the rough endoplasmic reticulum, where they are modified. Upon exiting the endoplasmic reticulum and entering the Golgi apparatus via vesicular transport, a specific lysosomal tag, mannose 6-phosphate, is added to the peptides. The presence of these tags allow for binding to mannose 6-phosphate receptors in the Golgi apparatus, a phenomenon that is crucial for proper packaging into vesicles destined for the lysosomal system. 

Upon leaving the Golgi apparatus, the lysosomal enzyme-filled vesicle fuses with a late endosome, a relatively acidic organelle with an approximate pH of 5.5. This acidic environment causes dissociation of the lysosomal enzymes from the mannose 6-phosphate receptors. The enzymes are packed into vesicles for further transport to established lysosomes. The late endosome itself can eventually grow into a mature lysosome, as evidenced by the transport of endosomal membrane components from the lysosomes back to the endosomes. 

==Disease==

Lysosomes are responsible for a group of genetically inherited disorders called lysosomal storage diseases (LSD). They are a type of inborn errors of metabolism caused by malfunction of one of the enzymes. The rate of incidence is estimated to be 1 in 5,000 live births, and the true figure expected to be higher as many cases are likely to be undiagnosed or misdiagnosed. The primary cause is deficiency of an acidic hydrolase, while there are conditions of defects in lysosomal membrane proteins that fail to transport the enzyme, or non-enzymatic soluble lysosomal proteins. The initial effect is accumulation of specific macromolecules or monomeric compounds inside the endosomalautophagiclysosomal system. This results in abnormal signaling pathways, calcium homeostasis, lipid biosynthesis and degradation and intracellular trafficking, ultimately leading to pathogenetic disorders. The organs most affected are brain, viscera, bone and cartilage. There is no direct medical treatment to cure LSDs. The most common LSD is Gaucher's disease, which is due to deficiency of the enzyme glucocerebrosidase. Consequently the enzyme substrate, the fatty acid glucosylceramide accumulates, particularly in white blood cells, which in turn affects spleen, liver, kidneys, lungs, brain and bone marrow. The disease is characterized by bruises, fatigue, anaemia, low blood platelets, osteoporosis, and enlargement of the liver and spleen. 

== Lysosomotropism ==
Weak bases with lipophilic properties accumulate in acidic intracellular compartments like lysosomes. While the plasma and lysosomal membranes are permeable for neutral and uncharged species of weak bases, the charged protonated species of weak bases do not permeate biomembranes and accumulate within lysosomes. The concentration within lysosomes may reach levels 100 to 1000 fold higher than extracellular concentrations. This phenomenon is called "lysosomotropism" or "acid trapping". The amount of accumulation of lysosomotropic compounds may be estimated using a cell based mathematical model. 

A significant part of the clinically approved drugs are lipophilic weak bases with lysosomotropic properties. This explains a number of pharmacological properties of these drugs, such as high tissue-to-blood concentration gradients or long tissue elimination half-lifes; these properties have been found for drugs such as haloperidol, levomepromazine, and amantadine. However, high tissue concentrations and long elimination half-lives are explained also by lipophilicity and absorption of drugs to fatty tissue structures. Important lysosomal enzymes, such as acid sphingomyelinase, may be inhibited by lysososomally accumulated drugs. Such compounds are termed FIASMAs (functional inhibitor of acid sphingomyelinase) and include for example fluoxetine, sertraline, or amitriptyline.

== Controversy in botany ==

By scientific convention, the term lysosome is applied to those vesicular organelles only in animals, and vacuoles to plants, fungi and algae. Discoveries in plant cells since the 1970s started to challenge this definition. Plant vacuoles are found to be much more diverse in structure and function than previously thought. Some vacuoles contain their own hydrolytic enzymes and perform the classic lysosomal activity, which is autophagy. These vacuoles are therefore seen as fulfilling the role of the animal lysosome. Based on de Duve's description that only when considered as part of a system involved directly or indirectly in intracellular digestion does the term lysosome describe a physiological unit, some botanist strongly argued that these vacuoles are lysosomes. However, this is not universally accepted as the vacuoles are strictly not similar to lysosomes, such as in their specific enzymes and lack of phagocytic functions. Vacuoles do not have catabolic activity and do not undergo exocytosis as lysosomes do. 

==See also==
* Cathelicidin
* Antimicrobial peptides
* Innate immune system

==References==

==External links==

* 
* 3D structures of proteins associated with lysosome membrane
* Hide and Seek Foundation For Lysosomal Research Team
* Self-Destructive Behavior in Cells May Hold Key to a Longer Life
* Mutations in the Lysosomal EnzymeTargeting Pathway and Persistent Stuttering
* Animation showing how lysosomes are made, and their function



[[Leg spin]]

Leg spin is a type of spin bowling in the sport of cricket. A leg spinner bowls right-arm with a wrist spin action, causing the ball to spin from right to left in the cricket pitch, at the point of delivery. When the ball bounces, the spin causes the ball to deviate sharply from right to left, that is, away from the leg side of a right-handed batsman. The same kind of trajectory, which spins from right to left on pitching, when performed by a left-arm bowler is known as left-arm orthodox spin bowling. 

A leg spin or leg break delivery.

As with all spinners, leg spinners bowl the ball far slower (7090 km/h or 45-55 mph) than fast bowlers. The fastest leg spinners will sometimes top 100 km/h (60 mph). Leg spinners typically use variations of flight by sometimes looping the ball in the air, allowing any cross-breeze and the aerodynamic effects of the spinning ball to cause the ball to dip and drift before bouncing and spinning (usually called "turning") sharply. While very difficult to bowl accurately, good leg spin is considered one of the most threatening types of bowling to bat against, since the flight and sharp turn make the ball's movement extremely hard to read and the turn away from the batsman (assuming he or she is right-handed) is more dangerous than the turn into the batsman generated by an off spinner.

Highly skilled leg spin bowlers are also able to bowl deliveries that behave unexpectedly, including the googly, which turns the opposite way to a normal leg break and the topspinner, which does not turn but dips sharply and bounces higher than other deliveries. A few leg spinners such as Abdul Qadir, Anil Kumble, Shane Warne and Mushtaq Ahmed have also mastered the flipper, a delivery that like a topspinner goes straight on landing, but floats through the air before skidding and keeping low, often dismissing batsmen leg before wicket or bowled. Another variation in the arsenal of some leg spinners is the slider, a leg break pushed out of the hand somewhat faster, so that it doesn't spin as much, but travels more straight on.

To grip the ball for a leg-spinning delivery, the ball is placed into the palm with the seam parallel to the palm. The first two fingers then spread and grip the ball, and the third and fourth fingers close together and rest against the side of the ball. The first bend of the third finger should grasp the seam. The thumb resting against the side is up to the bowler, but should impart no pressure. When the ball is bowled, the third finger will apply most of the spin. The wrist is cocked as it comes down by the hip, and the wrist moves sharply from right to left as the ball is released, adding more spin. The ball is tossed up to provide flight. The batsman will see the hand with the palm facing towards them when the ball is released.

==History==
In the 1970s and 1980s it was thought that leg spin would disappear from the game due to the success of West Indian and later Australian teams exclusively using fast bowlers. During this time Abdul Qadir of Pakistan was the highest-profile leg spinner in the world and is sometimes credited with "keeping the art alive". Abdul Qadir, player profile Scyld Berry et al, Cricinfo, 1998 and November 2008. Farewell to Shane Warne as cricket's great teaser bowls his final ball Mike Selvey, The Guardian, 19 May 2011. However, leg spin has again become popular with cricket fans and a successful part of cricket teams, driven largely by the success of Shane Warne, beginning with his spectacular Ball of the Century to Mike Gatting in 1993. 

==References==



[[Lisp machine]]

A Knight machine preserved in MIT's museum.
Lisp machines are general-purpose computers designed (usually through hardware support) to efficiently run Lisp as their main software language. In a sense, they were the first commercial single-user workstations. Despite being modest in number (perhaps 7,000 units total as of 1988 Newquist, HP. The Brain Makers, Sams Publishing, 1994. ISBN 0-672-30412-0 ), Lisp machines commercially pioneered many now-commonplace technologies  including effective garbage collection, laser printing, windowing systems, computer mice, high-resolution bit-mapped graphics, computer graphic rendering, and networking innovations like CHAOSNet. Several companies were building and selling Lisp Machines in the 1980s: Symbolics (3600, 3640, XL1200, MacIvory and other models), Lisp Machines Incorporated (LMI Lambda), Texas Instruments (Explorer and MicroExplorer) and Xerox (InterLisp-D workstations). The operating systems were written in Lisp Machine Lisp, InterLisp (Xerox) and later partly in Common Lisp.

Symbolics 3640 Lisp machine
==History==
===Historical context===
Artificial intelligence (AI) computer programs of the 1960s and 1970s intrinsically required what was then considered a huge amount of computer power, as measured in processor time and memory space. The power requirements of AI research were exacerbated by the Lisp symbolic programming language, when commercial hardware was designed and optimized for assembly- and Fortran-like programming languages. At first, the cost of such computer hardware meant that it had to be shared among many users. But as integrated circuit technology shrank the size and cost of computers in the 1960s and early 1970s, and the memory requirements of AI programs started to exceed the address space of the most common research computer, the DEC PDP-10, researchers considered a new approach: a computer designed specifically to develop and run large artificial intelligence programs, and tailored to the semantics of the Lisp programming language. To keep the operating system (relatively) simple, these machines would not be shared, but would be dedicated to a single user.

===Initial development===
 

In 1973, Richard Greenblatt and Thomas Knight, programmers at MIT's AI Lab, started what would become the MIT Lisp Machine Project when they first began building a computer hardwired to run certain basic Lisp operations, rather than run them in software, in a 24-bit tagged architecture. The machine also did incremental (or "Arena") garbage collection. More specifically, since Lisp variables are typed at runtime rather than compile time, a simple addition of two variables could take five times as long on conventional hardware, due to test and branch instructions. Lisp Machines ran the tests in parallel with the more conventional single instruction additions. If the simultaneous tests failed, then the result was discarded and recomputed; this meant in many cases a speed increase by several factors. This simultaneous checking approach was used as well in testing the bounds of arrays when referenced, and other memory management necessities (not merely garbage collection or arrays).

Type checking was further improved and automated when the conventional byte word of 32-bits was lengthened to 36-bits for Symbolics 3600-model Lisp machines and eventually to 40-bits or more (usually, the excess bits not accounted for by the following were used for error-correcting codes). The first group of extra bits were used to hold type data, making the machine a tagged architecture, and the remaining bits were used to implement CDR coding (wherein the usual linked list elements are compressed to occupy roughly half the space), aiding garbage collection by reportedly an order of magnitude. A further improvement was two microcode instructions which specifically supported Lisp functions, reducing the cost of calling a function to (in some Symbolics implementations) as little as 20 clock cycles.

The first machine was called the CONS machine (named after the list construction operator [[cons]] in Lisp). Often it was affectionately referred to as the "Knight machine", perhaps since Knight wrote his master's thesis on the subject; it was extremely well received. It was subsequently improved into a version called CADR (a pun; in Lisp, the [[cAR and CDR|cadr]] function, which returns the second element of a list, is pronounced // or //, as some pronounce the word "cadre") which was based on essentially the same architecture. About 25 of what were essentially prototype CADRs were sold within and without MIT for ~$50,000; it quickly became the favorite machine for hacking- many of the most favored software tools were quickly ported to it (e.g. Emacs was ported from ITS in 1975). It was so well received at an AI conference held at MIT in 1978 that DARPA began funding its development.

===Commercialization of the MIT Lisp Machine technology===

In 1979, Russell Noftsker, being convinced that Lisp machines had a bright commercial future due to the strength of the Lisp language and the enabling factor of hardware acceleration, made Greenblatt a proposal: they would take the technology commercial. In a counter-intuitive move for an AI Lab hacker, Greenblatt acquiesced, hoping perhaps that he could recreate the informal and productive atmosphere of the Lab in a real business. These ideas and goals were considerably different from the ones Noftsker held. The two negotiated at length, but neither would compromise. As the proposed company could only be a success with the full and undivided assistance of the AI Lab hackers as a group, Noftsker and Greenblatt decided that the fate of the enterprise was up to them, and so the choice should be left to the hackers.

The ensuing discussions of the choice divided the lab into two factions. In February, 1979, matters came to a head. The hackers sided with Noftsker, believing that a commercial venture fund-backed company had a better chance of surviving and commercializing Lisp Machines than Greenblatt's proposed self-sustaining start-up. Greenblatt had lost the battle.

It was at this juncture that Symbolics, Noftsker's enterprise, slowly came together. While Noftsker was paying his staff a salary, he did not actually have a building or any equipment for the hackers to work on. He bargained with Patrick Winston that, in exchange for allowing Symbolics staff to keep working out of MIT, Symbolics would let MIT use internally and freely all the software Symbolics developed. A consultant from CDC, who was trying to put together a natural language computer application with a group of West-coast programmers, came to Greenblatt, seeking a Lisp machine for his group to work with, about eight months after the disastrous conference with Noftsker. Greenblatt had decided to start his own rival Lisp machine company, but he had done nothing. The consultant, Alexander Jacobson, decided that the only way Greenblatt was going to actually start his company and build the Lisp machines that Jacobson desperately needed was if Jacobson pushed and otherwise helped Greenblatt launch his company. Jacobson pulled together business plans, a board, a partner for Greenblatt (one F. Stephen Wyle). The newfound company was named LISP Machine, Inc. (LMI), and was funded by CDC orders, via Jacobson.

Around this time Symbolics (Noftsker's company) began operations  it had been hindered by Noftsker's promise to give Greenblatt a years head start, and by severe delays in procuring venture capital. Symbolics still had the major advantage that while 3 or 4 of the AI Lab hackers had gone to work for Greenblatt, a solid 14 other hackers had signed onto Symbolics. There were two AI Lab people who did not get hired by either: Richard Stallman and Marvin Minsky. Stallman, however, blamed Symbolics for the decline of the hacker community that had centered around the AI lab. For two years, from 1982 to the end of 1983, Stallman worked by himself to clone the output of the Symbolics programmers, with the aim of preventing them from gaining a monopoly on the lab's computers. Levy,S: Hackers. Penguin USA, 1984 

Regardless, after a series of internal battles, Symbolics did get off the ground in 1980/1981, selling the CADR as the LM-2, while Lisp Machines, Inc. sold it as the LMI-CADR. Symbolics did not intend to produce many LM-2s, since the 3600 family of Lisp machines was supposed to ship quickly, but the 3600s were repeatedly delayed, and Symbolics ended up producing ~100 LM-2s, each of which sold for $70,000. Both companies developed second-generation products based on the CADR: the Symbolics 3600 and the LMI-LAMBDA (of which LMI managed to sell ~200). The 3600, which shipped a year late, expanded on the CADR by widening the machine word to 36-bits, expanding the address space to 28-bits, Moon 1985 and adding hardware to accelerate certain common functions that were implemented in microcode on the CADR. The LMI-LAMBDA, which came out a year after the 3600, in 1983, was compatible with the CADR (it could run CADR microcode), but there were hardware differences. Texas Instruments (TI) joined the fray when it licensed the LMI-LAMBDA design and produced its own variant, the TI Explorer. Some of the LMI-LAMBDAs and the TI Explorer were dual systems with both a Lisp and a UNIX processor. TI also developed a 32bit microprocessor version of its Lisp CPU for the TI Explorer. This Lisp chip also was used for the MicroExplorer  a NuBus board for the Apple Macintosh II (NuBus was initially developed at MIT for use in Lisp machines).

Symbolics continued to develop the 3600 family and its operating system, Genera, and produced the Ivory, a VLSI implementation of the Symbolics architecture. Starting in 1987, several machines based on the Ivory processor were developed: boards for Suns and Macs, stand-alone workstations and even embedded systems (I-Machine Custom LSI, 32 bit address, Symbolics XL-400, UX-400, MacIvory II; in 1989 available platforms were Symbolics XL-1200, MacIvory III, UX-1200, Zora, NXP1000 "pizza box"). Texas Instruments shrunk the Explorer into silicon as the MicroExplorer which was offered as a card for the Apple Mac II. LMI abandoned the CADR architecture and developed its own K-Machine, but LMI went bankrupt before the machine could be brought to market. Prior to its demise, LMI was working on a distributed system for the LAMBDA using Moby space. Moby space Patent application 4779191 

These machines had hardware support for various primitive Lisp operations (data type testing, CDR coding) and also hardware support for incremental garbage collection. They ran large Lisp programs very efficiently. The Symbolics machine was actually competitive against many commercial super mini computers, but it was never adapted for conventional purposes. The Symbolics Lisp Machines were also sold to some non-AI markets like computer graphics, modeling and animation.

The MIT-derived Lisp machines ran a Lisp dialect called Lisp Machine Lisp, descended from MIT's Maclisp. The operating systems were written from the ground up in Lisp, often using object-oriented extensions. Later these Lisp machines also supported various versions of Common Lisp (with Flavors, New Flavors and CLOS).

===InterLisp, BBN, and Xerox===

BBN developed its own Lisp Machine, called Jericho, which ran a version of Interlisp. It was never marketed; frustrated, the entire AI group resigned, and were hired primarily by Xerox. So, Xerox Palo Alto Research Center had, simultaneously with Greenblatt's own development at MIT, developed their own Lisp machines which were designed to run InterLisp (and later Common Lisp). The same hardware was used with different software also as Smalltalk machines and as the Xerox Star office system. These included the Xerox 1100, "Dolphin" (1979); the Xerox 1132, "Dorado"; the Xerox 1108, "Dandelion" (1981); and the Xerox 1109, "Dandetiger"; and the Xerox 1186/6085, "Daybreak". The Xerox machines were a commercial failure, but they did influence the creation of Apple Computer's Macintosh. The operating system of the Xerox Lisp Machines has also been ported to a virtual machine and is available for several platforms as a product called "Medley". The Xerox Lisp Machine was well known for its advanced development environment (InterLisp-D), the ROOMS window manager, for its early graphical user interface and for novel applications like NoteCards (one of the first Hypertext applications).

Xerox also worked on a RISC-based Lisp Machine using the 'Xerox Common Lisp Processor' and planned to bring it to market by 1987, which did not happen.

===Integrated Inference Machines===

In the mid-80s prototypes of Lisp Machines called Inferstar have been built by Integrated Inference Machines (IIM). 

===Developments of Lisp Machines outside the US===

In 19841985 a UK company, Racal-Norsk, a joint subsidiary of Racal and Norsk Data, attempted to repurpose Norsk Data's ND-500 supermini as a microcoded Lisp Machine, running CADR software: the Knowledge Processing System (KPS). 

There were several attempts by Japanese manufacturers to enter the Lisp Machine market: the Fujitsu Facom-alpha mainframe co-processor, NTT's Elis, Toshiba's AI processor (AIP) and NEC's LIME. Several university research efforts produced working prototypes, among them are Kobe University's TAKITAC-7, RIKEN's FLATS and Osaka University's EVLIS. 

In France there were two Lisp Machine projects: M3L at Toulouse Paul Sabatier University and later MAIA. 

In Germany the company Siemens designed the RISC-based Lisp co-processor COLIBRI. Mller-Schloer
Bewertung der RISC-Methodik am Beispiel COLIBRI, RISC-Architekturen, Editor A. Bode, BI-Verlag, 1988 Christian Hafer, Josef Plankl, F. J. Schmitt., COLIBRI: Ein RISC-LISP-System, Architektur von Rechensystemen, Tagungsband, 11. ITG/GI-Fachtagung, 7.-9. Mrz 1990, Mnchen, Germany 1990 

===End of the Lisp Machines===
With the onset of the "AI winter" and the early beginnings of the microcomputer revolution (which would gather steam and sweep away the minicomputer and workstation manufacturers), cheaper desktop PCs soon were able to run Lisp programs even faster than Lisp machines, without the use of special purpose hardware. Their high profit margin hardware business eliminated, most Lisp Machine manufacturers went out of business by the early 90s, leaving only software based companies like Lucid Inc. or hardware manufacturers who switched to software and services to avoid the crash. Besides Xerox, Symbolics is the only Lisp Machine company still operating today, selling the Open Genera Lisp Machine software environment as well as the Macsyma computer algebra system.

===Legacy===

Several attempts to write open-source emulators for various Lisp Machines have been made: CADR Emulation, Symbolics L Lisp Machine Emulation, the E3 Project (TI Explorer II Emulation), Meroko (TI Explorer I) and Nevermore (TI Explorer I). On 3 October 2005, the MIT released the CADR Lisp Machine source code as open source. 

The Bitsavers' PDF Document Archive has PDF versions of the extensive documentation for the Symbolics Lisp Machines, the TI Explorer and MicroExplorer Lisp Machines and the Xerox Interlisp-D Lisp Machines. 

===Other attempts on language-optimized computers===

A number of processors and coprocessors intended to implement Prolog more directly were designed in the late 1980s and early 1990s, including the Berkeley VLSI-PLM, its successor (the PLUM), and a related microcode implementation. There were also a number of simulated designs that were not produced as hardware , . Like Lisp, Prolog's basic model of computation is radically different from standard imperative designs, and computer scientists and electrical engineers were eager to escape the bottlenecks caused by emulating their underlying models.

Niklaus Wirth's Lilith project included a custom CPU geared toward the Modula-2 language. 

The INMOS Transputer was designed to support concurrent programming, using occam.

The AT&T Hobbit processor, stemming from a design called CRISP (C-language Reduced Instruction Set Processor), was optimized to run C code.

In the late 1990s, there were plans by Sun Microsystems and other companies to build CPUs that directly (or closely) implemented the stack-based Java virtual machine. As a result several Java processors have been built and used.

Ericsson developed ECOMP, a processor designed to run Erlang. http://www.erlang.se/euc/00/processor.ppt It was never commercially produced.

===Applications===

Domains using the Lisp Machines were mostly in the wide area of Artificial Intelligence applications, but also in Computer Graphics, Medical Image Processing and many others.

The main commercial expert systems of the 80s were available: Intellicorp's Knowledge Engineering Environment (KEE), Knowledge Craft from The Carnegie Group Inc. and ART (Automated Reasoning Tool) from Inference Corporation. Richter,Mark: AI Tools and Techniques. Ablex Publishing Corporation USA, 1988, Chapter 3, An Evaluation of Expert System Development Tools 

==Technical overview==

Initially the Lisp Machines were designed as personal workstations for software development in Lisp. They were used by a single person and offered no multi-user mode. The Lisp Machines provided a large, black and white, bitmap display, keyboard and mouse, network adapter, local hard disks, more than 1 MB RAM, serial interfaces, and a local bus for extension cards. Color graphics cards, tape drives, and laser printers were optional.

The processor did not run Lisp directly, but was a stack machine with instructions optimized for compiled Lisp. The early Lisp Machines used microcode to provide the instruction set. For several operations type checking and dispatching was done in hardware at runtime. There was for example only a single addition operation that could be used with various numeric types (integer, float, rational and complex numbers). The result was a very compact compiled representation of Lisp code.

The following example uses a function that counts the number of elements of a list for which a predicate returns 'true'.

(defun example-count (predicate list)
 (let ((count 0))
 (dolist (i list count)
 (when (funcall predicate i)
 (incf count)))))

The disassembled machine code for above function (for the Ivory microprocessor from Symbolics):

Command: (disassemble (compile #'example-count))

 0 ENTRY: 2 REQUIRED, 0 OPTIONAL ;Creating PREDICATE and LIST
 2 PUSH 0 ;Creating COUNT
 3 PUSH FP|3 ;LIST 
 4 PUSH NIL ;Creating I
 5 BRANCH 15
 6 SET-TO-CDR-PUSH-CAR FP|5
 7 SET-SP-TO-ADDRESS-SAVE-TOS SP|-1
 10 START-CALL FP|2 ;PREDICATE 
 11 PUSH FP|6 ;I 
 12 FINISH-CALL-1-VALUE
 13 BRANCH-FALSE 15
 14 INCREMENT FP|4 ;COUNT 
 15 ENDP FP|5
 16 BRANCH-FALSE 6
 17 SET-SP-TO-ADDRESS SP|-2
 20 RETURN-SINGLE-STACK

The operating system used virtual memory to provide a large address space. Memory management was done with garbage collection. All code shared a single address space. All data objects were stored with a tag in memory, so that the type could be determined at runtime. Multiple execution threads were supported and called 'processes'  all processes were running in the single address space.

All operating system software was written in Lisp. Xerox used InterLisp. Symbolics, LMI and TI used Lisp Machine Lisp (descendant of MacLisp). With the appearance of Common Lisp, Common Lisp was supported on the Lisp Machines and some system software was ported to Common Lisp or later written in Common Lisp.

Some later Lisp Machines (like the TI MicroExplorer, the Symbolics MacIvory or the Symbolics UX400/1200) were no longer complete workstations, but boards designed to be embedded in host computers: Apple Macintosh II and SUN 3 or 4.

Some Lisp Machines, like the Symbolics XL1200, had extensive graphics capabilities using special graphics boards. These Lisp Machines were used in domains like medical image processing, 3D animation and CAD.

==See also==
* ICAD  Example of "Knowledge based engineering" software originally developed on a Lisp machine that was useful enough to be then ported via Common Lisp to Unix.
* Orphaned technology

==References==

; General

* "LISP Machine Progress Report", Alan Bawden, Richard Greenblatt, Jack Holloway, Thomas Knight, David Moon, Daniel Weinreb, AI Lab memos, AI-444, 1977.
* "CADR", Thomas Knight, David A. Moon, Jack Holloway, Guy L. Steele. AI Lab memos, AIM-528, 1979.
* "Design of LISP-based Processors, or SCHEME: A Dielectric LISP, or Finite Memories Considered Harmful, or LAMBDA: The Ultimate Opcode", Guy Lewis Steele, Gerald Jay Sussman, AI Lab memo, AIM-514, 1979
* David A. Moon. Chaosnet. A.I. Memo 628, Massachusetts Institute of Technology Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, June 1981.
* "Implementation of a List Processing Machine". Tom Knight, Master's thesis. 
* Lisp Machine manual, 6th ed. Richard Stallman, Daniel Weinreb, David Moon. 1984.

* "Anatomy of a LISP Machine", Paul Graham, AI Expert, December 1988
* 

==External links==
* current Symbolics domain
* Medley
* Bitsavers, PDF documents
** LMI documentation
** MIT CONS documentation
** MIT CADR documentation
* Lisp Machine Manual, Chinual
** "The Lisp Machine manual, 4th Edition, July 1981"
** "The Lisp Machine manual, 6th Edition, HTML/XSL version"
** "The Lisp Machine manual"
* Information and code for LMI Lambda and LMI K-Machine
* Jaap Weel's Lisp Machine Webpage  (A collection of links and locally stored documents appertaining to all manner of Lisp machines)
* "A Few Things I Know About LISP Machines"  (Another collection of links, but mostly a discussion of purchasing Lisp machines)
* Ralf Mller's Symbolics Lisp Machine Museum
** A page of screenshots of Genera
* Rainer Joswig's web page with Lisp Machine videos and screen shots
** "Genera Concepts"  (Web copy of Symbolic's introduction to Genera)
* Vintage Computer Festival pictures of some Lisp Machines, one running Genera
* Picture of a partially disassembled Symbolics 3640
* LISPMACHINE.NET  Lisp Books and Information
* Lisp machines timeline -(a timeline of Symbolics' and others' Lisp machines)
* Zeta-C
* "Prsentation Gnrale du projet M3L" -(An account of French efforts in the same vein)
* Discussion
** "If It Works, It's Not AI: A Commercial Look at Artificial Intelligence startups"
** "Symbolics, Inc.: A failure of Heterogenous engineering"  (PDF)
** "My Lisp Experiences and the Development of GNU Emacs"  (a transcript of a speech Richard Stallman gave about Emacs, Lisp, and Lisp machines)



[[Links (web browser)]]

Links is an open source text and graphic web browser with a pull-down menu system. Links home page It renders complex pages, has partial HTML 4.0 support (including tables and frames and support for multiple character sets such as UTF-8), supports color and monochrome terminals and allows horizontal scrolling.

It is oriented toward visual users who want to retain many typical elements of graphical user interfaces (pop up windows, menus etc.) in a text-only environment. The focus on intuitive usability makes it suitable as a web browser for low-end terminals in libraries, Internet cafes etc.

The original version of Links was developed by Mikul Patoka in the Czech Republic. His group, Twibright Labs, later developed version 2 of the Links browser, that displays graphics, renders fonts in different sizes (with spatial anti-aliasing) and supports JavaScript (up to version 2.1pre28). The resulting browser is very fast, but it does not display many pages as they were intended. The graphical mode works even on Unix systems without X or any other window environment, using either SVGALib or the framebuffer of the system's graphics card.

== Forks ==

=== ELinks ===

ELinks ("Experimental/Enhanced Links") is a fork of Links led by Petr Baudi. It is based on Links 0.9. It has a more open development and incorporates patches from other Links versions (such as additional extension scripting in Lua) and from Internet users.

=== Hacked Links ===
Hacked Links is another version of the Links browser which has merged some of Elinks' features into Links 2.

Andrey Mirtchovski has ported it to Plan 9. It is considered a good browser on that operating system, though some users have complained about its inability to cut and paste with the Plan 9 snarf buffer.

 the last release of Hacked Links is that of July 9, 2003 with some further changes unreleased. 

=== Linkx ===
Linkx is a new fork of links2 that bring some of the features of links-hacked (tabs support, ...)

=== Other ===
Links was also ported to run on the Sony PSP platform by Rafael Cabezas with the last version (2.1pre23_PSP_r1261) released on February 6, 2007. 

The BeOS port was updated by Franois Revol who also added GUI support. It also runs on Haiku.

==Graphics stack==

The graphics stack has several peculiarities unusual for a web browser. The fonts displayed by Links are not derived from the system, but compiled into the binary as grayscale bitmaps in PNG format. This allows the browser to be a single executable file independent of the system libraries, however it increases the size of the executable to about 5 MB.

The fonts are anti-aliased without hinting and for small line pitch an artificial sharpening is employed to increase legibility. Subpixel sampling further increases legibility on LCD displays. This allowed Links to have anti-aliased fonts at a time when anti-aliased font libraries were uncommon.

All graphical elements (images and text) are first converted from given gamma space (according to known or assumed gamma information in PNG, JPEG etc.) through known user gamma setting into a 48 bits per pixel photometrically linear space where they are resampled with bilinear resampling to the target size, possibly taking aspect ratio correction into account. Then the data are passed through high-performance restartable dithering engine which is used regardless of monitor bit depth, i. e. also for 24 bits per pixel colour. This FloydSteinberg dithering engine takes into account the gamma characteristics of the monitor and uses 768 KiB of dithering tables to avoid time expensive calculations. A technique similar to self-modifying code, function templates, is used to maximize the speed of the dithering engine without using assembler optimization, which is non-portable.

Images which are scaled down also use subpixel sampling on LCD to increase level of detail.

The reason for this high quality processing is: provide proper realistic up/downsampling of images, and photorealistic display regardless of the monitor gamma, without colour fringing caused by 8-bit gamma correction built into the X server. It also increases the perceived colour depth over 24 bits per pixel.

Despite the amount of digital image processing that has to be internally done, Links is one of the fastest graphical web browsers.

Links has graphics driver for X Server, Linux framebuffer, svgalib, OS/2 PMShell and AtheOS GUI. This allows it to run in graphics mode even on platforms which don't have X Server because of lack of implementation or limited resources.

==See also==

* List of web browsers
* Comparison of web browsers

==References==

==External links==

* Official Links homepage
* Twibright Labs Links
* Links Hacked Web Page
* Links for Mac OS X on PowerPC and Intel
* PSP Port
*Linkx fork



[[Learning object]]

A learning object is "a collection of content items, practice items, and assessment items that are combined based on a single learning objective". The term is credited to Wayne Hodgins when he created a working group in 1994 bearing the name though the concept was first described by Gerard in 1967. Learning objects go by many names, including content objects, chunks, educational objects, information objects, intelligent objects, knowledge bits, knowledge objects, learning components, media objects, reusable curriculum components, nuggets, reusable information objects, reusable learning objects, testable reusable units of cognition, training components, and units of learning.

Learning objects offer a new conceptualization of the learning process: rather than the traditional "several hour chunk", they provide smaller, self-contained, re-usable units of learning. 

They will typically have a number of different components, which range from descriptive data to information about rights and educational level. At their core, however, will be instructional content, practice, and assessment. A key issue is the use of metadata.

Learning object design raises issues of portability, and of the object's relation to a broader learning management system.

==Definitions==
The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) defines a learning object as "any entity, digital or non-digital, that may be used for learning, education or training". 

Chiappe defined Learning Objects as: "A digital self-contained and reusable entity, with a clear educational purpose, with at least three internal and editable components: content, learning activities and elements of context. The learning objects must have an external structure of information to facilitate their identification, storage and retrieval: the metadata." . 

The following definitions focus on the relation between learning object and digital media. RLO-CETL, a British inter-university Learning Objects Center, defines "reusable learning objects" as "web-based interactive chunks of e-learning designed to explain a stand-alone learning objective". . Daniel Rehak and Robin Mason define it as "a digitized entity which can be used, reused or referenced during technology supported learning". 

Adapting a definition from the Wisconsin Online Resource Center, Robert J. Beck suggests that learning objects have the following key characteristics:

* Learning objects are a new way of thinking about learning content. Traditionally, content comes in a several hour chunk. Learning objects are much smaller units of learning, typically ranging from 2 minutes to 15 minutes.
* Are self-contained  each learning object can be taken independently
* Are reusable  a single learning object may be used in multiple contexts for multiple purposes
* Can be aggregated  learning objects can be grouped into larger collections of content, including traditional course structures
* Are tagged with metadata  every learning object has descriptive information allowing it to be easily found by a search 

== Components ==
The following is a list of some of the types of information that may be included in a learning object and its metadata:
* General Course Descriptive Data, including: course identifiers, language of content (English, Spanish, etc.), subject area (Maths, Reading, etc.), descriptive text, descriptive keywords
* Life Cycle, including: version, status
* Instructional Content, including: text, web pages, images, sound, video
* Glossary of Terms, including: terms, definition, acronyms
* Quizzes and Assessments, including: questions, answers
* Rights, including: cost, copyrights, restrictions on Use
* Relationships to Other Courses, including prerequisite courses
* Educational Level, including: grade level, age range, typical learning time, and difficulty. 1484.12.1:2002
*Typology as defined by Churchill (2007): presentation, practice, simulation, conceptual models, information, and contextual representation Churchill, D. (2007). Towards a useful classification of learning objects. Educational Technology Research & Development, 55(5), 479-497. 

==Metadata==
One of the key issues in using learning objects is their identification by search engines or content management systems. This is usually facilitated by assigning descriptive learning object metadata. Just as a book in a library has a record in the card catalog, learning objects must also be tagged with metadata. The most important pieces of metadata typically associated with a learning object include:
# objective: The educational objective the learning object is instructing
# prerequisites: The list of skills (typically represented as objectives) which the learner must know before viewing the learning object
# topic: Typically represented in a taxonomy, the topic the learning object is instructing
# interactivity: The Interaction Model of the learning object.
# technology requirements: The required system requirements to view the learning object.

==Mutability==

A mutated learning object is, according to Michael Shaw, a learning object that has been "re-purposed and/or re-engineered, changed or simply re-used in some way different from its original intended design". Shaw also introduces the term "contextual learning object", to describe a learning object that has been "designed to have specific meaning and purpose to an intended learner". 

==Portability==
Before any institution invests a great deal of time and energy into building high-quality e-learning content (which can cost over $10,000 per classroom hour), Rumble, Greville. 2001. The Cost and Costing of Networked Learning. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, Volume 5, Issue 2. it needs to consider how this content can be easily loaded into a Learning Management System. It is possible for example, to package learning objects with SCORM specification and load it in Moodle Learning Management System or Desire2Learn Learning Environment.

If all of the properties of a course can be precisely defined in a common format, the content can be serialized into a standard format such as XML and loaded into other systems. When it is considered that some e-learning courses need to include video, mathematical equations using MathML, chemistry equations using CML and other complex structures, the issues become very complex, especially if the systems needs to understand and validate each structure and then place it correctly in a database.

==Criticism==
In 2001, David Wiley criticized learning object theory in his paper, The Reusability Paradox which is summarized by D'Arcy Norman as, If a learning object is useful in a particular context, by definition it is not reusable in a different context. If a learning object is reusable in many contexts, it isnt particularly useful in any. 
In Three Objections to Learning Objects and E-learning Standards, Norm Friesen, Canada Research Chair in E-Learning Practices at Thompson Rivers University, points out that the word neutrality in itself implies a state or position that is antithetical ... to pedagogy and teaching.

== See also ==
* Intelligent tutoring system
* North Carolina Learning Object Repository (NCLOR)
* Serious games

==References==

==Further reading==
*.
*.
*.
*
* Spanish Draf: Blog de Andrs Chiappe - Objetos de Aprendizaje.
*.
*.
*Churchill, D. (2007). Towards a useful classification of learning objects. Educational Technology Research & Development, 55(5), 479-497.
Innayah: Creating An Audio Script with Learning Object, unpublished, 2013.

==External links==
* The Learning Objects at Milwaukee's Center for International Education.



[[List of Labour Parties]]

The name Labour Party (or Labor), or similar, is used by several political parties around the world, particularly common in countries of the Commonwealth of Nations. They are most commonly, but not exclusively, social democrats or democratic socialists and have been traditionally allied to the Labour movement and trade unions. Many labour parties are members of the Socialist International.

==Active Labor parties==

Nation Party 
 Party of Labor 
 Antigua Labour PartyNational Labour Party 
 All Armenian Labor PartyUnited Labor Party 
 Australian Labor PartyDemocratic Labor PartyProgressive Labor Party 
 Barbados Labour PartyDemocratic Labour Party 
 Belarusian Labour Party 
 Workers' Party of Belgium christelijke ACV} 
 Bougainville Labour Party 
 Brazilian Labour PartyBrazilian Labour Renewal PartyDemocratic Labour PartyNational Labour PartySocial Labour Party 
 New Democratic Party of Canada (successor to the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) 
 Croatian Labourists - Labour Party 
 Independent Labor Party 
 Congolese Party of Labour 
 Dominica Labour Party 
 Fiji Labour Party 
 Georgian Labour Party 
 Gibraltar Socialist Labour Party 
 Grenada United Labor Party 
 Labour Party 
 Labor Party 
 
 Labour Party 
 Manx Labour Party 
 Israeli Labor Party 
 Jamaica Labour Party 
 Labor Party of Liberia 
 Labour Party 
 Labour Party 
 Labour Party 
 Labor Party 
 Labour Party 
 Labour Party 
 Labour Party People's Crusade 
 Labour Party 
 New Zealand Labour Party 
 Labour Party 
 Labour Party 
 Labour PartyPeoples Labour Party 
 Labour Party Pakistan 
 Polish Labour Party 
 Saint Kitts and Nevis Labour Party 
 Saint Lucia Labour Party 
 Progressive Labour PartyUnity Labour Party 
 Solomon Islands Labour Party 
 New Labour Party (South Africa) 
 Labor PartyDemocratic Labor Party 
 Surinamese Labour Party 
 Swedish Social Democratic Labour Party 
 Swiss Labour Party 
 Tanzania Labour Party 
 Labour Party 
 Labour Party 
 Labour PartyScottish Labour Party (Scottish branch of the Labour Party (UK))Welsh Labour (Welsh branch of the Labour Party (UK))Socialist Labour Party (UK)Newtownabbey Labour Party (in Northern Ireland)Social Democratic and Labour Party (in Northern Ireland) 
 Minnesota DemocraticFarmerLabor Party 
 Labour Party 
 Zimbabwe Labour Party 

==Historical Labour parties==

Nation Party 
 Industrial Socialist Labor Party 
 Belgian Labour Party 
 Party of Labour of BurkinaVoltaic Labour Party 1970 
 Canadian Labour Party 1917-1929Labour Party of Canada 1870s-1960sCo-operative Commonwealth Federation - (Farmer-Labour-Socialist) 1932-1961Labor-Progressive PartyNorth American Labour Party 
 Croatian labour party 1906-1918 
 Gibraltar Labour Party 
 Labour Party 
 Guatemalan Party of Labour  Alamos 
 Labour PartyLabour Party of Indonesia 
 Italian Labour PartyLabour Federation 
 National Labour Party 
 Democratic Labour Party of Lithuania 
 Labour Party 
 Labour Party 
 Central Democratic Labour Party 
 NewLabour PartyNew Zealand Labour Party (original) 
 Cape Breton Labour Party 1970-1984 
 Labour Party 
 Labor Party 
 Western Samoa Labour Party 
 Labour Party of Sine Saloum 
 Labour Party 
 Labour Party 
 Labour PartyLabour Party (Coloured) 
 Communist Labour Party (Scotland)Independent Labour PartyNational LabourBelfast Labour PartyLabour Party of Northern IrelandLabour Party of Scotland (former name of Scottish branch of Labour Party (UK))Northern Ireland Labour PartyRepublican Labour Party (In Northern Ireland)Scottish Labour Party (1888-1895)Scottish Labour Party (1976-1981) 
 Labor Party (United States, 19th century) Union Labor Party (California) Socialist Labor Party of America FarmerLabor Party (United States) Minnesota Farmer-Labor Party Labor Party of the United States American Labor Party American Labor Party (1932) U.S. Labor Party Labor Party (United States, 1996) Communist Labor Party of North America Revolutionary Socialist Labor Party United States Socialist-Labor Party Greenback-Labor Party 

==See also==
*Communist party
*Democratic Socialist Party (disambiguation)
*Labour movement
*Left-wing political parties
*List of political parties
*List of social democratic parties
*Social Democratic Party (disambiguation)
*Socialist Equality Party
*Socialist Labor Party (disambiguation)
*Socialist Party
*Socialist Workers Party (disambiguation)
*Workers' Party (disambiguation)

Labour

[[Louisiana]]

Louisiana ( or ; , ; Louisiana Creole: Lta de la Lwizyn) is a state located in the southern region of the United States. Louisiana is the 31st most extensive and the 25th most populous of the 50 United States. Its capital is Baton Rouge and largest city is New Orleans. Louisiana is the only state in the U.S. with political subdivisions termed parishes, which are local governments equivalent to counties. The largest parish by population is East Baton Rouge Parish, and the largest by land area is Cameron Parish.

Much of the state's lands were formed from sediment washed down the Mississippi River, leaving enormous deltas and vast areas of coastal marsh and swamp. The two "Deltas" are located in Monroe, the parish seat of Ouachita Parish, Shreveport, the parish seat of Caddo Parish, and Alexandria, the parish seat of Rapides Parish, for the small Delta, and Monroe, Lake Charles, and New Orleans for the large Delta. They are referred to as Deltas because they form a perfect triangle shape when the points are lined up. These contain a rich southern biota; typical examples include birds such as ibis and egrets. There are also many species of tree frogs, and fish such as sturgeon and paddlefish. In more elevated areas, fire is a natural process in the landscape, and has produced extensive areas of longleaf pine forest and wet savannas. These support an exceptionally large number of plant species, including many species of orchids and carnivorous plants. 

Some Louisiana urban environments have a multicultural, multilingual heritage, being so strongly influenced by a mixture of 18th-century French, Spanish, Native American, and African cultures that they are considered to be somewhat exceptional in the US. Before the American purchase of the territory in 1803, the current Louisiana State had been both a Spanish and French colony. In addition, the pattern of development included importing numerous African slaves in the 18th century with many from the same region of West Africa, thus concentrating their culture. In the post-Civil War environment, Anglo-Americans increased the pressure for Anglicization, and in 1915, English was made the only official language of the state. It has more Native American tribes than any other southern state, including four that are federally recognized, ten that are state recognized, and four that have not yet received recognition. Dayna Bowker Lee, "Louisiana Indians in the 21st Century", Louisiana Folklife Program, 2013 

==Etymology==
Louisiana was named after Louis XIV, King of France from 1643 to 1715. When Ren-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle claimed the territory drained by the Mississippi River for France, he named it , meaning "Land of Louis". Once part of the French Colonial Empire, the Louisiana Territory stretched from present-day Mobile Bay to just north of the present-day Canadian border, and included a small part of what is now southwestern Canada.

==Geology==

The Gulf of Mexico did not exist 250 million years ago when there was but one supercontinent, Pangea. As Pangea split apart, the Atlantic Ocean and Gulf of Mexico opened. Louisiana slowly developed, over millions of years, from water into land, and from north to south. The oldest rocks are exposed in the north, in areas such as the Kisatchie National Forest. The oldest rocks date back to the early Tertiary Era, some 60 million years ago. The history of the formation of these rocks can be found in D. Spearing's Roadside Geology of Louisiana. Spearing, D. (1995). Roadside Geology of Louisiana. Mountain Press Publishing Company, Missoula, MT. 225 pp. 519 

The youngest parts of the state were formed during the last 7,500 years as successive deltas of the Mississippi River: the Maringouin, Teche, St. Bernard, Lafourche, the modern Mississippi, and now the Atchafalaya. Coleman, J. M., Roberts, H. H., and Stone, G. W. (1998). "Mississippi River Delta: an overview", Journal of Coastal Research, 14, 698716. The sediments were carried from north to south by the Mississippi River.

In between the Tertiary rocks of the north, and the relatively new sediments along the coast, is a vast belt known as the Pleistocene Terraces. Their age and distribution can be largely related to the rise and fall of sea levels during past ice ages. In general, the northern terraces have had sufficient time for rivers to cut deep channels, while the newer terraces tend to be much flatter. Holland, W.C. 1944. "Physiographic divisions of the Quaternary lowlands of Louisiana", Proceedings of the Louisiana Academy of Sciences VIII: 1024. 

Salt domes are also found in Louisiana. Their origin can be traced back to the early Gulf of Mexico, when the shallow ocean had high rates of evaporation. There are several hundred salt domes in the state; one of the most familiar is Avery Island. Kniffen, F.B. and Hilliard, S.B. 1988. Louisiana: Its Land and People. Revised edition. Louisiana State University Press, Baton Rouge. p. 66-68. Salt domes are important not only as a source of salt; they also serve as underground traps for oil and gas. Spearing (1995), Roadside Geology, pp. 1930 

==Geography==
Map of Louisiana
Aerial view of Louisiana wetland habitats.
A field of yellow wildflowers in Saint Bernard Parish, Louisiana 
Honey Island Swamp, Louisiana
Entrance to the Bald Eagle Nest Trail at South Toledo Bend State Park
Bogue Chitto State Park
Louisiana is bordered to the west by Texas; to the north by Arkansas; to the east by the state of Mississippi; and to the south by the Gulf of Mexico. The surface of the state may properly be divided into two parts, the uplands of the north, and the alluvial along the coast.

The alluvial region includes low swamp lands, coastal marshlands and beaches, and barrier islands that cover about 20,000 sqmi. This area lies principally along the Gulf of Mexico and the Mississippi River, which traverses the state from north to south for a distance of about 600 miles (1,000 km) and empties into the Gulf of Mexico; the Red River; the Ouachita River and its branches; and other minor streams (some of which are called bayous).

The breadth of the alluvial region along the Mississippi is from 10 to 60 miles (15 to 100 km), and along the other rivers, the alluvial region averages about 10 miles (15 km) across. The Mississippi River flows along a ridge formed by its own natural deposits (known as a levee), from which the lands decline toward a river beyond at an average fall of six feet per mile (3 m/km). The alluvial lands along other streams present similar features.

The higher and contiguous hill lands of the north and northwestern part of the state have an area of more than 25,000 sqmi. They consist of prairie and woodlands. The elevations above sea level range from 10 feet (3 m) at the coast and swamp lands to 50 and 60 feet (1518 m) at the prairie and alluvial lands. In the uplands and hills, the elevations rise to Driskill Mountain, the highest point in the state at only 535 feet (163 m) above sea level.

Besides the navigable waterways already named, there are the Sabine, forming the western boundary; and the Pearl, the eastern boundary; the Calcasieu (KAL-cah-shew), the Mermentau, the Vermilion, Bayou Teche, the Atchafalaya (a-CHAF-a-LI-a), the Boeuf (bEHf), Bayou Lafourche, the Courtableau River, Bayou D'Arbonne, the Macon River, the Tensas (TEN-saw), Amite River, the Tchefuncte (CHA-Funk-ta), the Tickfaw, the Natalbany River, and a number of other smaller streams, constituting a natural system of navigable waterways, aggregating over 4000 mi long.

The state also has political jurisdiction over the approximately 3 mi-wide portion of subsea land of the inner continental shelf in the Gulf of Mexico. Through a peculiarity of the political geography of the United States, this is substantially less than the 9 mi-wide jurisdiction of nearby states Texas and Florida, which, like Louisiana, have extensive Gulf coastlines. 

The southern coast of Louisiana in the United States is among the fastest-disappearing areas in the world. This has largely resulted from human mismanagement of the coast (see Wetlands of Louisiana). At one time, the land was added to when spring floods from the Mississippi River added sediment and stimulated marsh growth; the land is now shrinking. There are multiple causes. 

Artificial levees block spring flood water that would bring fresh water and sediment to marshes. Swamps have been extensively logged, leaving canals and ditches that allow saline water to move inland. Canals dug for the oil and gas industry also allow storms to move sea water inland, where it damages swamps and marshes. Rising sea waters have exacerbated the problem. Some researchers estimate that the state is losing a land mass equivalent to 30 football fields every day. There are many proposals to save coastal areas by reducing human damage, including restoring natural floods from the Mississippi. Without such restoration, coastal communities will continue to disappear. Boesch, D. F., Josselyn, M. N., Mehta, A. J., Morris, J. T., Nuttle, W. K., Simenstad, C. A., and Swift, D. P. J. (1994). "Scientific assessment of coastal wetland loss, restoration and management in Louisiana", Journal of Coastal Research, Special Issue No. 20. And as the communities disappear, more and more people are leaving the region. Tidwell, Michael. Bayou Farewell: The Rich Life and Tragic Death of Louisiana's Cajun Coast. Vintage Departures: New York, 2003 ISBN 978-0-375-42076-4. Since the coastal wetlands support an economically important coastal fishery, the loss of wetlands is adversely affecting this industry.

===Climate===

Louisiana has a humid subtropical climate (Kppen climate classification Cfa), perhaps the most "classic" example of a humid subtropical climate of all the Southcentral states. It has long, hot, humid summers and short, mild winters. The subtropical characteristics of the state are due in large part to the influence of the Gulf of Mexico, which at its farthest point is no more than 200 miles (320 km) away.

Rain is frequent throughout the year, although the summer is slightly wetter than the rest of the year. There is a dip in precipitation in October. Southern Louisiana receives far more copious rainfall, especially during the winter months. Summers in Louisiana have high temperatures from mid-June to mid-September averaging 90 F (32 C) or more, and overnight lows averaging above 70 F (22 C).

In the summer, the extreme maximum temperature is much warmer in the north than in the south, with temperatures near the Gulf of Mexico occasionally reaching 100 F (38 C), although temperatures above 95 F (35 C) are commonplace. In northern Louisiana, the temperatures reach above 105 F (41 C) in the summer.

Temperatures are generally mildly warm in the winter in the southern part of the state, with highs around New Orleans, Baton Rouge, the rest of south Louisiana, and the Gulf of Mexico averaging 66 F (19 C). The northern part of the state is mildly cool in the winter, with highs averaging 59 F (15 C). The overnight lows in the winter average well above freezing throughout the state, with 46 F (8 C) the average near the Gulf and an average low of 37 F (3 C) in the winter in the northern part of the state.

Louisiana gets some cold fronts, which frequently drop the temperatures below 20 F (8 C) in the northern part of the state, but almost never do so in the southern part of the state. Snow is not very common near the Gulf of Mexico, although residents in the northern parts of the state can expect one to three snowfalls per year, with the frequency increasing northwards. Louisiana's highest recorded temperature is 114 F in Plain Dealing on August 10, 1936, while the coldest recorded temperature is -16 F at Minden on February 13, 1899.

Louisiana is often affected by tropical cyclones and is very vulnerable to strikes by major hurricanes, particularly the lowlands around and in the New Orleans area. The unique geography of the region, with the many bayous, marshes and inlets, can result in water damage across a wide area from major hurricanes. The area is also prone to frequent thunderstorms, especially in the summer. 

The entire state averages over 60 days of thunderstorms a year, more than any other state except Florida. Louisiana averages 27 tornadoes annually. The entire state is vulnerable to a tornado strike, with the extreme southern portion of the state slightly less so than the rest of the state. Tornadoes are more common from January to March in the southern part of the state, and from February through March in the northern part of the state. 

===Hurricanes since 1950===
*October 5, 2013, Hurricane Karen hit the Louisiana Gulf Coast
*August 2829, 2012, Hurricane Isaac hits southeast Louisiana 7 years after Katrina (2005)

*September 1, 2008, Gustav made landfall along the coast near Cocodrie in southeastern Louisiana. As late as August 31 it had been projected by the National Hurricane Center that the hurricane would remain at Category 3 or above on September 1, but in the event the center of Gustav made landfall as a strong Category 2 hurricane (1 mph below Category 3), and dropped to Category 1 soon after. Hurricane Gustav makes landfall, weakens to Category 1 storm Fox News, September 2, 2008. As a result of NHC's forecasts, a massive evacuation of New Orleans took place after many residents having failed to leave for Katrina in 2005. Mandatory evacuations to begin Sunday morning in New Orleans CNN, August 31, 2008. A significant number of deaths were caused by or attributed to Gustav. Around 1.5 million people were without power in Louisiana on September 1. 

*September 24, 2005, Rita (Category 3 at landfall) struck southwestern Louisiana, flooding many parishes and cities along the coast, including Cameron Parish, Lake Charles, and other towns. The storm's winds weakened the damaged levees in New Orleans and caused renewed flooding in parts of the city.

*August 29, 2005, Katrina (Category 3 at landfall) struck and devastated southeastern Louisiana, where it breached and undermined levees in New Orleans, causing 80% of the city to flood. Most people had been evacuated, but the majority of the population became homeless. The city was virtually closed until October. It is estimated that more than two million people in the Gulf region were displaced by the hurricane, and that more than 1,500 fatalities resulted in Louisiana alone. A public outcry criticized governments at the local, state, and federal levels, for lack of preparation and slowness of response. Louisiana residents relocated across the country for temporary housing, and many have not returned.

*Oct 3, 2002, Lili (Category 1 at landfall)

*August 1992, Andrew (Category 3 at landfall) struck south-central Louisiana. It killed four people; knocked out power to nearly 150,000 citizens; and destroyed crops worth hundreds of millions of dollars.

*August 1969, Camille (Category 5) caused a 23.4 ft storm surge and killed 250 people. Although Camille officially made landfall in Mississippi and the worst damage occurred there, it also had effects in Louisiana. New Orleans remained dry, with the exception of mild rain-generated flooding in the most low-lying areas.

*September 9, 1965, Betsy (Category 3 at landfall) came ashore in Louisiana, causing massive destruction as the first hurricane in history to cause one billion dollars in damage (over ten billion in inflation-adjusted USD). The storm hit New Orleans and flooded nearly 35% of the city (including the Lower 9th Ward, Gentilly, and parts of Mid-City). The death toll in the state was 76.

*June 1957, Audrey (Category 4) devastated southwest Louisiana, destroying or severely damaging 6080 percent of the homes and businesses from Cameron to Grand Chenier. 40,000 people were left homeless and more than 300 people in the state died.

*August 15-17th, 1915: A hurricane made landfall just west of Galveston. Gales howled throughout Cameron and Vermilion Parishes and as far east as Mobile. Produced tides of 11 feet at Cameron (called Leesburg at the time), 10 feet at Grand Cheniere, and 9.5 feet at Marsh Island; Grand Isle reported water 6 feet deep across the city. The light keeper at the Sabine Pass lighthouse had to turn the lens by hand, as vibrations caused by the wave action put the clockwork out of order. At Sabine Bank, 17 miles offshore the Mouth of the Sabine, damage was noted. Damage estimates for Louisiana and Texas totaled around $50 million. 

1915 over 300 people drowned below Montegut - 4 can be identified as white, none of the others have been identified and are assumed to be Indians. The Indian settlement was about 10 miles below Montegut, called by the Indians - Taire-bonne - is now in swamp and can only be reached by boat. This hurricane caused the survivors to move to higher ground.

===Protected areas===
Owing to its location and geology, the state has high biological diversity. Some vital areas, such as southwestern prairie, have experienced a loss in excess of 98 percent. The pine flatwoods are also at great risk, mostly from fire suppression and urban sprawl. There is not yet a properly organized system of natural areas to represent and protect Louisiana's biological diversity. Such a system would consist of a protected system of core areas linked by biological corridors, such as Florida is planning. Florida Greenways Commission. 1994. Report to the Governor. Creating a statewide greenways system: For people ... for wildlife ... for Florida. Florida Department of Environmental Protection, Tallahassee, FL. 

Louisiana contains a number of areas which are, in varying degrees, protected from human intervention. Lester, G. D., S.G. Sorensen, P. L. Faulkner, C. S. Reid and I. E. Maxit. 2005. Louisiana Comprehensive Wildlife Conservation Strategy. Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries, Baton Rouge, LA In addition to National Park Service sites and areas and a United States National Forest, Louisiana operates a system of state parks, state historic sites, one state preservation area, one state forest, and many Wildlife Management Areas. The Nature Conservancy also owns and manages a set of natural areas.

One of Louisiana's largest natural areas is Kisatchie National Forest. It is some 600,000 acres in area, more than half of which is vital flatwoods vegetation, which supports many rare plant and animal species. These include the Louisiana pine snake and Red-cockaded woodpecker. The system of protected cypress swamps around Lake Pontchartrain provides another large and important natural area, with southern wetland species including egrets, alligators, and sturgeon. At least 12 core areas would be needed to build a "protected areas system" for the state; these would range from southwestern prairies, to the Pearl River Floodplain in the east, to the Mississippi River alluvial swamps in the north. 

The Louisiana Natural and Scenic Rivers System provides a degree of protection for 48 rivers, streams and bayous in the state. It is administered by the Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries.

====National Park Service====
Historic or scenic areas managed, protected, or otherwise recognized by the National Park Service include:
*Atchafalaya National Heritage Area in Ascension Parish;
*Cane River National Heritage Area near Natchitoches;
*Cane River Creole National Historical Park near Natchitoches;
*Jean Lafitte National Historical Park and Preserve, headquartered in New Orleans, with units in St. Bernard Parish, Barataria (Crown Point), and Acadiana (Lafayette);
*Poverty Point National Monument at Epps, Louisiana; and
*Saline Bayou, a designated National Wild and Scenic River near Winn Parish in northern Louisiana.

====US Forest Service====
*Kisatchie National Forest is Louisiana's only national forest. It includes 600,000 acres in central and north Louisiana with large areas of flatwoods and longleaf pine forest.

====State parks and recreational areas====

Louisiana operates a system of 22 state parks, 17 state historic sites and one state preservation area.

===Transportation===
The Louisiana Department of Transportation and Development is the state government organization in charge of maintaining public transportation, roadways, bridges, canals, select levees, floodplain management, port facilities, commercial vehicles, and aviation which includes 69 airports.

Gulf Intracoastal Waterway in Louisiana near New Orleans

====Interstate highways====

 * ** ** ** ** ** ** * * ** * * * 

====United States highways====

 * * * * * ** * * ** ** * * * * ** * 

The Intracoastal Waterway is an important means of transporting commercial goods such as petroleum and petroleum products, agricultural produce, building materials and manufactured goods.

In 2011, Louisiana ranked among the five deadliest states for debris/litter-caused vehicle accidents per total number of registered vehicles and population size. Figures derived from National Highway Traffic Safety Administration the NTSHA show at least 25 persons in Louisiana were killed per year in motor vehicle collisions with non-fixed objects, including debris, dumped litter, animals and their carcasses.

==History==

===Prehistory===
Louisiana was inhabited by Native Americans for many millennia before the arrival of Europeans in the 16th century. During the Middle Archaic period, Louisiana was the site of the earliest mound complex in North America and one of the earliest dated, complex constructions in the Americas, the Watson Brake site near present-day Monroe. An 11-mound complex, it was built about 5400 BP (3500 BCE). Amlie A. Walker, "Earliest Mound Site", Archaeology Magazine, Volume 51 Number 1, January/February 1998 The Middle Archaic sites of Caney and Frenchman's Bend have also been securely dated to 56005000 BP, demonstrating that seasonal hunter-gatherers organized to build complex constructions in present-day northern Louisiana. The Hedgepeth Site in Lincoln Parish is more recent, dated to 52004500 BP. 

Nearly 2,000 years later, Poverty Point, the largest and best-known Late Archaic site in the state, was built. Modern-day Epps developed near it. The Poverty Point culture may have reached its peak around 1500 BCE, making it the first complex culture, and possibly the first tribal culture in North America. Jon L. Gibson, PhD, "Poverty Point: The First Complex Mississippi Culture", 2001, Delta Blues, accessed October 26, 2009 It lasted until approximately 700 BCE.

The Poverty Point culture was followed by the Tchefuncte and Lake Cormorant cultures of the Tchula period, local manifestations of Early Woodland period. The Tchefuncte culture were the first people in Louisiana to make large amounts of pottery. These cultures lasted until 200 CE. The Middle Woodland period starts in Louisiana with the Marksville culture in the southern and eastern part of the state and the Fourche Maline culture in the northwestern part of the state. The Marksville culture takes its name from the Marksville Prehistoric Indian Site in Avoyelles Parish, Louisiana.

These cultures were contemporaneous with the Hopewell cultures of Ohio and Illinois, and participated in the Hopewell Exchange Network. Trade with peoples to the southwest brought the bow and arrow. The first burial mounds were built at this time. Political power begins to be consolidated as the first platform mounds at ritual centers are constructed for the developing hereditary political and religious leadership. 

By 400 CE in the southern part of the state the Late Woodland period had begun with the Baytown culture. Population increased dramatically and there is strong evidence of a growing cultural and political complexity. Many Coles Creek sites were erected over earlier Woodland period mortuary mounds. Scholars have speculated that emerging elites were symbolically and physically appropriating dead ancestors to emphasize and project their own authority. 

The Mississippian period in Louisiana was when Plaquemine and the Caddoan Mississippian cultures developed and extensive maize agriculture was adopted. The Plaquemine culture in the lower Mississippi River Valley in western Mississippi and eastern Louisiana began in 1200 CE and continued to about 1400 CE. Good examples of this culture are the Medora Site in West Baton Rouge Parish, Louisiana, and the Emerald Mound, Winterville and Holly Bluff sites in Mississippi. 

Plaquemine culture was contemporaneous with the Middle Mississippian culture represented by the primary settlement, the Cahokia site near St. Louis, Missouri. This group is considered ancestral to the Natchez and Taensa Peoples. 

By 1000 CE in the northwestern part of the state, the Fourche Maline culture had evolved into the Caddoan Mississippian culture. The Caddoan Mississippians covered a large territory, including what is now eastern Oklahoma, western Arkansas, northeast Texas, and northwest Louisiana. Archeological evidence has demonstrated that the cultural continuity is unbroken from prehistory to the present. The Caddo and related Caddo language speakers in prehistoric times and at first European contact were the direct ancestors of the modern Caddo Nation of Oklahoma of today. 

Many current place names in the state, including Atchafalaya, Natchitouches (now spelled Natchitoches), Caddo, Houma, Tangipahoa, and Avoyel (as Avoyelles), are transliterations of those used in various Native American languages.

===Exploration and colonization by Europeans===
Louisiana regions
The first European explorers to visit Louisiana came in 1528 when a Spanish expedition led by Panfilo de Narvez located the mouth of the Mississippi River. In 1542, Hernando de Soto's expedition skirted to the north and west of the state (encountering Caddo and Tunica groups) and then followed the Mississippi River down to the Gulf of Mexico in 1543. Spanish interest in Louisiana then lay dormant.

In the late 17th century, French and French Canadian expeditions, which included sovereign, religious and commercial aims, established a foothold on the Mississippi River and Gulf Coast. With its first settlements, France lay claim to a vast region of North America and set out to establish a commercial empire and French nation stretching from the Gulf of Mexico to Canada.

In 1682, the French explorer Robert Cavelier de La Salle named the region Louisiana to honor France's King Louis XIV. The first permanent settlement, Fort Maurepas (at what is now Ocean Springs, Mississippi, near Biloxi), was founded by Pierre Le Moyne d'Iberville, a French military officer from Canada, in 1699. By then the French had also built a small fort at the mouth of the Mississippi at a settlement they named La Balise (or La Balize), "seamark" in French. By 1721 they built a 62 ft wooden lighthouse-type structure to guide ships on the river. David Roth, "Louisiana Hurricane History: 18th century (17221800)", Tropical Weather  National Weather Service  Lake Charles, LA, 2003, accessed May 7, 2008 

The French colony of Louisiana originally claimed all the land on both sides of the Mississippi River and north to French territory in Canada.
The following States were part of Louisiana: Louisiana, Mississippi, Arkansas, Oklahoma, Missouri, Kansas, Nebraska, Iowa, Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Wisconsin, Minnesota, North Dakota, South Dakota.

The settlement of Natchitoches (along the Red River in present-day northwest Louisiana) was established in 1714 by Louis Juchereau de St. Denis, making it the oldest permanent European settlement in the Louisiana Purchase territory. The French settlement had two purposes: to establish trade with the Spanish in Texas, and to deter Spanish advances into Louisiana. Also, the northern terminus of the Old San Antonio Road was at Natchitoches. The settlement soon became a flourishing river port and crossroads, giving rise to vast cotton kingdoms along the river. Over time, planters developed large plantations and built fine homes in a growing town. This became a pattern repeated in New Orleans and other places.
French Acadians, who came to be known as Cajuns, settled the swamps of southern Louisiana, especially in the Atchafalaya Basin.
Louisiana's French settlements contributed to further exploration and outposts, concentrated along the banks of the Mississippi and its major tributaries, from Louisiana to as far north as the region called the Illinois Country, around present-day St. Louis, Missouri. See also: French colonization of the Americas

Initially Mobile, Alabama, and Biloxi, Mississippi, functioned as the capital of the colony. Recognizing the importance of the Mississippi River to trade and military interests, France made New Orleans the seat of civilian and military authority in 1722. From then until the United States acquired the territory in the Louisiana Purchase on December 20, 1803, France and Spain traded control of the region's colonial empire.

In the 1720s, German immigrants settled along the Mississippi River in a region referred to as the German Coast.

France ceded most of its territory to the east of the Mississippi to Great Britain in the aftermath of Britain's victory in the Seven Years' War or French and Indian War, as it is known in North America. It retained the area around New Orleans and the parishes around Lake Pontchartrain. The rest of Louisiana became a colony of Spain after the Seven Years' War by the Treaty of Fontainebleau of 1763.

In 1765, during the period of Spanish rule, several thousand French-speaking refugees from the region of Acadia (now Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, and Prince Edward Island, Canada) made their way to Louisiana after having been expelled from their homelands by the British during the French and Indian War. They settled chiefly in the southwestern Louisiana region now called Acadiana. The Spanish, eager to gain more Catholic settlers, welcomed the Acadian refugees. Cajuns descend from these Acadian refugees.

Spanish Canary Islanders, called Isleos, emigrated from the Canary Islands of Spain to Louisiana under the Spanish crown between 1778 and 1783.

In 1800, France's Napoleon Bonaparte reacquired Louisiana from Spain in the Treaty of San Ildefonso, an arrangement kept secret for two years.

===Expansion of slavery===
Bienville brought the first two African slaves to Louisiana in 1708, transporting them from a French colony in the West Indies. In 1709, French financier Antoine Crozat obtained a monopoly of commerce in La Louisiane, which extended from the Gulf of Mexico to what is now Illinois. "That concession allowed him to bring in a cargo of blacks from Africa every year," the British historian Hugh Thomas wrote. The Slave Trade: The Story of the Atlantic Slave Trade, 14401870 by Hugh Thomas. 1997: Simon and Schuster. p. 242-43 Physical conditions, including disease, were so harsh there was high mortality among both the colonists and the slaves, resulting in continuing demand and importation of slaves.

Starting in 1719, traders began to import slaves in higher numbers; two French ships, the Du Maine and the Aurore, arrived in New Orleans carrying more than 500 black slaves coming from Africa. Previous slaves in Louisiana had been transported from French colonies in the West Indies. By the end of 1721, New Orleans counted 1256 inhabitants, of which about half were slaves.

With the growth in slavery, in 1724, the colony adopted Louis XVs Code Noir (Black Code) in Louisiana. Louis XIVs Code Noir dates to the late seventeenth century. It was nominally to protect the living and working conditions for African slaves. Historians have assessed it also as a way to keep slaves more content by granting some freedoms and protecting their families. Officials were aware of the risk of the small number of colonists in hostile territory. In keeping with Catholic principles, the Codes forbade the separation of family members, especially any selling of young children away from their parents. In those years, a young person was considered an adult by the age of thirteen, and subject to sale away from the family from that age. Masters relied on slave labor for cultivation of their land and could not afford to spark off rebellions that may have turned into violence, or to lose many slaves from their running away. The fugitive slaves, called maroons, could easily hide in the backcountry of the bayous and survive in small settlements. The word maroon comes from the French marron, derived from the Spanish cimarrn; it means feral or fugitive.

Article II of the Code Noir of 1724, required masters to provide their slaves with religious education, meaning Roman Catholicism. Sunday was to be a day of rest for slaves. On days off, slaves were expected to feed and take care of themselves. During the 1740s economic crisis in the colony, masters had trouble feeding their slaves and themselves. Giving them time off also effectively gave more power to slaves, who started cultivating their own gardens and crafting items for sale as their own property. They began to participate in the economic development of the colony while at the same time increasing independence and self-subsistence.

The Code forbade mixed marriages (article VI) but did little to protect slave women from sexual advances by masters, overseers or other slaves. On balance, the Code benefitted the masters but had more protections and flexibility than did the institution of slavery in the southern Thirteen Colonies.

In the late 18th century, the last Spanish governor of the Louisiana territory wrote:
"Truly, it is impossible for lower Louisiana to get along without slaves" and with the use of slaves, the colony had been "making great strides toward prosperity and wealth." 

When the United States made the Louisiana Purchase in 1803, it was soon accepted that enslaved Africans could be brought to Louisiana as easily as they were brought to neighboring Mississippi, though it violated U.S. law to do so. Hugh Thomas, The Slave Trade: The Story of the Atlantic Slave Trade, 14401870, Simon and Schuster, 1997, p. 548. Despite demands by United States Rep. James Hillhouse and by the pamphleteer Thomas Paine to enforce existing federal law against slavery in the newly acquired territory, slavery prevailed because it was the source of great profits and the lowest-cost labor.

At the start of the 19th century, Louisiana was a small producer of sugar with a relatively small number of slaves, compared to Saint-Domingue and the West Indies. It soon became a major sugar producer as new settlers arrived to develop plantations. William C. C. Claiborne, Louisiana's first United States governor, said that African slave labor was needed because white laborers "cannot be had in this unhealthy climate." Thomas (1997), The Slave Trade, p. 549. Hugh Thomas wrote that Claiborne was unable to enforce the abolition of the African slave trade, which the US and Great Britain adopted in 1808. The United States continued to protect the domestic slave trade, including the coastwise trade, the transport of slaves by ship along the Atlantic Coast and to New Orleans and other Gulf ports.

As the Deep South was developed for both cotton and sugar in the nineteenth century, demand increased for slaves. This resulted in the first half of the 19th century in a massive forced migration through the slave trade of more than one million African Americans from the Upper South, where surplus labor was sold, to the Deep South. Many traders brought slaves to New Orleans for domestic sale; by 1840 New Orleans had the largest slave market in the country, and was the third-largest city, and one of the wealthiest.
Free woman of color with quadroon daughter; late 18th-century collage painting, New Orleans.

The United States adapted Louisiana law by adding parts of US or southern state laws. The Louisiana Black Code of 1806 made the cruel punishment of slaves a crime, but masters and overseers were seldom prosecuted for such acts. 

===Haitian migration and influence===
Spanish control of Louisiana lasted from 1763 to 1800. Beginning in the 1790s, waves of immigration took place from Saint-Domingue, following a slave rebellion that started in 1791. Over the next decade, thousands of migrants landed in Louisiana from the island, including ethnic Europeans, free people of color, and African slaves, some brought in by each group. They greatly increased the French-speaking population in New Orleans and Louisiana, as well as the number of Africans, and the slaves reinforced African culture in the city. The process was complex, but uprisings continued, and in 1803, France pulled out its surviving troops from the island, having suffered the loss of two-thirds, mostly to yellow fever. In 1804, Haiti, the second republic in the western hemisphere, proclaimed its independence, achieved by slave leaders. "The Slave Rebellion of 1791". Library of Congress Country Studies. 

Pierre Clment de Laussat (Governor of Louisiana, 1803) said: "Saint-Domingue was, of all our colonies in the Antilles, the one whose mentality and customs influenced Louisiana the most. Sieur de Bienville, "In Motion", African American Migration Experience, accessed July 22, 2012 

portrait of Jean Lafitte, early 19th century, Rosenberg Library, Galveston, Texas.JPG|thumb|upright|French pirate Jean Lafitte, who operated in New Orleans, was born in Port-au-Prince around 1782. [http://www.smithsonianmag.com/history-archaeology/neworleans.html Saving New Orleans, Smithsonian magazine, August 2006. Retrieved February 16, 2010. ]]

===Purchase by the United States (1803)===

When the United States won its independence from Great Britain in 1783, one of its major concerns was having a European power on its western boundary, and the need for unrestricted access to the Mississippi River. As American settlers pushed west, they found that the Appalachian Mountains provided a barrier to shipping goods eastward. The easiest way to ship produce was to use a flatboat to float it down the Ohio and Mississippi Rivers to the port of New Orleans, from whence goods could be put on ocean-going vessels. The problem with this route was that the Spanish owned both sides of the Mississippi below Natchez.

Napoleon's ambitions in Louisiana involved the creation of a new empire centered on the Caribbean sugar trade. By the terms of the Treaty of Amiens of 1800, Great Britain returned ownership of the islands of Martinique and Guadaloupe to the French. Napoleon looked upon Louisiana as a depot for these sugar islands, and as a buffer to U.S. settlement. In October 1801 he sent a large military force to take back Saint-Domingue, then under control of Toussaint Louverture after a slave rebellion.

When the army led by Napoleon's brother-in-law Leclerc was defeated, Napoleon decided to sell Louisiana.
Map of Louisiana in 1800
Thomas Jefferson, third President of the United States, was disturbed by Napoleon's plans to re-establish French colonies in America. With the possession of New Orleans, Napoleon could close the Mississippi to U.S. commerce at any time. Jefferson authorized Robert R. Livingston, U.S. Minister to France, to negotiate for the purchase of the City of New Orleans, portions of the east bank of the Mississippi, and free navigation of the river for U.S. commerce. Livingston was authorized to pay up to $2 million.

An official transfer of Louisiana to French ownership had not yet taken place, and Napoleon's deal with the Spanish was a poorly kept secret on the frontier. On October 18, 1802, however, Juan Ventura Morales, Acting Intendant of Louisiana, made public the intention of Spain to revoke the right of deposit at New Orleans for all cargo from the United States. The closure of this vital port to the United States caused anger and consternation. Commerce in the west was virtually blockaded. Historians believe that the revocation of the right of deposit was prompted by abuses by the Americans, particularly smuggling, and not by French intrigues as was believed at the time. President Jefferson ignored public pressure for war with France, and appointed James Monroe a special envoy to Napoleon, to assist in obtaining New Orleans for the United States. Jefferson also raised the authorized expenditure to $10 million.

However, on April 11, 1803, French Foreign Minister Talleyrand surprised Livingston by asking how much the United States was prepared to pay for the entirety of Louisiana, not just New Orleans and the surrounding area (as Livingston's instructions covered). Monroe agreed with Livingston that Napoleon might withdraw this offer at any time (leaving them with no ability to obtain the desired New Orleans area), and that approval from President Jefferson might take months, so Livingston and Monroe decided to open negotiations immediately. By April 30, they closed a deal for the purchase of the entire Louisiana territory of 828000 sqmi for 60 million Francs (approximately $15 million).

Part of this sum, $3.5 million, was used to forgive debts owed by France to the United States. Peter Kastor,The Nation's Crucible: The Louisiana Purchase and the Creation of America, (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2004) 40 The payment was made in United States bonds, which Napoleon sold at face value to the Dutch firm of Hope and Company, and the British banking house of Baring, at a discount of 87 per each $100 unit. As a result, France received only $8,831,250 in cash for Louisiana.
Dutiful English banker Alexander Baring conferred with Marbois in Paris, shuttled to the United States to pick up the bonds, took them to Britain, and returned to France with the money  which Napoleon used to wage war against Baring's own country.

Louisiana Purchase, 1803
When news of the purchase reached the United States, Jefferson was surprised. He had authorized the expenditure of $10 million for a port city, and instead received treaties committing the government to spend $15 million on a land package which would double the size of the country. Jefferson's political opponents in the Federalist Party argued the Louisiana purchase was a worthless desert, and that the Constitution did not provide for the acquisition of new land or negotiating treaties without the consent of the Senate. What really worried the opposition was the new states which would inevitably be carved from the Louisiana territory, strengthening Western and Southern interests in Congress, and further reducing the influence of New England Federalists in national affairs. President Jefferson was an enthusiastic supporter of westward expansion, and held firm in his support for the treaty. Despite Federalist objections, the U.S. Senate ratified the Louisiana treaty on October 20, 1803.

A transfer ceremony was held in New Orleans on November 29, 1803. Since the Louisiana territory had never officially been turned over to the French, the Spanish took down their flag, and the French raised theirs. The following day, General James Wilkinson accepted possession of New Orleans for the United States. A similar ceremony was held in St. Louis on March 9, 1804, when a French tricolor was raised near the river, replacing the Spanish national flag. The following day, Captain Amos Stoddard of the First U.S. Artillery marched his troops into town and had the American flag run up the fort's flagpole. The Louisiana territory was officially transferred to the United States government, represented by Meriwether Lewis.

The Louisiana Territory, purchased for less than 3 cents an acre, doubled the size of the United States overnight, without a war or the loss of a single American life, and set a precedent for the purchase of territory. It opened the way for the eventual expansion of the United States across the continent to the Pacific.

===Statehood (1812)===
Louisiana became a U.S. State on April 30, 1812.

By 1840 New Orleans had the biggest slave market in the United States, which contributed greatly to the economy. It had become one of the wealthiest cities and the third largest city in the nation. Walter Johnson, Soul by Soul: Life Inside the Antebellum Slave Market, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1999, p.2 The ban on the African slave trade and importation of slaves had increased demand in the domestic market. During these decades after the American Revolutionary War, more than one million enslaved African Americans underwent forced migration from the Upper South to the Deep South, two thirds of them in the slave trade. Others were transported by their masters as slaveholders moved west for new lands. In Motion: The African-American Migration Experience- The Domestic Slave Trade, New York Public Library, Schomburg Center for Study of Black Culture, 2002, accessed April 27, 2008 Peter Kolchin, American Slavery: 16191877, New York: Hill and Wang, 1994, pp. 9698 

With changing agriculture in the Upper South as planters shifted from tobacco to less labor-intensive mixed agriculture, planters had excess laborers. Many sold slaves to traders to take to the Deep South. Slaves were driven by traders overland from the Upper South or transported to New Orleans and other coastal markets by ship in the coastwise slave trade. After sales in New Orleans, steamboats operating on the Mississippi transported slaves upstream to markets or plantation destinations at Natchez and Memphis.

===Secession and the Civil War (18601865)===
'Signing the Ordinance of Secession of Louisiana, January 26, 1861', oil on canvas painting, 1861
Capture of New Orleans; April 1862
According to the 1860 census, 331,726 people were enslaved, nearly 47% of the state's total population of 708,002. Historical Census Browser, 1860 US Census, University of Virginia, accessed October 31, 2007 Enfranchised elite whites' strong economic interest in maintaining the slave system contributed to Louisiana's decision to secede from the Union in 1861. It followed other Southern states in seceding after the election of Abraham Lincoln as President of the United States. Louisiana's secession was announced on January 26, 1861, and it became part of the Confederate States of America.

The state was quickly defeated in the Civil War, a result of Union strategy to cut the Confederacy in two by seizing the Mississippi. Federal troops captured New Orleans on April 25, 1862. Because a large part of the population had Union sympathies (or compatible commercial interests), the Federal government took the unusual step of designating the areas of Louisiana under Federal control as a state within the Union, with its own elected representatives to the U.S. Congress.

===Post Civil War (18651945)===
Following the Civil War and emancipation of slaves, violence rose in the South as the war was carried on by paramilitary and private groups. Some ex-Confederate dominated legislatures passed Black Codes to regulate freedmen and generally refused to give them suffrage, nor to extend voting rights to African Americans who had been free before the war and had sometimes obtained education and property (as in New Orleans.) Following the Memphis Riots of 1866 and the New Orleans Riot the same year, Congress developed the Fourteenth Amendment to provide for suffrage and full citizenship for freedmen, and passed Reconstruction Act establishing military districts for those states where conditions were considered the worst, including Louisiana. It was grouped with Texas in what was administered as the Fifth Military District.

African Americans began to live as citizens with some measure of equality before the law. Both freedmen and people of color who had been free before the war began to make more advances in education, family stability and jobs. At the same time, there was tremendous social volatility in the aftermath of war, with many whites actively resisting defeat. White insurgents mobilized to enforce white supremacy, first in Ku Klux Klan chapters.

By 1877, when federal forces were withdrawn, white Democrats in Louisiana and other states had regained control of state legislatures, often by paramilitary groups suppressing black voting through intimidation and violence. Following Mississippi's example in 1890, in 1898, the white Democratic, planter-dominated legislature passed a new constitution that effectively disfranchised blacks and people of color, by requirements for voter registration, such as poll taxes, residency requirements and literacy tests, whose implementation was directed at reducing black voter registration. The effect was immediate and long lasting. In 1896, there were 130,334 black voters on the rolls and about the same number of white voters, in proportion to the state population, which was evenly divided. 

The state population in 1900 was 47% African-American: a total of 652,013 citizens, of whom many in New Orleans were descendants of Creoles of color, the sizeable population of free people of color who had been established long before the Civil War. Historical Census Browser, 1900 US Census, University of Virginia, accessed March 15, 2008 By 1900, two years after the new constitution, only 5,320 black voters were registered in the state. Because of disfranchisement, by 1910 there were only 730 black voters (less than 0.5 percent of eligible African-American men), despite advances in education and literacy among blacks and people of color. Richard H. Pildes, "Democracy, Anti-Democracy and the Canon", Constitutional Commentary, Vol. 17, p.12, accessed March 10, 2008 Without being able to vote, blacks were excluded from juries and running for any political office. White Democrats had established one-party Democratic rule, which they maintained in the state for decades deep into the 20th century until Congressional passage of the 1965 Voting Rights Act provided federal enforcement of the constitutional right to vote.

In the early decades of the 20th century, thousands of African Americans left Louisiana in the Great Migration north to industrial cities for jobs and education, and to escape Jim Crow society and lynchings. The boll weevil infestation and agricultural problems had cost sharecroppers and farmers their jobs. The mechanization of agriculture also reduced the need for laborers. Beginning in the 1940s, blacks went West to California for jobs in its expanding defense industries. "African American Migration Experience: The Great Migration", In Motion, New York Public Library, Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, accessed April 24, 2008 

During some of the Great Depression, Louisiana was led by Governor Huey Long. He was elected to office on populist appeal. Though popular for his public works projects, which provided thousands of jobs to people in need, and for his programs in education and increased suffrage for poor whites, Long was criticized for his allegedly demogogic and autocratic style. He extended patronage control through every branch of Louisiana's state government. Especially controversial were his plans for wealth redistribution in the state. Long's rule ended abruptly when he was assassinated in the state capitol in 1935.

===Post World War II (1945)===
Mobilization for World War II created jobs in the state. Thousands of other workers, black and white alike, migrated to California for better jobs in its burgeoning defense industry. Many African Americans left the state in the Second Great Migration, from the 1940s through the 1960s. The mechanization of agriculture in the 1930s had sharply cut the need for laborers. They sought skilled jobs in the defense industry in California, better education for their children, and living opportunities in communities where they could vote. "African American Migration Experience: The Second Great Migration", In Motion, New York Public Library, Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, accessed April 24, 2008 

In the 1950s the state created new requirements for a citizenship test for voter registration. Despite opposition by the States Rights Party, downstate black voters began to increase their rate of registration, which also reflected the growth of their middle classes. Gradually black voter registration and turnout increased to 20% and more, and it was 32% in 1964, when the first civil rights legislation of the era was passed. Debo P. Adegbile, Voting Rights in Louisiana: 19822006, March 2006, p. 7, accessed March 19, 2008 The percentage of black voters ranged widely in the state during these years, from 93.8% in Evangeline Parish to 1.7% in Tensas Parish, for instance. Edward Blum and Abigail Thernstrom, "Executive Summary", Bullock-Gaddie Expert Report on Louisiana, Feb 10, 2006, p.1, American Enterprise Institute, accessed March 19, 2008 

Patterns of Jim Crow segregation against African Americans still ruled in Louisiana in the 1960s. Because of the Great Migration of blacks to the north and west, and growth of other groups in the state, by 1960 the proportion of African Americans in Louisiana had dropped to 32%. The 1,039,207 black citizens were adversely affected by segregation and efforts at disfranchisement. Historical Census Browser, 1960 US Census, University of Virginia, accessed March 15, 2008 African Americans continued to suffer disproportionate discriminatory application of the state's voter registration rules. Because of better opportunities elsewhere, from 1965 to 1970, blacks continued to migrate from Louisiana, for a net loss of more than 37,000 people. During the latter period, some people began to migrate to cities of the New South for opportunities. William H. Frey, "The New Great Migration: Black Americans' Return to the South, 19652000"; May 2004, p. 3, The Brookings Institution, accessed March 19, 2008 

In August 2005, New Orleans and many other low-lying parts of the state along the Gulf of Mexico were hit by the catastrophic Hurricane Katrina. It caused widespread damage due to breaching of levees and large-scale flooding of more than 80% of the city. Officials issued warnings to evacuate the city and nearby areas, but tens of thousands of people, mostly African Americans, stayed behind, some stranded, and suffered through the damage of the widespread floodwaters.

==Demographics==

Louisiana's population density

The United States Census Bureau estimates that the population of Louisiana was 4,625,470 on July 1, 2013, a 2.0% increase since the 2010 United States Census. The population density of the state is 104.9 people per square mile. 

The center of population of Louisiana is located in Pointe Coupee Parish, in the city of New Roads. 

According to the 2010 United States Census, 3.5% of the population aged 5 and older spoke Spanish at home, up from 2.5% in 2000; and 4.5% spoke French (including Cajun and Louisiana Creole), down from 4.8% in 2000. http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/tableservices/jsf/pages/productview.xhtml?pid=ACS_10_1YR_B16001&prodType=table http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/tableservices/jsf/pages/productview.xhtml?pid=DEC_00_SF3_QTP16&prodType=table 

===Race and ethnicity===
According to the 2010 US census, the population of Louisiana was: Louisiana QuickFacts from the US Census Bureau. Quickfacts.census.gov. Retrieved on July 12, 2013. 
* White Americans  63.7% (59.9% non-Hispanic white, 3.8% White Hispanic)
* Black or African American  32.4%
* Asian  1.7%
* Multiracial American  1.4%
* Native American  0.7%
* some other race  0.1%

The major ancestry groups of Louisiana are French (16.8%), American (9.5%), German (8.3%), Irish (7.5%), English (6.6%), Italian (4.8%) and Scottish (1.1%). 

As of 2011, 49.0% of Louisiana's population younger than age 1 were minorities. 

 Louisiana Racial Breakdown of Population 
 Racial composition 1990 2000 Population of Louisiana: Census 2010 and 2000 Interactive Map, Demographics, Statistics, Quick Facts 2010 
 White 67.3% 63.9% 62.6% 
 Black 30.8% 32.5% 32.0% 
 Asian 1.0% 1.2% 1.6% 
 Native 0.4% 0.6% 0.7% 
 Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander - - - 
 Other race 0.5% 0.7% 1.5% 
 Two or more races - 1.1% 1.6% 

===Population centers===

File:LPD18USSNewOrleansPassingNewOrleans.jpg|New Orleans 360,740
File:OKC BatonRougeSkyline.JPG|Baton Rouge 230,139
Shreveport, la.jpg|Shreveport 200,975
File:VeteransBlvdMetairie.jpg|Metairie 138,481
File:LafayetteCollage.jpg|Lafayette 122,130
File:Downtown Lake Charles.JPG|Lake Charles 72,475
File:Kenner, LA.jpg|Kenner 66,715
File:Bossier City Brdwlk.jpg|Bossier City 62,745
File:Monroe, LA, City Hall IMG 1291.JPG|Monroe 48,815
File:DowntownAlexandria3rd.jpg|Alexandria 47,723

*Louisiana metropolitan areas

*List of cities, towns, and villages in Louisiana

*Louisiana locations by per capita income

==Economy==

The total gross state product in 2010 for Louisiana was US$213.6 billion, placing it 24th in the nation. Its per capita personal income is $30,952, ranking 41st in the United States. 

The state's principal agricultural products include seafood (it is the biggest producer of crawfish in the world, supplying approximately 90%), cotton, soybeans, cattle, sugarcane, poultry and eggs, dairy products, and rice. The seafood industry directly supports an estimated 16,000 jobs. "Louisiana's already-declining seafood industry could be wiped out". MiamiHerald.com. May 15, 2010. Industry generates chemical products, petroleum and coal products, processed foods and transportation equipment, and paper products. Tourism is an important element in the economy, especially in the New Orleans area.

The Port of South Louisiana, located on the Mississippi River between New Orleans and Baton Rouge, is the largest volume shipping port in the Western Hemisphere and 4th largest in the world, as well as the largest bulk cargo port in the world. linked from , accessed September 28, 2006 

New Orleans, Shreveport, and Baton Rouge are home to a thriving film industry. State financial incentives since 2002 and aggressive promotion have given Louisiana the nickname "Hollywood South". Because of its distinctive culture within the United States, only Alaska is Louisiana's rival in popularity as a setting for reality television programs. In late 2007 and early 2008, a 300000 sqft film studio was scheduled to open in Trem, with state-of-the-art production facilities, and a film training institute. 
Tabasco sauce, which is marketed by one of the United States' biggest producers of hot sauce, the McIlhenny Company, originated on Avery Island. Shevory, Kristina. "The Fiery Family," New York Times, March 31, 2007, p. B1. 

Louisiana has three personal income tax brackets, ranging from 2% to 6%. The sales tax rate is 4%: a 3.97% Louisiana sales tax and a .03% Louisiana Tourism Promotion District sales tax. Political subdivisions also levy their own sales tax in addition to the state fees. The state also has a use tax, which includes 4% to be distributed by the Department of Revenue to local governments. Property taxes are assessed and collected at the local level. Louisiana is a subsidized state, receiving $1.44 from the federal government for every dollar paid in.

Tourism and culture are major players in Louisiana's economy, earning an estimated $5.2 billion per year. Louisiana also hosts many important cultural events, such as the World Cultural Economic Forum, which is held annually in the fall at the New Orleans Morial Convention Center. World Culture Economic Forum 

As of January 2010, the state's unemployment rate was 7.4%. Bls.gov; Local Area Unemployment Statistics An African American is three times as likely as a white person to be unemployed in Louisiana. "State Unemployment Trends by Race, Ethnicity and Gender" (PDF). 

===Federal subsidies and spending===
Louisiana taxpayers receive more federal funding per dollar of federal taxes paid compared to the average state. Per dollar of federal tax collected in 2005, Louisiana citizens received approximately $1.78 in the way of federal spending. This ranks the state 4th highest nationally and represents a rise from 1995 when Louisiana received $1.35 per dollar of taxes in federal spending (ranked 7th nationally). Neighboring states and the amount of federal spending received per dollar of federal tax collected were: Texas ($0.94), Arkansas ($1.41), and Mississippi ($2.02). Federal spending in 2005 and subsequent years since has been exceptionally high due to the recovery from Hurricane Katrina.
Tax Foundation.

===Energy===
The oil slick just off the Louisiana coast on April 30, 2010. The Deepwater Horizon oil spill is now considered the biggest environmental disaster in U.S. history.
Louisiana is rich in petroleum and natural gas. Petroleum and gas deposits are found in abundance both onshore and offshore in State-owned waters. In addition, vast petroleum and natural gas reserves are found offshore from Louisiana in the federally administered Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) in the Gulf of Mexico. According to the Energy Information Administration, the Gulf of Mexico OCS is the largest U.S. petroleum-producing region. Excluding the Gulf of Mexico OCS, Louisiana ranks fourth in petroleum production and is home to about 2 percent of total U.S. petroleum reserves. One third of the oil produced in the United States comes from offshore, and 80% of offshore production comes from deep water off Louisiana. The oil industry employs about 58,000 Louisiana residents and has created another 260,000 oil-related jobs, accounting for about 17% of all Louisiana jobs. "Despite BP oil spill, Louisiana still loves Big Oil". CSMonitor.com. May 24, 2010. 

Louisiana's natural gas reserves account for about 5 percent of the U.S. total. The recent discovery of the Haynesville Shale formation in parts of or all of Caddo, Bossier, Bienville, Sabine, De Soto, Red River, Sabine, and Natchitoches parishes have made it the world's fourth largest gas field with some wells initially producing over 25 million cubic feet of gas daily. 

Louisiana was the first site of petroleum drilling over water in the world, on Caddo Lake in the northwest corner of the state. The petroleum and gas industry, as well as its subsidiary industries such as transport and refining, have dominated Louisiana's economy since the 1940s. Beginning in 1950, Louisiana was sued several times by the U.S. Interior Department, in efforts by the federal government to strip Louisiana of its submerged land property rights. These control vast stores of reservoirs of petroleum and natural gas.

When petroleum and gas boomed in the 1970s, so did Louisiana's economy. The Louisiana economy as well as its politics of the last half-century cannot be understood without thoroughly accounting for the influence of the petroleum and gas industries. Since the 1980s, these industries' headquarters have consolidated in Houston, but many of the jobs that operate or provide logistical support to the U.S. Gulf of Mexico crude-oil-and-gas industry remained in Louisiana .

==Law and government==

:

The Louisiana State Capitol
The Louisiana Governor's Mansion
In 1849, the state moved the capital from New Orleans to Baton Rouge. Donaldsonville, Opelousas, and Shreveport have briefly served as the seat of Louisiana state government. The Louisiana State Capitol and the Louisiana Governor's Mansion are both located in Baton Rouge.

The current Louisiana governor is Bobby Jindal, the first Indian American to be elected governor. The current U.S. senators are Mary Landrieu (Democrat) and David Vitter (Republican). Louisiana has six congressional districts and is represented in the U.S. House of Representatives by five Republicans and one Democrat. Louisiana had eight votes in the Electoral College for the 2012 election after losing one House seat due to stagnant population growth in the 2010 Census.

===Administrative divisions===
Louisiana is divided into 64 parishes (the equivalent of counties in most other states). 

*List of parishes in Louisiana

*Louisiana census statistical areas

===Civil law===
The Louisiana political and legal structure has maintained several elements from the times of French and Spanish governance. One is the use of the term "parish" (from the French: paroisse) in place of "county" for administrative subdivision. Another is the legal system of civil law based on French, German, and Spanish legal codes and ultimately Roman law  as opposed to English common law. Common law is "judge-made" law based on precedent, and is the basis of statutes in all other U.S. states.

Louisiana's civil law system is what the majority of nations in the world use, especially in Europe and its former colonies, excluding those that derive from the British Empire. However, it is incorrect to equate the Louisiana Civil Code with the Napoleonic Code. Although the Napoleonic Code and Louisiana law draw from common legal roots, it was never in force in Louisiana, as it was enacted in 1804, after the Louisiana Purchase of 1803.

While the Louisiana Civil Code of 1808 has been continuously revised and updated since its enactment, it is still considered the controlling authority in the state. Differences still exist between Louisianan civil law and the common law found in the other U.S. states. While some of these differences have been bridged due to the strong influence of common law tradition, it is important to note that the "civilian" tradition is still deeply rooted in most aspects of Louisiana private law. Thus property, contractual, business entities structure, much of civil procedure, and family law, as well as some aspects of criminal law, are still mostly based on traditional Roman legal thinking.

Model Codes, such as the Uniform Commercial Code, which are adopted by most states within the union including Louisiana, are based on civilian thought, the essence being that it is deductive, as opposed to the common law which is inductive. In the civilian tradition the legislative body agrees a priori on the general principles to be followed. When a set of facts are brought before a judge, he deduces the court's ruling by comparing the facts of the individual case to the law.

===Marriage===
In 1997, Louisiana became the first state to offer the option of a traditional marriage or a covenant marriage. In a covenant marriage, the couple waives their right to a "no-fault" divorce after six months of separation, which is available in a traditional marriage. To divorce under a covenant marriage, a couple must demonstrate cause. Marriages between ascendants and descendants and marriages between collaterals within the fourth degree (i.e., siblings, aunt and nephew, uncle and niece, first cousins) are prohibited. http://www.legis.state.la.us/lss/lss.asp?doc=111053 Same-sex marriages are also prohibited. http://www.legis.state.la.us/lss/lss.asp?doc=111041 Louisiana is a community property state. http://www.legis.state.la.us/lss/lss.asp?doc=109401 

===Elections===

From 1898 to 1965, after Louisiana had effectively disfranchised African Americans and poor whites by provisions of a new constitution, it essentially was a one-party state dominated by elite white Democrats. The franchise for whites was expanded somewhat during the decades, but blacks remained essentially disfranchised until the Civil Rights Movement, culminating in passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965. In multiple acts of resistance, blacks left the segregation, violence and oppression of the state to seek better opportunities in northern and western industrial cities during the Great Migrations of 19101970, markedly reducing their proportion of population in Louisiana.

Since the 1960s, when civil rights legislation was passed under President Lyndon Johnson to protect voting and civil rights, most African Americans in the state have affiliated with the Democratic Party. In the same years, many white conservatives have moved to support Republican Party candidates in national and gubernatorial elections. David Vitter is the first Republican in Louisiana to be popularly elected as a U.S. Senator. The previous Republican Senator, John S. Harris, who took office in 1868, was chosen by the state legislature.

Louisiana is unique among U.S. states in using a system for its state and local elections similar to that of modern France. All candidates, regardless of party affiliation, ran in a nonpartisan blanket primary (or "jungle primary") on Election Day. If no candidate had more than 50% of the vote, the two candidates with the highest vote total competed in a runoff election approximately one month later. This run-off did not take into account party identification; therefore, it was not uncommon for a Democrat to be in a runoff with a fellow Democrat or a Republican to be in a runoff with a fellow Republican.

Congressional races have also been held under the jungle primary system. All other states (except Washington) use single-party primaries followed by a general election between party candidates, each conducted by either a plurality voting system or runoff voting, to elect Senators, Representatives, and statewide officials. Between 2008 and 2010, federal congressional elections were run under a closed primary system  limited to registered party members. However, upon the passage of House Bill 292, Louisiana once again adopted a nonpartisan blanket primary for its federal congressional elections.

Louisiana has six seats in the U.S. House of Representatives, five of which are currently held by Republicans and one by a Democrat. The state lost a House seat at the end of the 112th Congress due to stagnant population growth enumerated by the 2010 United States Census. Louisiana is not classified as a "swing state" for future presidential elections, as it regularly supports Republican candidates. The two Senators are Mary Landrieu (D) and David Vitter (R).

===Law enforcement===

Louisiana's statewide police force is the Louisiana State Police. It began in 1922 from the creation of the Highway Commission. In 1927 a second branch, the Bureau of Criminal Investigations, was formed. In 1932 the State Highway Patrol was authorized to carry weapons.

On July 28, 1936 the two branches were consolidated to form The Louisiana Department of State Police and its motto became "courtesy, loyalty, service". In 1942 this office was abolished and became a division of the Department of Public Safety called the Louisiana State Police. In 1988 the Criminal Investigation Bureau was reorganized. Its troopers have statewide jurisdiction with power to enforce all laws of the state, including city and parish ordinances. Each year, they patrol over 12 million miles (20 million km) of roadway and arrest about 10,000 impaired drivers. The State Police are primarily a traffic enforcement agency, with other sections that delve into trucking safety, narcotics enforcement and gaming oversight.

The sheriff in each parish is the chief law enforcement officer in the parish. They are the keepers of the local parish prisons which house felony and misdemeanor prisoners. They are the primary criminal patrol and first responder agency in all matters criminal and civil. They are also the official tax collectors in each parish.

The sheriffs are responsible for general law enforcement in their respective parishes. Orleans Parish is an exception, as there the general law enforcement duties fall to the New Orleans Police Department. Prior to 2010, Orleans parish was the only parish to have two (2) Sheriff's Offices. Orleans Parish divided Sheriff's duties between criminal and civil, with a different elected sheriff overseeing each aspect. In 2006 a bill was passed which eventually consolidated the two sheriffs' departments into one parish Sheriff responsible for both civil and criminal matters.

Most parishes are governed by a Police Jury. Eighteen of the 64 parishes are governed under an alternative form of government under a Home Rule Charter. They oversee the parish budget and operate the parish maintenance services. This includes parish road maintenance and other rural services.

Louisiana had a higher murder rate than any other U.S. state in 2012 (10.8 murders per 100,000) which marked the 24th consecutive year (19892012) that Louisiana has recorded the highest per-capita murder rate among U.S. states. Louisiana is also the only state with an average annual per capita murder rate (14.0 per 100,000) at least twice as high as the U.S. average annual (6.7 per 100,000) during that period according to Bureau of Justice Statistics from FBI Uniform Crime Reports. The Chicago Tribune reports that Louisiana is the most corrupt state in the United States. 

According to the Times Picayune, Louisiana is the prison capital of the world, because of its many for-profit/Sheriff owned prisons. Louisiana's incarceration rate is nearly five times Iran's, 13 times China's and 20 times Germany's. 

===Judiciary===
The judiciary of Louisiana is defined under the Constitution and law of Louisiana and is composed of the Louisiana Supreme Court, the Louisiana Circuit Courts of Appeal, the District Courts, the Justice of the Peace Courts, the Mayor's Courts, the City Courts, and the Parish Courts. The Chief Justice of the Louisiana Supreme Court is the chief administrator of the judiciary, and its administration is aided by the Judiciary Commission of Louisiana, the Louisiana Attorney Disciplinary Board, and the Judicial Council of the Supreme Court of Louisiana.

==National Guard==
Louisiana has over 9,000 Soldiers in the Louisiana Army National Guard including both the 225th Engineer Brigade and the 256th Infantry Brigade. Both these units have seen overseas service in either Iraq, Afghanistan, or both. The Louisiana Air National Guard has over 2,000 airmen and its 159th Fighter Squadron has likewise seen overseas service in combat theaters.

Training sites include Camp Beauregard near Pineville, LA, Camp Villerie near Slidell, LA, Camp Minden near Minden, LA, England Air Park (formerly England Air Force Base) near Alexandria, LA, Gillis Long Center near Carville, LA, and Jackson Barracks in New Orleans, LA.

==Education==

The Louisiana Science Education Act is a controversial law passed by the Louisiana Legislature on June 11, 2008 and signed into law by Governor Bobby Jindal on June 25. The act allows public school teachers to use supplemental materials in the science classroom which are critical of established science on such topics as the theory of evolution and global warming. Louisiana was the first state to pass a law of this type.

==Sports teams==

Louisiana is nominally the least populous state with more than one major professional sports league franchise: the National Basketball Association's New Orleans Pelicans and the National Football League's Super Bowl XLIV Champions New Orleans Saints. Louisiana has a AAA Minor League baseball team, the New Orleans Zephyrs. The Zephyrs are currently affiliated with the Miami Marlins.

Louisiana has 11 collegiate NCAA Division I programs, a high number given its population. The state has no Division II teams and only one Division III team.

The State of Louisiana in 2013 produced the most NFL players per capita for the fifth year in a row. 

==Culture==

Dishes typical of Louisiana Creole cuisine.

Louisiana is home to many, especially notable are the distinct culture of the Creoles and Cajuns.

===Creole culture===
Creole culture is an amalgamation that takes a little from the French, Spanish, African, and Native American cultures. Creole comes from the Portuguese word crioulo, meaning a slave of African descent born in the New World. Delehanty, Randolph.New Orleans: Elegance and Decadence, Chronicle Books, 1995, pg. 14 The oldest Louisiana manuscript to use the word Creole, from 1782, applied it to a slave. Kein, Sybil. "Creole: the history and legacy of Louisiana's free people of color". Louisiana State University Press, 2009, p. 73. Today, those descended from both slaves and freemen, French, Spanish, and Native Americans identify as Creole.

Creoles became associated with the New Orleans area. Most wealthy Creole planters had houses in town as well as at their plantations. All of the respective groups that settled in southern Louisiana have combined to make one "New Orleans" culture. It has continued as one of the dominant social, economic and political cultures of Louisiana, along with Cajun culture, well into the 20th century.

===Cajun culture===
The ancestors of Cajuns came from west central France to the provinces of New Brunswick and Nova Scotia, Canada, known as Acadia. When the British won the French and Indian War, the British forcibly separated families and evicted them because of their long-stated political neutrality. Most captured Acadians were placed in internment camps in England and the New England colonies for 10 to 30 years. Many of those who escaped the British remained in French Canada.

Once freed by England, many scattered, some to France, Canada, Mexico, or the Falkland Islands. The majority found refuge in south Louisiana centered in the region around Lafayette and the LaFourche Bayou country. Until the 1970s, Cajuns were often considered lower-class citizens, with the term "Cajun" being somewhat derogatory. Once flush with oil and gas riches, Cajun culture, food, music, and their infectious "joie de vivre" lifestyle quickly gained international acclaim.

===Isleo culture===
A third distinct culture in Louisiana is that of the Isleos, who are descendants of Spanish Canary Islanders who migrated from the Canary Islands of Spain to Louisiana under the Spanish crown beginning in the mid-1770s. They settled in four main settlements, but many relocated to what is modern-day St. Bernard Parish, where the majority of the Isleo population is still concentrated. An annual festival called Fiesta celebrates the heritage of the Isleos.

St Bernard Parish has an Isleos museum, cemetery and church, as well as many street names with Spanish words and Spanish surnames from this heritage. Isleo identity is an active concern in the New Orleans suburbs of St. Bernard Parish, LA. Some members of the Isleo community still speak Spanish  with their own Canary Islander accent. Numerous Isleo identity red and organizations, and many members of Isleos society keep contact with the Canary Islands of Spain.

===Languages===

The native languages that were historically located in what is now Louisiana include: Tunica, Caddo, Natchez, Choctaw, Atakapa, Chitimacha and Houma.
Historically, Native American peoples in the area of spoke seven languages: Caddo, Tunica, Natchez, Houma, Choctaw, Atakapa, and Chitimacha. Of these, only Caddo and Choctaw still have living native speakers, although several other tribes are working to teach and revitalize their languages. Other Native American peoples driven into the state by European pressure spoke Alabama, Biloxi, Koasati, and Ofo languages.

Starting in the 1700s, French colonists brought their language with them. English gradually gained prominence for business and government with migration of English speakers after the Louisiana Purchase, but many ethnic French families continued to use French in private. Two hundred years later, according to the 2000 census, among persons five years old and older, Statistics of languages spoken in Louisiana Retrieved on June 18, 2008. 90.8% of Louisiana residents speak only English (99% total speak English) and 4.7% speak French at home (7% total speak French). Other minority languages are Spanish, which is spoken by 2.5% of the population; Vietnamese, by 0.6%; and German, by 0.2%. Although state law recognizes the usage of English and French in certain circumstances, the Louisiana State Constitution does not declare any "de jure official language or languages". Louisiana State Constitution of 1974 Retrieved on June 18, 2008. Currently the "de facto administrative languages" of the Louisiana State Government are English and French.

Several unique dialects of French, Creole, and English are spoken in Louisiana. Dialects of the French language are: Colonial French and Cajun French (predominant in some areas after arrival of Acadians expelled by the British from Canada). Louisiana Creole French is the term for the Creole dialect. Two unique dialects developed of the English language: Cajun English, a French-influenced variety of English, and what is informally known as Yat, which resembles the New York City dialect, particularly that of historical Brooklyn. Both accents were influenced by large communities of immigrant Irish and Italians, but the Yat dialect, which developed in new Orleans, was also influenced by French and Spanish.

Louisiana's bilingual state welcome sign, recognizing its French heritage

Colonial French was the predominant language of Louisiana during the French colonial period and was spoken primarily by the white settlers; the black/mixed-race creole population spoke mostly Creole. The limited years of Spanish rule at the end of the 18th century did not result in widespread adoption of the Spanish language. Cajun French developed in Louisiana only after the Great Upheaval of Acadians from Canada, primarily in the mid-1700s and after Great Britain's victory in the French and Indian War in 1763. The Cajun culture and language developed gradually from the original Acadian culture, with influences from local African-American and other cultures. English and its associated dialects became predominant only after the Louisiana Purchase, when more English-speaking Americans settled in the state. In some regions, English was influenced by French, as seen with Cajun English. Colonial French and Cajun French have somewhat merged since English became the dominant language of business and government.

Renewed interest in the French language in Louisiana has led to the establishment of Canadian-modeled French immersion schools, as well as bilingual signage in the historic French neighborhoods of New Orleans and Lafayette. Organizations such as CODOFIL promote the French language in the state.

===Religion===
The largest denominations by number of adherents in 2010 were the Catholic Church with 1,200,900; Southern Baptist Convention with 709,650; and the United Methodist Church with 146,848. Non-denominational Evangelical Protestant congregations had 195,903 members. 

Like other Southern states, the population of Louisiana is also made up of numerous Protestant denominations, comprising 60% of the state's adult population. Protestants are concentrated in the northern and central parts of the state and in the northern tier of the Florida Parishes. Because of French and Spanish heritage, whose descendants are Cajun and French Creole, and later Irish, Italian, Portuguese and German immigrants, there is a majority Roman Catholic population, particularly in the southern part of the state. For Louisiana's position in a larger religious context, see Bible Belt. 

Since French Creoles were the first settlers, planters and leaders of the territory, they have traditionally been well represented in politics. For instance, most of the early governors were French Creole Catholics. Because Catholics constitute a majority of Louisiana's population, Catholics have continued to be influential in state politics. both Senators and the Governor were Catholic. The high proportion and influence of the Catholic population makes Louisiana distinct among Southern states. Other Southern states  such as Maryland and Texas  have longstanding indigenous Catholic populations, and Florida's largely Catholic population of Cuban emigres has been influential since the 1960s. Yet, Louisiana is still unusual or exceptional in its extent of aboriginal Catholic settlement and influence. Among states in the Deep South (discounting Florida's Panhandle and much of Texas) the historic role of Catholicism in Louisiana is unparalleled and unique. Among the states of the Union, Louisiana's unique use of the term parish (French la parouche or "la paroisse") for county is rooted in the pre-statehood role of Catholic church parishes in the administration of government. 

Current religious affiliations of the people of Louisiana is mostly Christian of whom 60% are Protestant, 28% are Roman Catholic, 1% are Jehovah's Witnesses, 1% are Muslim, 1% are Buddhist, 0.5% are Hindu and 0.5% are Jewish. Non-religious (unaffiliated) people make up 8%. 

Jewish communities exist in the state's larger cities, notably Baton Rouge and New Orleans. Isaacs, Ronald H. The Jewish Information Source Book: A Dictionary and Almanac, Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson, Inc., 1993. p. 202. The most significant of these is the Jewish community of the New Orleans area, with a pre-Katrina population of about 12,000. The presence of a significant Jewish community well established by the early 20th century also made Louisiana unusual among Southern states, although South Carolina and Virginia also had influential populations in some of their major cities from the 18th and 19th centuries.

Prominent Jews in Louisiana's political leadership have included Whig (later Democrat) Judah P. Benjamin (18111884), who represented Louisiana in the U.S. Senate prior to the American Civil War and then became the Confederate Secretary of State; Democrat Adolph Meyer (18421908), Confederate Army officer who represented the state in the U.S. House from 1891 until his death in 1908; Republican Secretary of State Jay Dardenne (1954), and Republican (Democrat prior to 2011) Attorney General Buddy Caldwell (1946).

===Music===

==See also==

*Index of Louisiana-related articles
*Outline of Louisiana  organized list of topics about Louisiana

==References==

==Bibliography==
*The Sugar Masters: Planters and Slaves in Louisiana's Cane World, 18201860 by Richard Follett, Louisiana State University Press, 2007. ISBN 978-0-8071-3247-0
*The Slave Trade: The Story of the Atlantic Slave Trade, 14401870 by Hugh Thomas. 1997: Simon and Schuster. p. 548.
*Inhuman Bondage: The Rise and Fall of Slavery in the New World by David Brion Davis 2006: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-533944-4
*Yiannopoulos, A.N., The Civil Codes of Louisiana (reprinted from Civil Law System: Louisiana and Comparative law, A Coursebook: Texts, Cases and Materials, 3d Edition; similar to version in preface to Louisiana Civil Code, ed. by Yiannopoulos)
*Rodolfo Batiza, "The Louisiana Civil Code of 1808: Its Actual Sources and Present Relevance," 46 TUL. L. REV. 4 (1971); Rodolfo Batiza, "Sources of the Civil Code of 1808, Facts and Speculation: A Rejoinder," 46 TUL. L. REV. 628 (1972); Robert A. Pascal, Sources of the Digest of 1808: A Reply to Professor Batiza, 46 TUL. L. REV. 603 (1972); Joseph M. Sweeney, Tournament of Scholars Over the Sources of the Civil Code of 1808,46 TUL. L. REV. 585 (1972).
*The standard history of the state, though only through the Civil War, is Charles Gayarr's History of Louisiana (various editions, culminating in 1866, 4 vols., with a posthumous and further expanded edition in 1885).
*A number of accounts by 17th- and 18th-century French explorers: Jean-Bernard Bossu, Franois-Marie Perrin du Lac, Pierre-Franois-Xavier de Charlevoix, Dumont (as published by Fr. Mascrier), Fr. Louis Hennepin, Lahontan, Louis Narcisse Baudry des Lozires, Jean-Baptiste Bnard de la Harpe, and Laval. In this group, the explorer Antoine Simon Le Page du Pratz may be the first historian of Louisiana with his Histoire de la Louisiane (3 vols., Paris, 1758; 2 vols., London, 1763)
*Franois Xavier Martin's History of Louisiana (2 vols., New Orleans, 18271829, later ed. by J. F. Condon, continued to 1861, New Orleans, 1882) is the first scholarly treatment of the subject, along with Franois Barb-Marbois' Histoire de la Louisiane et de la cession de colonie par la France aux Etats-Unis (Paris, 1829; in English, Philadelphia, 1830).
*Alce Fortier's A History of Louisiana (N.Y., 4 vols., 1904) is the most recent of the large-scale scholarly histories of the state.
*The official works of Albert Phelps and Grace King, the publications of the Louisiana Historical Society and several works on the history of New Orleans (q.v.), among them those by Henry Rightor and John Smith Kendall provide background.

==External links==

*
*Louisiana Geographic Information Center
*Louisiana Endowment for the Humanities
*Louisiana Weather and Tides

;Geology links
*Geology
**Generalized Geologic Map of Louisiana, 2008
**Generalized Geology of Louisiana (text to Generalized Geologic Map of Louisiana)
**Loess Map of Louisiana
**Other Louisiana Geological Maps
**Louisiana Geofacts

;Government
*Official State of Louisiana website
*Louisiana State Databases  Annotated list of searchable databases produced by Louisiana state agencies and compiled by the Government Documents Roundtable of the American Library Association.
*Census Statistics on Louisiana

;U.S. government
*Energy Profile for Louisiana
*USDA Louisiana Statistical Facts
*USGS real-time, geographic, and other scientific resources of Louisiana
*: Steve Scalise  Website
*: Cedric Richmond  Website & Campaign Website
*: Jeff Landry  Website
*: John C. Fleming 
*: Rodney Alexander  Website
*: Bill Cassidy
*: Charles Boustany  Website

;News media
*The Times-Picayune major Louisiana newspaper
*WWL-TV Louisiana television station

;Ecoregions
*Ecoregions of Louisiana
*Ecoregions of the Mississippi Alluvial Plain

;Tourism
*Official site of Louisiana tourism
*Official site of the New Orleans Convention & Tourism Bureau
*Official site of New Orleans Plantation Country tourism
*

 



[[Los Angeles International Airport]]

Los Angeles International Airport is the primary airport serving the Greater Los Angeles Area, the second-most populated metropolitan area in the United States. It is most often referred to by its IATA airport code LAX, with the letters pronounced individually. LAX is located in southwestern Los Angeles along the Pacific coast in the neighborhood of Westchester, 16 mi from Downtown Los Angeles. It is owned and operated by Los Angeles World Airports, an agency of the Los Angeles city government formerly known as the Department of Airports.

In 2012, LAX was the sixth busiest airport in the world by passenger volume with 63,688,121 passengers, an increase of 3% from 2011. The airport holds the claim for "the world's busiest origin and destination (O & D) airport" in 2011, meaning it had the most non-connecting passengers, and the third busiest in the world by aircraft movements. It is also the only airport to rank among the top five U.S. airports for both passenger and cargo traffic. 

LAX is the busiest airport in the Greater Los Angeles Area; however, other airports including Bob Hope Airport, John Wayne Airport, Long Beach Airport, and LA/Ontario International Airport also serve the region. It is also notable for being one of few U.S. airports with four parallel runways (arranged in two pairs), bested only by HartsfieldJackson Atlanta International Airport and Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport's five parallel strips.

==History==
Los Angeles Municipal Airport on Army Day, c. 1931
Hangar No. 1 was the first structure at LAX, built in 1929, restored in 1990 and remaining in active use. 
Los Angeles International Airport with Marina Del Rey in the foreground and Palos Verdes Peninsula in the background

In 1928, the Los Angeles City Council selected 640 acre in the southern part of Westchester for a new airport for the city. The fields of wheat, barley and lima beans were converted into dirt landing strips without any terminal buildings. It was named Mines Field for William W. Mines, the real estate agent who arranged the deal. The first structure, Hangar No. 1, was erected in 1929 and is in the National Register of Historic Places. 

Mines Field opened as the airport of Los Angeles in 1930 and the city purchased it to be a municipal airfield in 1937. The name became Los Angeles Airport in 1941 and Los Angeles International Airport in 1949. In the 1930s the main airline airports were Burbank Airport (then known as Union Air Terminal, and later Lockheed) in Burbank and the Grand Central Airport in Glendale. (In 1940 the airlines were all at Burbank except for Mexicana's three departures a week from Glendale; in late 1946 most airline flights moved to LAX, but Burbank always retained a few.) Official Guide of the Airways 7/40 and American Aviation Air Traffic Guide 1/46, 12/46 and 6/47 

Mines Field did not extend west of Sepulveda Boulevard; Sepulveda was rerouted circa 1950 to loop around the west ends of the extended eastwest runways (now runways 25L and 25R), which by November 1950 were 6000 ft long. Aerial view looking south A tunnel was completed in 1953 allowing Sepulveda Boulevard to revert to straight and pass beneath the two runways; it was the first tunnel of its kind. For the next few years the two runways were 8500 ft long. Airport diagrams for 1956 and 1965 

On July 10, 1956, Boeing's 707 prototype (the 36780) visited LAX. The Los Angeles Times said it was its first appearance at a "commercial airport" outside the Seattle area. 

The April 1957 Official Airline Guide showed 66 weekday departures on United Airlines, 32 American Airlines, 32 Western Airlines, 27 TWA, nine Southwest, five Bonanza Air Lines and three Mexicana Airlines; also 22 flights a week on Pan American World Airways and five a week on Scandinavian Airlines (the only direct flights from California to Europe).

American Airlines' 707-123s flew the first jet passengers out of LAX to New York in January 1959; the first wide-body jets were TWA's Boeing 747s to New York in early 1970. 

In 1958, the architecture firm Pereira & Luckman was contracted to plan the re-design of the airport for the "jet age". The plan, developed with architects Welton Becket and Paul Williams, called for a series of terminals and parking structures in the central portion of the property, with these buildings connected at the center by a huge steel-and-glass dome. The plan was never realized, and the Theme Building was built on the site intended for the dome.

In the new terminal area west of Sepulveda Blvd that started opening in 1961, each terminal had a satellite building out in the middle of the tarmac, reached by underground tunnels from the ticketing area. United's satellites 7 and 8 were first to open, followed by 3, 4 and 5; satellite 2 was the international terminal several months later and satellite 6 was to be the last to open. Aviation Week July 3, 1961 p40 

Since the 1920s, a neighborhood called Surfridge had been on the coastline west of the airport, part of the larger community of Palisades del Rey along with the neighborhood to the north now known as Playa del Rey. When the airlines switched to jet airliners during the 1960s and 1970s and Surfridge's residents complained about noise pollution, the city used its eminent domain powers to condemn and evacuate Surfridge. The government bulldozed the homes but did not bulldoze the streets, and the fenced-off "ghost" streets west of LAX are still there.

In 1981, the airport began a $700 million expansion in preparation for the 1984 Summer Olympics. The U-shaped roadway past the terminal entrances got a second level, with arriving passengers on the lower level and departing on the upper. Connector buildings between the ticketing areas and the satellite buildings were added, changing the layout to a "pier" design. Two new terminals (Terminal 1 and the International Terminal) were built and Terminal 2, then two decades old, was rebuilt. Multi-story parking structures were also built in the center of the airport. 

On July 8, 1982, groundbreaking for the two new terminals were conducted by Mayor Tom Bradley and World War II aviator General James Doolittle. The $123 million 963000 sqft International Terminal opened on June 11, 1984, and was named for Bradley. 

On April 29, 1992, the airport closed for violence and cleanup after the 1992 Los Angeles Riots over the Rodney King beating.

The airport closed again on January 17, 1994 after the Northridge earthquake.

In 1996 a $29 million, 277 ft air traffic control tower was built near the Theme Building. 

The Theme Building decorated with light displays for the Christmas season

In 2000, before Los Angeles hosted the Democratic National Convention, fifteen glass pylons up to ten stories high were placed in a circle around the intersection of Sepulveda Boulevard and Century Boulevard, with more pylons of decreasing height following Century Boulevard eastward, evoking a sense of departure and arrival. Conceived by the designers at Selbert Perkins Design, the towers and 30 ft "LAX" letters are a gateway to the airport and offer a welcoming landmark for visitors. Illuminated from the inside, the pylons slowly cycle through a rainbow of colors that represents the multicultural makeup of Los Angeles and can be customized to celebrate events, holidays or a season. This was part of an overall face-lift that included new signage and various other cosmetic enhancements that was led by Ted Tokio Tanaka Architects. The LAX pylons underwent improvements in 2006, as stage lighting inside the cylinders was replaced with LED lights to conserve energy, make maintenance easier and enable on-demand cycling through various color effects. 

LAX has been a hub for TWA, Air California, Braniff International, Continental Airlines, Delta Air Lines, Pacific Southwest Airlines, US Airways, Western Airlines, and the Flying Tiger Line.

Starting in the mid-1990s, under Mayors Richard Riordan and James Hahn, modernization and expansion plans for LAX were prepared, only to be stymied by a coalition of residents who live near the airport. They cited increased noise, pollution and traffic impacts of the project. In late 2005, newly elected Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa was able to reach a compromise, allowing some modernization to go forward while encouraging future growth among other facilities in the region.

It is illegal to limit the number of passengers that use an airport, but in December 2005 the city agreed to limit the passenger gates to 163. Once passenger usage hits 75 million, a maximum of two gates a year for up to five years will be closed, intending to limit growth to 79 million passengers a year. In exchange civil lawsuits were abandoned, to allow the city to complete badly needed improvements to the airport. 

The airport is a hub for United Airlines, Alaska Airlines, American Airlines, and a focus city for Southwest Airlines, Allegiant Air, Air New Zealand, Qantas, Virgin America and Volaris. It also serves as an international gateway for Delta Air Lines and houses a line maintenance facility for Delta Air Lines' primary maintenance, repair and overhaul arm, Delta TechOps. 

Today, LAX is in the midst of a $4.11 billion renovation and improvement program to expand and rehabilitate the Tom Bradley International Terminal to accommodate the next generation of larger aircraft, as well as handle the growing number of flights to and from the Southern California region, and to develop the Central Terminal Area (CTA) of the airport to include streamlined passenger processing, public transportation and updated central utility plants. As of 2013, Los Angeles International Airport is the biggest airport in California. The multi-year projects are expected to be completed by 2014 and is the largest public works project in Los Angeles history. 

===The "X" in LAX===
Before the 1930s, existing airports used a two-letter abbreviation based on the weather stations at the airports. At that time, "LA" served as the designation for Los Angeles Airport. But with the rapid growth in the aviation industry the designations expanded to three letters c. 1947, and "LA" became "LAX." The letter "X" has no specific meaning in this identifier. "LAX" is also used for the Port of Los Angeles in San Pedro and by Amtrak for Union Station in downtown Los Angeles.

==Aircraft spotting==
The "Imperial Hill" area (also known as Clutter's Park) in El Segundo is a prime location for aircraft spotting. Another popular spotting location sits under the final approach for runways 24 L&R on a lawn next to the Westchester In-N-Out Burger on Sepulveda Boulevard. This is one of the few remaining locations in Southern California from which spotters may watch such a wide variety of low-flying commercial airliners from directly underneath a flight path.

===Space Shuttle Endeavour===

At 12:51 pm on Friday, September 21, 2012, a Shuttle Carrier Aircraft carrying Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at LAX on runway 25L. It is heard that over 10,000 people saw the shuttle land in person. Interstate 105 was backed up for miles at a standstill. Imperial Highway was shut down for spectators. Along the way the shuttle passed many landmarks in the Los Angeles area including the Santa Monica Pier, Getty Center, NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Griffith Observatory, Malibu coastline, the Hollywood Sign, Universal Studios Hollywood, the Disneyland Resort, and Los Angeles City Hall. It was quickly taken off the Boeing 747 and was moved to a United Airlines hangar. The shuttle spent about a month in the hangar while it was prepared for transport to the California Science Center.

On Friday, October 12, Endeavour left the hangar at 2:00 a.m. Pacific Daylight Time and moved eastward on Manchester Boulevard on its way to the California Science Center. The shuttle transport vehicle (STV) was constructed of over 60 individual wheels and weighed over 12000 lb. It was designed to move the shuttle at a speed of 2 mph. This was both for safety concerns for the shuttle and so people could take many photos. As the entire planned route was only 12 miles, it should have only taken 6 hours to complete. Instead, the shuttle arrived in one piece on the morning of Sunday, October 14, 2012.

==Theme Building==

The distinctive white googie "Theme Building", designed by Pereira & Luckman architect Paul Williams and constructed in 1961 by Robert E. McKee Construction Co., resembles a flying saucer that has landed on its four legs. A restaurant with a sweeping view of the airport is suspended beneath two arches that form the legs. The Los Angeles City Council designated the building a Los Angeles Historic-Cultural Monument in 1992. A$4 million renovation, with retro-futuristic interior and electric lighting designed by Walt Disney Imagineering, was completed before the "Encounter Restaurant" opened there in 1997. Visitors are able to take the elevator up to the roof of the "Theme Building", which closed after the September 11 attacks for security reasons and reopened to the public on weekends beginning on July 10, 2010. Additionally, a memorial to the victims of September 11, 2001 is also located on the grounds of the Theme Building, as three of the four hijacked planes were originally destined for LAX that day. 

==Terminals==
A terminal map of LAX.
LAX has nine passenger terminals arranged in the shape of the letter U or a horseshoe. The terminals are served by a shuttle bus. Terminals 5, 6, 7, and 8 are all connected airside via an underground tunnel between Terminals 5 and 6 and above-ground walkways between Terminals 6, 7, and 8. There are no physical airside connections between any of the other terminals, although an airside shuttle bus operates among Terminals 4, 6, and the American Eagle remote terminal.

In addition to these terminals, there are 2000000 sqft of cargo facilities at LAX, and a heliport operated by Bravo Aviation. Qantas has a maintenance facility at LAX, even though it is not a hub.

Most inter-terminal connections require passengers to exit security, then walk or use a shuttle-bus to get to the other terminal, then re-clear security. A few LAX terminals provide airside connections, which allow connecting passengers to access other terminals without having to re-clear through security. The following airside connections are possible: 

* Terminals 6, 7, and 8 are all connected airside via walking corridors, allowing arriving domestic passengers a seamless connection.
* Terminals 5 and 6 are connected via an airside underground walkway. Terminal 4 was previously connected via this underground walkway, but it is currently closed off.
* Some airlines provide an airside shuttle bus connection between terminals. For example, Qantas offers a late afternoon/evening shuttle bus for passengers arriving in Terminal 4 to connect with flights departing from the Tom Bradley International Terminal. 

===Terminal 1===
Terminal 1 has 15 gates: Gates 13, 4A4B, and 514, and houses AirTran Airways and Southwest Airlines. Terminal 1 was built in 1984 and is the largest of all of the terminals in terms of number of gates. It was announced that Southwest and Los Angeles World Airports would fund about $400 million in Terminal 1 improvements under a plan approved Monday, January 14, 2013, by the Board of Airport Commissioners. Though the improvements have already begun, the plan must be approved by the City of Los Angeles. As part of the deal, US Airways agreed to move its operations to Terminal 3, giving Southwest its own terminal. US Airways moved to Terminal 3 on February 12, 2014, leaving Southwest and subsidiary AirTran as sole operators at Terminal 1. 

===Terminal 2===
Terminal 2 with Air China, Air Canada and Avianca Airlines.
Terminal 2 has 11 gates: Gates 2121B, 2222B, 23, 2424B, and 2528. It hosts most foreign airlines not using the TBIT along with a couple of domestic airlines: Aeromxico, Air Canada, Air China, Avianca, Air New Zealand, Hawaiian Airlines, Sun Country Airlines, Virgin Atlantic, Volaris, and WestJet. Former tenants of the terminal include Northwest Airlines, Pan American World Airways, and Taca International Airlines.

Terminal 2 was built in 1962, and was the original international terminal. It was completely torn down and rebuilt in stages between 1984 and 1988 at a cost of $94 million. The rebuilt terminal was designed by Leo A Daly. Terminal 2 has CBP (Customs and Border Protection) facilities to process arriving international passengers.

Air New Zealand will be moving to the TBIT in 2014.
 

===Terminal 3===
Terminal 3 is served by ultra low cost carrier Spirit Airlines.
Terminal 3 has 12 gates: Gates 30, 31A31B, 32, 33A33B, 3436, 37A37B, and 38 (gate 39 was removed to make room for Virgin Australia Boeing 777 operations at gate 38). Terminal 3 opened in 1961 and was Trans World Airlines' terminal. It formerly housed some American Airlines flights after that airline acquired Reno Air and TWA in 1999 and 2001, respectively. Eventually, all American flights were moved to Terminal 4. As of April 2012, JetBlue, Spirit Airlines, Virgin Australia, and Virgin America use Terminal 3.

On May 1, 2013, Allegiant Air relocated to Terminal 3. A week later on May 8, Frontier Airlines relocated to Terminal 3. US Airways moved to Terminal 3 on February 12, 2014. 

Note: Virgin America uses Terminal 2 for arrivals from Cancun, and Virgin Australia uses the TBIT for arrivals from Australia.

===Tom Bradley International Terminal===
(Not to be confused with Bradley International Airport which serves Hartford, Connecticut)

Tom Bradley International Terminal in the early morning
Check-in counters in the Tom Bradley International Terminal.
Moving walkways inside the new south concourse of the Tom Bradley West terminal. A separated arrivals walkway can be seen on the upper-left and in the background, which leads directly to US Customs.

The Tom Bradley International Terminal (TBIT) has 12 gates, including six on the north concourse and six on the south concourse. Each gate is equippped with a Safegate Advanced - Visual Docking Guidance System. In addition, there are nine satellite gates for international flights located on the west side of LAX. Passengers are ferried to the west side gates by bus. The terminal hosts most of the major international airlines, with the exception of those housed in Terminal 2.

This terminal opened for the 1984 Summer Olympic Games and is named for Tom Bradley, the first African-American and longest-serving (20 years) mayor of Los Angeles, and champion of LAX. The terminal is located at the west end of the passenger terminal area between Terminals 3 and 4. Tom Bradley International Terminal hosts 27 airlines and handles 10 million passengers per year.

In 2010, modernization efforts resulted in additional space for inline baggage screening, three large alliance-aligned lounges plus one unaffiliated lounge (to replace the multiple airline specific lounges) and cosmetic upgrades in the departures and arrivals areas.

On November 17, 2008, Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa unveiled design concepts for LAX's Bradley West and Midfield Concourse projects. Los Angeles World Airports (LAWA), along with city officials, selected Fentress Architects in association with HNTB to develop a design concept for the modernization of LAX. The emphasis of the modernization is to improve the passenger experience and to keep Los Angeles competitive with other global cities.

On February 22, 2010, construction began on the $1.5 billion Bradley West project, part of the multi-year $4.11 billion LAX improvement and redevelopment projects. The project added over 1250000 sqft of shops, restaurants, and passenger lounges, as well as new security screening, customs, immigration, and baggage claim facilities. The terminal's existing two concourses will be demolished and replaced with a larger pair with 18 gates, nine of which will be able to accommodate the Airbus A380. The terminal opened in phases beginning on September 2012, and was completed in 2014. 

On September 18, 2013, the new Tom Bradley International Terminal at LAX officially opened. Airlines started to use the new, smarter gates that can handle big aircraft, including the Airbus A380. Inside, Southern California scenes and quirky videos are played on seven huge multimedia screens. It is the largest immersive system in an airport and the most advanced multimedia environment in a North American airport. Passengers can relax at the lounge-like seating in the Great Hall or shop in the 25,000-square-foot duty-free shopping area. Many restaurants and high-end shops are located there, such as Chlo, Burberry, Fred Seagal, and Porsche amongst others.

==== A380====
On March 25, 2007, Runway 7R/25L reopened after being shifted 55 ft south to prevent runway incursions and prepare the runway for the Airbus A380. Additional storm drains and enhanced runway lighting were added. Runway 25L is now 800 ft south of the parallel runway centerline to centerline, allowing a parallel taxiway between the runways; the taxiway was completed in 2008.

On September 18, 2006, Los Angeles World Airports started a $503 million facelift of the Tom Bradley International Terminal. Improvements included new paging, air conditioning and electrical systems, along with new elevators, escalators, baggage carousels, and a digital sign that automatically update flight information. With federal funding, explosives-detection technology was incorporated into the terminal's underground baggage system.

According to the Los Angeles Times, in February 2007, many Pacific Rim carriers began reducing flights to LAX in favor of more modern airports, such as San Francisco International Airport, due to the aging Tom Bradley International Terminal. 

On August 15, 2007, the Los Angeles City Council approved a $1.2 billion project to construct a new 10-gate terminal to handle international flights using the Airbus A380. Steve Hymon, Council OKs 10 new gates at LAX, Los Angeles Times, August 16, 2007 Adding the first new gates built since the early 1980s, the new structure was to be built directly west of the Tom Bradley International Terminal on a site that was occupied mostly by aircraft hangars. 

On March 19, 2007, the Airbus A380 made its debut at LAX, landing on runway 24L. Though LAX was originally to be the first US city to see the A380, Airbus later decided to forgo LAX in favor of John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York City. After city officials fought for the super-jumbo jet to land at LAX, the A380 landed simultaneously in New York and LAX. 

On March 31, 2008, the Los Angeles Times reported that foreign carriers were once again flocking to LAX's Tom Bradley International Terminal. The weaker dollar caused a surge in demand for US travel, resulting in airlines either adding new destinations or increasing frequencies to existing routes. New airlines that introduced flights to LAX included Virgin Australia and Emirates Airlines, Turkish Airlines, and Iberia Airlines. Korean Air, Qantas, Air China, and Air France have all augmented their services to Los Angeles by adding new flights to existing routes. The influx of new flights comes amidst the renovation of the airport and consolidates LAX's status as the premiere international gateway to the Western United States. 

Qantas launched service with the Airbus A380 on October 20, 2008, using the west side remote gates. Though initially deployed between LAX-SYD, Qantas' A380 service was extended to the popular LAX-Melbourne route. This was followed shortly by Korean Air, which initiated nonstop Seoul-Los Angeles service with the Airbus A380 in October 2011. Air France has launched A380 flights between Paris-Charles de Gaulle and Los Angeles in May 2012. In Addition, China Southern launched A380 service to Guangzhou in October 2012, representing an increase in capacity of 78% on the route. With the addition of these services, LAX boasts six daily flights on the Airbus A380. British Airways has announced that Los Angeles will be its first A380 route, starting October 15. 

===Terminal 4===
Interior view of Terminal 4

Terminal 4 has 14 gates: Gates 4041, 42A42B, 4345 (Gate 44 is for the bus to the American Eagle remote terminal (Gates 44A-44L)), 46A46B, 47A47B, 48A48B, and 49A. Terminal 4 was built in 1961 and was renovated in 2001 at a cost of $400 million in order to improve the appearance and functionality of the facility. The renovation was designed by Rivers & Christian. It is home for American Airlines, which operates its West Coast hub at the airport, and for its subsidiary commuter carrier, Envoy Air. American is the only tenant at T4. An international arrivals facility serving American Airlines flights was also added in the renovation in 2001.

Note: American Eagle flights operate from the "American Eagle Terminal", which is located just east of Terminal 8. Gate 44 serves as the shuttle bus stop at Terminal 4. The remote terminal is also connected by shuttle buses to Terminals 6 and TBIT because of Eagle's codesharing with Alaska Airlines and Qantas.

===Terminal 5===
Terminal 5 has 15 gates: Gates 50A50B, 51A51B, 52A52B, 53A53B, 54A54B, 55A, 5657, 58, and 59. Western Airlines occupied this terminal at its opening in 1962, and continued to do so until Western was merged with Delta Air Lines on April 1, 1987. Terminal 5 was redesigned by Gensler, expanded to include a connector building between the original satellite and the ticketing facilities and remodeled from 1986 through early 1988. It was unofficially named 'Delta's Oasis at LAX' with the slogan 'Take Five at LAX' when construction was completed in the summer of 1988. Northwest Airlines moved all operations to Terminal 5 and Terminal 6 alongside Delta Air Lines on June 30, 2009, as part of its merger with the airline.

===Terminal 6===
A Virgin America Airbus A319 at Terminal 6 prior to the airline's move to Terminal 3.

Terminal 6 has 14 gates: Gates 6063, 64A64B, 65A-65B, 66, 67, 68A68B, and 69A69B. Parts of this terminal have changed little from its opening in 1961; in 1979, new gates were expanded from the main building, as is obvious from the rotunda at the end. Four of these gates have two jetways, which can accommodate large aircraft.

Terminal 6 hosts airline tenants with a variety of relationships with the airport. Continental Airlines originally built the Connector Building (which links the Ticketing and rotunda buildings). United Airlines uses the connector gates, supplementing its base at Terminal 7. Delta Air Lines leases space from the Airport in Terminal 6, in addition to its base at Terminal 5. Most of the rotunda gates can feed arriving passengers into a sterile corridor that shunts them to Terminal 7's customs and immigration facility. Also, one foreign-flag airline, Copa Airlines, departs from Terminal 6, as a result of its long relationship with Continental and now United.

In April 2011, Alaska Airlines agreed to a deal with Los Angeles World Airports to renovate Terminal 6. The airline moved its flights to Terminal 6 on March 20, 2012, and Spirit Airlines was relocated to Terminal 3. 

Both United and Alaska operate lounges in Terminal 6.

Former tenants of the terminal include Continental Airlines until its merger with United Airlines in 2011 and Eastern Air Lines, which went bankrupt in 1991. The terminal also originally housed Pacific Southwest Airlines.

===Terminal 7===
Terminal 7 has 11 gates: Gates 70A-70B, 71A-71B, 72, 73, 74, 75A-75B, 76, and 77. This terminal opened in 1962. Four of these gates have two jetways, which accommodate large aircraft. Terminal 7 is the home to United Airlines. The interior of the terminal was renovated between January 1998 and June 1999 at a cost of $250 million, was designed by HNTB, and was constructed by Hensel Phelps Construction. Added were new gate podiums, increased size of gate areas, relocated concessions, expanded restrooms, new flooring, and new signage. Also, the roof of the terminal was raised, and new, brighter light fixtures were added in order to provide more overall lighting. As of 2012, Terminal 7 is undergoing another facelift, with significant changes to concessions. The terminal also contains a United Club and International First Class Lounge.

===Terminal 8===
Terminal 8 has nine gates: Gates 8088. This terminal was added for smaller jets and turboprops in 1988 and formerly served Shuttle by United flights. In 2002, United moved all non-Express flights to Terminals 6 and 7. However, Terminal 8 is now used once again for mainline United flights.

==Airlines and destinations==
LAX connects 87 domestic and 69 international destinations in North America, Latin America, Europe, the Middle East, Asia, and Oceania. Its most prominent airlines are United Airlines (18.24% of passenger traffic, combined with United Express traffic), American Airlines (14.73%), and Southwest Airlines (12.62%). Other airlines with a presence on a lesser scale include Delta Air Lines (11.12%) and Alaska Airlines (4.74%). http://www.lawa.org/%5Cuploadedfiles%5CLAX%5Cstatistics%5Caircarrier-2008.pdf 

===Passenger===
United Airlines/United Express operate the most departures from the airport, followed by American Airlines/American Eagle and Southwest Airlines. United also operates to the most destinations, followed by American and Alaska Airlines/Horizon. Delta, Qantas, United, and Virgin Australia all operate nonstop services to the most transpacific destinations (three). Norwegian Air Shuttle (Operated by Norwegian Long Haul) serves the most destinations in Europe (three), while Alaska Airlines/Horizon serve the most destinations in Mexico (nine).

This table lists passenger flights served with a nonstop or direct flight with no change of aircraft carrying passengers originating in Los Angeles according to the airlines' published schedules, unless otherwise noted.

;Notes:
* Air New Zealand will relocate operations to the Tom Bradley International Terminal (TBIT) in mid-2014. 
* Qantas flights to/from New YorkJFK are only for non-domestic, connecting traffic. The airline does not have local traffic rights to transport passengers solely from LAX to JFK.
* Although Virgin Australia flights depart out of the Tom Bradley International Terminal, passengers check in at Terminal 3 

===Cargo===

==Traffic and statistics==
LAX handles more "origin and destination" (i.e. not connecting) passengers than any other airport in the world. The airport handled 28,861,477 enplanements, the total number of passengers boarding an aircraft, in 2008. This makes LAX the third busiest airport in the U.S. in terms of enplanements. It was the world's sixth-busiest airport by passenger traffic and eleventh-busiest by cargo traffic, serving over 60 million passengers and more than two million tons of freight in 2006. It is the busiest airport in the state of California, and the third-busiest airport by passenger traffic in the United States based on final 2006 statistics. Passenger Traffic 2006 FINAL from Airports Council International In terms of international passengers, LAX is the third busiest in the U.S. (behind JFK in New York City and MIA in Miami) and 26th worldwide. The number of aircraft operations (landings and takeoffs) has steadily increased to 603,912 in 2011, up from 575,875 in 2010. 

The LAX control tower and Theme Building as seen from Terminal 4

 Busiest international routes from Los Angeles (JanuaryDecember 2013) 
 Rank Airport Passengers Change 2012/2013 Carriers 
 1 London (Heathrow), United Kingdom 1,339,445 4.0% Air New Zealand, American, British Airways, United, Virgin Atlantic 
 2 Tokyo (Narita), Japan 1,180,227 7.3% ANA, American, Delta, JAL, Malaysia Airlines, Singapore Airlines, United 
 3 Sydney, Australia 1,067,179 3.1% Delta, Qantas, United, Virgin Australia 
 4 Seoul (Incheon), South Korea 998,932 4.3% Asiana, Korean Air, Thai Airways 
 5 Taipei (Taoyuan), Taiwan 881,530 3.0% China Airlines, EVA Air 
 6 Mexico City, Mexico 769,068 3.0% Aeromxico, Alaska Airlines, United, Volaris 
 7 Vancouver, Canada 753,972 1.3% Air Canada, Alaska Airlines, United, WestJet 
 8 Guadalajara, Mexico 740,325 8.4% Aeromxico, Alaska Airlines, Delta, United, Volaris 
 9 Paris (Charles de Gaulle), France 579,311 2.9% Air France, Air Tahiti Nui 
 10 Toronto (Pearson), Canada 560,059 3.0% Air Canada, American 

 Busiest domestic routes from Los Angeles (March 2013  February 2014) 
 Rank Airport Passengers Carriers 
 1 San Francisco, California 1,661,000 American, Delta, Southwest, United, Virgin America 
 2 New York (JFK), New York 1,496,000 American, Delta, JetBlue, United, Virgin America 
 3 Chicago (O'Hare), Illinois 1,195,000 American, Spirit, United, Virgin America 
 4 Las Vegas, Nevada 1,190,000 American, Delta, Southwest, Spirit, United, Virgin America 
 5 Dallas/Fort Worth, Texas 1,131,000 American, Spirit, United, Virgin America 
 6 Honolulu, Hawaii 1,046,000 Allegiant, American, Delta, Hawaiian, United 
 7 Denver, Colorado 952,000 American, Frontier, Southwest, United 
 8 Seattle, Washington 872,000 Alaska, Delta, United, Virgin America 
 9 Atlanta, Georgia 869,000 AirTran, Delta, Southwest 
 10 Phoenix, Arizona 791,000 American, Delta, Southwest, United, US Airways 

 Traffic by calendar year 
 Passengers Aircraft movements Freight(tons) Mail(tons) 
 1994 51,050,275 689,888 1,516,567 186,878 
 1995 53,909,223 732,639 1,567,248 193,747 
 1996 57,974,559 763,866 1,696,663 194,091 
 1997 60,142,588 781,492 1,852,487 212,410 
 1998 61,215,712 773,569 1,787,400 264,473 
 1999 64,279,571 779,150 1,884,526 253,695 
 2000 67,303,182 783,433 2,002,614 246,538 
 2001 61,606,204 738,433 1,779,065 162,629 
 2002 56,223,843 645,424 1,869,932 92,422 
 2003 54,982,838 622,378 1,924,883 97,193 
 2004 60,704,568 655,097 2,022,911 92,402 
 2005 61,489,398 650,629 2,048,817 88,371 
 2006 61,041,066 656,842 2,022,687 80,395 
 2007 62,438,583 680,954 2,010,820 66,707 
 2008 59,815,646 622,506 1,723,038 73,505 
 2009 56,520,843 544,833 1,599,782 64,073 
 2010 59,069,409 575,835 1,852,791 74,034 
 2011 61,862,052 603,912 1,789,204 80,442 
 2012 63,688,121 605,480 1,867,155 88,438 
 2013 66,667,619 614,917 1,848,764 77,286 
 Source: Los Angeles World Airports 

==Airport lounges==

* Terminal 2 (Air Canada Maple Leaf Lounge, Air New Zealand Koru Club, Hawaiian Airlines Premier Club, Air France Affaires/ Premiere Lounge)
* Terminal 3 (Virgin America LOFT)
* Terminal 4 (American Airlines Admiral's Club, American Airlines Flagship Lounge, Qantas Club)
* Terminal 5 (Delta Air Lines Sky Club)
* Terminal 6 (Alaska Airlines Board Room, United Club)
* Terminal 7 (United Airlines GlobalFirst Lounge, United Club)
* Terminal 8 (None)
* TBIT (Star Alliance Lounge, SkyTeam Lounge, Oneworld Lounge, Philippine Airlines Mabuhay Lounge, reLAX Lounge)

==Ground transportation==

One of the large LAX signs that greet visitors to Los Angeles International Airport. This sign is at the Century Boulevard entrance to the airport.

===Freeways and roads===
LAX's terminals are immediately west of the interchange between Century Boulevard and Sepulveda Boulevard (State Route 1). The 405 Freeway can be reached to the east via Century Boulevard, and the 105 Freeway can be reached to the south via Sepulveda Boulevard.

===Bus===
LAX City Bus Center.
The closest bus stops to the terminals are the pair of opposites on Sepulveda and Century, served by Torrance 8, Metro 117, Metro 232, Commuter Express 574 and Metro 40 (owl service only).

In addition, out of a number of bus systems, many routes (local, rapid and express) of the LACMTA Metro 232 to Long Beach, Line 8 of Torrance Transit, Line 109 of Beach Cities Transit, the Santa Monica Big Blue Bus system's Line 3 and Rapid 3 via Lincoln Blvd to Santa Monica and the Culver CityBus's Line 6 and Rapid 6 via Sepulveda Blvd to Culver City and UCLA all make stops at the LAX Transit Center in Parking Lot C. on 96th St., where shuttle bus "C" offers free connections to and from every LAX terminal, and at the Green Line Station, where shuttle bus "G" connects to and from the terminals.

====FlyAway Bus====

FlyAway Bus at Los Angeles Union Station.

The FlyAway Bus is a motorcoach shuttle service run by the LAWA, which currently travels between one of three off-airport areas: San Fernando Valley (Van Nuys), downtown Los Angeles (Union Station), and the Westside (Westwood). The Irvine FlyAway was discontinued on August 31, 2012. The shuttle service stops at every LAX terminal. The service hours vary based on the line. All lines use the regional system of High Occupancy Vehicle lanes to expedite their trips.

====Los Angeles Metro Rail====
Shuttle bus "G" offers a free connection to and from the Aviation/LAX station on the Los Angeles Metro Rail Green Line. The line was originally intended to connect directly to the airport, but budgetary restraints and opposition from local parking lot owners impeded its progress. Part of the long term master plan for LAX and the Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority calls for a direct Metro Rail stop on either the Green Line or the proposed Crenshaw/LAX Transit Corridor, with a people-mover system connecting the terminals to the station without the need for a shuttle bus. Currently, shuttle bus "G" runs every 1015 minutes (synched with the train schedule) from 5 am  1:30 am.
 LAWA Contract Manager 

====Taxis and private shuttles====
Taxicab services are operated by nine city-authorized taxi companies and regulated by Authorized Taxicab Supervision Inc. (ATS). ATS maintains a taxicab holding lot under the 96th Street Bridge where, at peak periods, hundreds of cabs queue up to wait their turn to pull into the central terminal area to pick up riders. A number of private shuttle companies also offer limousine and bus services to LAX airport.

==Coast Guard Air Station Los Angeles==

The airport also functions as a joint civil-military facility, providing a base for the United States Coast Guard and its Coast Guard Air Station Los Angeles facility, operating four HH-65 Dolphin helicopters, which covers Coast Guard operations in various Southern California locations, including Catalina Island.

Missions include search and rescue (SAR), law enforcement, aids to navigation support (such as operating lighthouses) and various military operations. In addition, Coast Guard helicopters assigned to the air station deploy to Coast Guard cutters.

==Flight Path Learning Center==
The light towers, first installed in preparation for the Democratic National Convention in 2000, change colors throughout the night.

The Flight Path Learning Center is a museum located at 6661 Imperial Highway and was formerly known as the "West Imperial Terminal". This building used to house some charter flights (Condor Airlines) and regular scheduled flights by MGM Grand Air. It sat empty for 10 years until it was re-opened as a learning center for LAX.

The center contains information on the history of aviation, several pictures of the airport, as well as aircraft scale models, flight attendant uniforms, and general airline memorabilia such as playing cards, china, magazines, signs, even a TWA gate information sign.

The museum claims to be "the only aviation museum and research center situated at a major airport and the only facility with a primary emphasis on contributions of civil aviation to the history and development of Southern California". However, there are other museums at major airports including the Udvar-Hazy Center of the National Air and Space Museum adjacent to Washington Dulles Airport, the Royal Thai Air Force Museum at Don Muang Airport, the Suomen ilmailumuseo (Finnish Aviation Museum) at Helsinki-Vantaa Airport, the Frontier of Flight Museum at Dallas Love Field, the Tulsa Air and Space Museum & Planetarium at Tulsa International Airport and others.

==Other facilities==
The airport has the administrative offices of Los Angeles World Airports. "About LAWA". Los Angeles World Airports. Retrieved on September 28, 2011. "Los Angeles International Airport 1 World Way, Los Angeles, CA 90045" 

Continental Airlines once had its corporate headquarters on the airport property. At a 1962 press conference in the office of Mayor of Los Angeles Sam Yorty, Continental Airlines announced that it planned to move its headquarters to Los Angeles in July 1963. "Continental Airlines to Move Its Main Offices Here From Denver". Los Angeles Times. August 16, 1962. B11. Retrieved on January 24, 2010. In 1963 Continental's headquarters moved to a two-story, $2.3 million building on the grounds of the airport. "AIRLINE OCCUPIES NEW HEADQUARTERS IN L.A." Los Angeles Times. September 15, 1963. Section J, page N6. Retrieved on January 24, 2010. "Westchester  Mapping L.A." Los Angeles Times. Retrieved on March 19, 2010. The July 2009 Continental Magazine issue stated that the move "underlined Continental's western and Pacific orientation". "The Company". Continental Airlines Magazine. July 2009. Retrieved on February 8, 2010. On July 1, 1983 the airline's headquarters were relocated to the America Tower in the Neartown area of Houston. "Insurer to Buy Continental Stock". Associated Press at Toledo Blade. Wednesday March 16, 1983. Page 4. Google News 3 of 52. Retrieved on August 22, 2009. 

In addition to Continental, Western Airlines and Flying Tiger Line also had their headquarters on the LAX property. "World Airline Directory". Flight International. March 30, 1985. 131". Retrieved on June 17, 2009. "Head Office: PO Box 92005, World Way Postal Center, Los Angeles International Airport, Los Angeles 90009, USA". "World Airline Directory". Flight International. March 30, 1985. 83". Retrieved on July 23, 2009. "7401 World Way West, Los Angeles International Airport, California 90009, USA" 

==Incidents and accidents==
During its history there have been numerous incidents, but only the most notable are summarized below: All incidents listed here are in the Aviation Safety Network LAX database, unless otherwise noted. 

===1930s===
* On January 23, 1939, the sole prototype Douglas 7B twin-engine attack bomber, designed and built as a company project, suffered loss of vertical fin and rudder during demonstration flight over Mines Field, flat spun into the parking lot of North American Aviation, burned. Another source states that the test pilot, in an attempt to impress the Gallic passenger, attempted a snap roll at low altitude with one engine feathered, resulting in the fatal spin. Huston, John W., Major General, USAF, Ret., editor, "American Airpower Comes of Age: General Henry H. "Hap" Arnold's World War II Diaries; Volume 1", Air University Press, Maxwell AFB, Alabama, January 2002, Library of Congress card number 2001041259, ISBN 1-58566-093-0, page 88. Douglas test pilot Johnny Cable bailed out at 300 feet, chute unfurled but did not have time to deploy, killed on impact, flight engineer John Parks rode the airframe in and died, but 33-year-old French Air Force Capt. Paul Chemidlin, riding in aft fuselage near top turret, survived with broken leg, severe back injuries, slight concussion. Presence of Chemidlin, a representative of foreign purchasing mission, caused a furor in Congress by isolationists over neutrality and export laws. Type was developed as Douglas DB-7. Matthews, Birch, "Cobra!: Bell Aircraft Corporation 19341946", Schiffer Publishing Limited, Atglen, Pennsylvania, 1996, Library of Congress card number 95-72357, ISBN 0-88740-911-3, pp.112113. 

===1940s===
* On June 1, 1940, the first Douglas R3D-1 for the U.S. Navy, BuNo 1901, crashed at Mines Field, before delivery. The Navy later acquired the privately owned DC-5 prototype, from William E. Boeing as a replacement. Swanborough, Gordon, and Bowers, Peter M., "United States Navy Aircraft since 1911", Naval Institute Press, Annapolis, Maryland, 1976, Library of Congress card number 90-60097, ISBN 978-0-87021-792-0, pp.487. 
* On November 20, 1940, the prototype NA-73X Mustang, NX19998, Waag, Robert, "NA 73  The Forgotten Mustang", Airpower, Granada Hills, California, November 1971, Volume 1, Number 2, p. 9. first flown October 26, 1940, by test pilot Vance Breese, crashed this date. Editors, "Mustang", Airpower, Granada Hills, California, July 1985, Volume 15, Number 4, p. 12. According to P-51 designer Edgar Schmued, the NA-73 was lost because test pilot Paul Balfour refused, before a high-speed test run, to go through the takeoff and flight test procedure with Schmued while the aircraft was on the ground, claiming "one airplane was like another". After making two high speed passes over Mines Field, he forgot to put the fuel valve on "reserve" and during third pass ran out of fuel. Emergency landing in a freshly plowed field caused wheels to dig in, aircraft flipped over, airframe was not rebuilt, the second aircraft being used for subsequent testing. Mizrahi, Joseph V., "Airmail", Wings, Granada Hills, California, December 1985, Volume 15, Number 6, p. 5. 
* On October 26, 1944, WASP pilot Gertrude Tompkins Silver of the 601st Ferrying Squadron, 5th Ferrying Group, Love Field, Dallas, Texas, departed Los Angeles Airport, in North American P-51D Mustang, 44-15669, at 1600 hrs PWT, headed for the East Coast. She took off into the wind, into an offshore fog bank, and was expected that night at Palm Springs. She never arrived. Due to a paperwork foul-up, a search did not get under way for several days, and while the eventual search of land and sea was massive, it failed to find a trace of Silver or her plane. She is the only missing WASP pilot. She had married Sgt. Henry Silver one month before her disappearance. 

===1960s===
* On January 13, 1969, a Scandinavian Airlines System Douglas DC-8-62, Flight 933, crashed into Santa Monica Bay, approximately 6 nmi west of LAX at 7:21 pm, local time. The aircraft was operating as flight SK-933, nearing the completion of a flight from Seattle. Of nine crewmembers, three lost their lives to drowning, while 12 of the 36 passengers also drowned.
* On January 18, 1969, United Airlines Flight 266 a Boeing 727-200 bearing the registration number N7434U, crashed into Santa Monica Bay approximately 11.3 mi west of LAX at 6:21 pm local time. The aircraft was destroyed, resulting in the loss of all 32 passengers and six crewmembers aboard.

===1970s===
* On the evening of June 6, 1971, Hughes Airwest Flight 706, a Douglas DC-9 jetliner which had departed LAX on a flight to Salt Lake City, Utah, was struck nine minutes after takeoff by a U.S. Marine Corps McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom II fighter jet over the San Gabriel Mountains. The midair collision killed all 44 passengers and five crew members aboard the DC-9 airliner and one of two crewmen aboard the military jet.
* On August 6, 1974, a bomb exploded near the Pan Am ticketing area at Terminal 2; three people were killed and 35 were injured. 
* On March 1, 1978, two tires burst in succession on a McDonnell Douglas DC-10-10 on Continental Airlines Flight 603 during its takeoff roll at LAX and the plane, bound for Honolulu, veered off the runway. A third tire burst and the DC-10's left landing gear collapsed, causing a fuel tank to rupture. Following the aborted takeoff, spilled fuel ignited and enveloped the center portion of the aircraft in flames. During the ensuing emergency evacuation, a husband and wife died when they exited the passenger cabin onto the wing and dropped down directly into the flames. Two additional passengers died of their injuries approximately three months after the accident; 74 others aboard the plane were injured, as were 11 firemen battling the fire.
* On the evening of March 10, 1979, Swift Aire Flight 235, a twin-engine Aerospatiale Nord 262A-33 turboprop en route to Santa Maria, was forced to ditch in Santa Monica Bay after experiencing engine problems upon takeoff from LAX. The pilot, co-pilot and a female passenger drowned when they were unable to exit the aircraft after the ditching. The female flight attendant and the three remaining passengerstwo men and a pregnant womansurvived and were rescued by several pleasure boats and other watercraft in the vicinity.

===1980s===
* On August 31, 1986, Aeromxico Flight 498, a DC-9 en route from Mexico City, Mexico to Los Angeles, began its descent into LAX when a Piper Cherokee collided with the DC-9's left horizontal stabilizer over Cerritos, California, causing the DC-9 to crash into a residential neighborhood. All 67 people on the two aircraft were killed, in addition to 15 people on the ground. 5 homes were destroyed and an additional 7 were damaged by the crash and resulting fire. The Piper went down in a nearby schoolyard and caused no further injuries on the ground. As a result of this incident, the FAA required all commercial aircraft to be equipped with Traffic Collision Avoidance System (TCAS).

===1990s===
* On February 1, 1991, USAir Flight 1493 (arriving from Columbus, Ohio), a Boeing 737-300, landing on Runway 24L at LAX, collided on touchdown with a SkyWest Airlines Fairchild Metroliner, Flight 5569 departing to Palmdale, California, that had been holding in position on the same runway. The collision killed all 12 occupants of the SkyWest plane and 22 people aboard the USAir 737.

===2000s===
* Al-Qaeda attempted to bomb LAX on New Year's Eve 1999/2000. The bomber, Algerian Ahmed Ressam, was captured in Port Angeles, Washington, the U.S. port of entry, with a cache of explosives that could have produced a blast 40x greater than that of a devastating car bomb hidden in the trunk of the rented car in which he had traveled from Canada. He had planned to leave one or two suitcases filled with explosives in an LAX passenger waiting area. He was initially sentenced to 22 years in prison, but in February 2010 an appellate court ordered that his sentence be extended. 
* On the afternoon of January 31, 2000, Alaska Airlines Flight 261, a McDonnell Douglas MD-83 jetliner flying from Puerto Vallarta, Mexico to San Francisco and Seattle, requested to make an emergency landing at LAX after experiencing control problems with its tail-mounted horizontal stabilizer. Before the plane could divert to Los Angeles, it suddenly plummeted into the Pacific Ocean approximately 2.7 mi north of Anacapa Island off the California coast, killing all 88 people aboard the aircraft. 
* Three of the aircraft hijacked in the September 11, 2001 attacks - American Airlines Flight 11, American Airlines Flight 77, and United Airlines Flight 175, had LAX as their final destination.
* In the 2002 Los Angeles Airport shooting of July 4, 2002, Hesham Mohamed Hadayet killed 2 Israelis at the ticket counter of El Al Airlines at LAX. Although the gunman was not linked to any terrorist group, the man was upset at U.S. support for Israel, and therefore was motivated by political disagreement. This led the FBI to classify this shooting as a terrorist act, one of the few on U.S. soil since the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. The attack was similar to the Rome and Vienna Airport Attacks.
* On September 21, 2005, JetBlue Airways Flight 292, an Airbus A320 discovered a problem with its landing gear as it took off from Bob Hope Airport in Burbank, California. It flew in circles for three hours to burn off fuel, then landed safely at Los Angeles International Airport on runway 25L, balancing on its back wheels as it rolled down the center of the runway. Passengers were able to watch their own coverage live from the satellite broadcast on JetBlue in-flight TV seat displays of their plane as it made an emergency landing with the front landing gear visibly becoming damaged. Because JetBlue did not serve LAX at the time, the aircraft was evaluated and repaired at a Continental Airlines hangar. 
* On July 29, 2006, after America West Express Flight 6008, a Canadair Regional Jet operated by Mesa Airlines from Phoenix, Arizona, landed on runway 25L, controllers instructed the pilot to leave the runway on a taxiway known as "Mike" and stop short of runway 25R. Even though the pilot read back the instructions correctly, he accidentally taxied onto 25R and into the path of a departing SkyWest Airlines Embraer EMB-120 operating United Express Flight 6037 to Monterey, California. They cleared each other by 50 ft and nobody was hurt. 
* On August 16, 2007, a runway incursion occurred between WestJet Flight 900 and Northwest Airlines Flight 180 on runways 24R and 24L, respectively, with the aircraft coming within 37 ft of each other. The planes were carrying a combined total of 296 people, none of whom were injured. The NTSB concluded that the incursion was the result of controller error. In September 2007, FAA Administrator Marion Blakey stressed the need for LAX to increase lateral separation between its pair of north runways in order to preserve the safety and efficiency of the airport. 

===2010s===
* On October 13 and 14, 2013, two incidents of dry ice bomb explosions occurred at the airport. The first dry ice bomb exploded at 7:00 pm in an employee restroom in Terminal 2, injuring nobody. Terminal 2 was briefly shut down as a result. On the next day at 8:30 pm, a dry ice bomb exploded on the tarmac area near the Tom Bradley International Terminal, injuring nobody. Two other plastic bottles containing dry ice were found at the scene during the second explosion. On October 15, a 28-year-old airport employee was arrested in connection with the explosions and was booked on charges of possession of an explosive or destructive device near an aircraft. He is held on $1 million bail. On October 18, a 41-year-old airport employee was arrested in connection with the second explosion, and was booked on suspicion of possessing a destructive device near an aircraft. Authorities believe that the incidents are not linked to terrorism. 
* In the November 1, 2013 shooting incident, at around 9:31 a.m. PDT, a lone gunman entered Terminal 3 and opened fire with a semi-automatic rifle, killing a Transportation Security Administration (TSA) officer and wounding at least three other people. The gunman was later apprehended and taken into custody. Until the situation was clarified and under control, a few terminals at the airport were evacuated, all inbound flights were diverted and all outbound flights were grounded until the airport began returning to normal operation at around 2:30 p.m. 

==Planned modernization==
New Tom Bradley West International Terminal "Bon Voyage" screen that greets travelers about to depart through the expanded concourse.

LAWA currently has several plans to modernize LAX. These include terminal and runway improvements, which will enhance the passenger experience, reduce overcrowding, and provide airport access to the latest class of very large passenger aircraft.

These improvements include:
* New crossfield taxiway
* New large aircraft gates at TBIT
* TBIT core improvements
* New Midfield Satellite Concourse
* Replacement of Central Utility Plant

LAWA is also planning to build and operate an LAX Automated People Mover. This small train will connect passengers between the central terminal area and the Metro Green Line, the future Metro Crenshaw Line, and regional and local bus lines.

==In popular culture==
Numerous films and television shows have been set or filmed partially at LAX, at least partly due to the airport's proximity to Hollywood studios. Film shoots at the Los Angeles airports, including LAX, produced $590 million for the Los Angeles region from 2002 to 2005. 
* In the 1966 musical film Hold On! there is a riot of teenage girls swarming aspiring starlet Cecilie Bannister at LAX.
* In the opening credit sequence to 1967's The Graduate, Dustin Hoffman's character is filmed passing wearily through an LAX concourse connection tunnel to "The Sound of Silence" by Simon & Garfunkel. In the 1997 film Jackie Brown, Pam Grier walks past the same spot to soaring soul music by Bobby Womack.
* "L.A. International Airport", a song written by Leanne Scott and first recorded by David Frizzell in 1970, was covered in 1971 by Susan Raye and this version reached No. 9 on the Billboard Country Singles chart (and No. 54 on the Hot 100 singles chart). The song was re-recorded with updated lyrics in 2003 by Shirley Myers for the 75th anniversary of LAX.

The 1976 Walt Disney comedy film "No Deposit, No Return" has scenes shown around the Interior and the Exterior of the LAX terminal.
* The 1980 Zucker, Abrahams and Zucker comedy Airplane! begins at LAX. Additionally, a twist on the iconic public announcement regarding the "white zone" is parodied in the film's opening scene.
* Several scenes of the 1985 Arnold Schwarzenegger motion picture Commando were filmed at the Tom Bradley International Terminal, on the airfield, and in an LAX parking deck.
* The 1985 film To Live and Die in L.A. featured a stunt in a terminal at LAX of Petersen running along the top of the dividers between the terminal's moving sidewalk.
* Stephen King's 1990 horror novella The Langoliers and its 1995 movie adaptation feature LAX as the starting point and ending destination for the protagonists.
* The opening sequence of the 1991 television series Going Places begins with the side-view of an airplane landing at the Los Angeles International Airport, followed by the view of a "Welcome to Los Angeles" sign under a highway bridge.
* The 1994 film Speed, starring Keanu Reeves and Sandra Bullock, was filmed in part on the runways of LAX.
* The 1995 film Heat starring Robert De Niro, Val Kilmer and Al Pacino has its ending scenes filmed at LAX.
* The 1995 Sandra Bullock film The Net, Bullock's character finds her car missing from an LAX parking lot.
* The 1997 film Liar Liar starring Jim Carrey features a climatic scene where Fletcher Reede (Carrey) struggles to keep his son. He hurries to LAX, but his son's plane has already left the terminal. Desperate, he hijacks a mobile stairway and pursues the plane onto the runway.
* The 1997 film Face/Off, a chartered plane crashes into an LAX hangar in the beginning of the film.
* The 1997 film Turbulence starring Ray Liotta and Lauren Holly features a landing attempt by Holly's character on an LAX runway.
* The 1997 Michael Crichton novel Airframe starts with a fictional airline from Hong Kong to Denver making an emergency landing at LAX.
* The 1999 Natalie Portman and Susan Sarandon film Anywhere but Here was partly filmed at LAX.
* The 1999 PlayStation video game Driver contains a mission featuring Los Angeles International.
* The 1999 film Fight Club starring Brad Pitt and Edward Norton feature an opening scene where the two arrive at LAX on the same flight.
* The 2000 film Charlie's Angels feature a scene in LAX.
* The 2001 Denzel Washington film Training Day concludes with Alonzo Harris fleeing to LAX.
* The 2002 comedy-drama film Catch Me If You Can, based on the life of Frank Abagnale, Jr., starring Leonardo DiCaprio and Tom Hanks, was partly filmed at LAX and nearby Ontario International Airport.
* The 2003 Quentin Tarantino film Kill Bill Volume 1 starring Uma Thurman featured a scene in an LAX terminal before her departure to Japan.
* The 2004 Tom Hanks film The Terminal had pre-production shooting done at LAX.
* The 2004 comedy Soul Plane features the NWA's first flight from Los Angeles International Airport.
* The 2004 & 2013 video game and Grand Theft Auto V featured and parodied the airport as Los Santos International Airport or LSX and was commonly called as Los Santos International. The Theme Building, light towers, and the control tower of LAX were also featured.
* The 2005 television series LAX starring Heather Locklear was a fictionalized drama of several operation managers working at LAX. Though most of the series was filmed at the nearby Ontario International Airport, LAX was used in several establishing shots.
* The 2005 PlayStation 2 video game, L.A. Rush by Midway Games, features LAX.
* The reality 2005 TV series Airline features the stories of Southwest Airlines employees and passengers originating from LAX, Chicago Midway International Airport, Baltimore-Washington International Airport and William P. Hobby Airport.
* The 2006 Samuel L. Jackson film, Snakes on a Plane featured a flight heading towards LAX from Honolulu, Hawaii.
* In the episode, The Woman at the Airport from the television series Bones, FBI Special Agent Seeley Booth and Dr. Temerance Brennan's investigate a woman's remains found at several locations around LAX.
* In the 2007 Jerry Seinfeld film Bee Movie, Barry and Vanessa fly flowers as luggage on a flight from Los Angeles International Airport to John F. Kennedy International Airport to re-pollinate the world.
* The music video of Backstreet Boys' "I Want It That Way" was filmed and is set mostly at the airport. The Tom Bradley International Terminal is seen in shots and also appears as the band sings and dances to the chorus. The scene where they are greeted by fans was filmed in one of the hangars of LAX. The plane in the video is a Boeing 727.
* Susan Raye, who has been retired from the music industry since 1986, made a rare public appearance to sing her classic hit at a concert at the celebration and to be on hand when a proclamation was issued to make the song the official song of LAX.
* Los Angeles Rapper Game had a 2008 album titled LAX.
* The airport is mentioned in the opening lines of Miley Cyrus's 2009 hit Party in the U.S.A., with the lyrics "I hopped off the plane at LAX..."
* The music video for American Idol Season 7 winner David Cook's song Come Back to Me was filmed at LAX.
* In a 2010 History Channel episode of Life After People, the Theme Building and LAX Control Tower are shown what would happen to them after years of neglect.
* The 2011 episode titled The Middle Men from the British science fiction television show , featured LAX.
* In the final season premiere of Lost, notably titled "LA X", the alternate timeline sequences are mostly set in LAX, which was the intended destination of Oceanic Airlines Flight 815.
* L.A. International Airport also featured in the Brett Ratner film Rush Hour where Chief Inspector Lee (Jackie Chan) and Detective James Carter (Chris Tucker) board a United Airlines Boeing 747-400 bound for Hong Kong.
* The LAX Theme Building influenced the stage set up for the U2 360 Tour.
* In the video game Destroy All Humans, a majestic base appears to be similar to LAX.
* LAX was featured as a playable stage in the 2003 video game Midnight Club II.
* In the second Splinter Cell game, , the last mission takes place in LAX where Sam Fisher infiltrates LAX via the parking garage, takes out terrorists disguised as LAX employees and rogue CIA agent Norman Soth, and disarms the ND133.
* In October 2013 musicians Gene Simmons and Paul Stanley of the rock band KISS opened up a rock-n-roll brew pub called Rock-n-Brews in Terminal 5. Kreuzer, Nikki "L.A.: Rock & Brews- Burgers and Beer with KISS", The Los Angeles Beat, October 12, 2013. 

==See also==

* California World War II Army Airfields
* Los Angeles Airport Police
* Peirson M. Hall, instrumental in establishing the airport

==References==

==External links==

* Los Angeles International Airport official website
* LAneXt website
* LAX Noise Management Internet Flight Tracking System
* 
* 
* 

 01



[[La Tne culture]]

Overview of the Hallstatt and La Tne cultures. The core Hallstatt territory (800 BCE) is shown in solid yellow, the area of influence by 500 BCE (HaD) in light yellow. The core territory of the La Tne culture (450 BCE) is shown in solid green, the eventual area of La Tne influence by 50 BCE in light green. The territories of some major Celtic tribes are labelled.
Map drawn after Atlas of the Celtic World, by John Haywood (2001: 3037).

The La Tne culture was a European Iron Age culture named after the archaeological site of La Tne on the north side of Neuenburgersee in Switzerland, where a rich cache of artifacts was discovered by Hansli Kopp in 1857.

La Tne culture developed and flourished during the late Iron Age (from 450 BCE to the Roman conquest in the 1st century BCE) in Belgium, eastern France, Switzerland, Austria, Southern Germany, the Czech Republic, Poland, Slovakia, Slovenia, Hungary and Romania. To the north extended the contemporary Jastorf culture of Northern Germany. The Jastorf culture is the southern part of the Pre-Roman Iron Age of the north. 

La Tne culture developed out of the early Iron Age Hallstatt culture without any definite cultural break, under the impetus of considerable Mediterranean influence from the Culture of Golasecca, Venceslas Kruta, La grande storia dei Celti. La nascita, l'affermazione, la decadenza, (Newton & Compton), Roma, 2003 ISBN 978-88-8289-851-9 , a translation of Les Celtes, histoire et dictionnaire. Des origines  la romanisation et au christianisme, Robert Laffont, Paris, 2000, without the dictionary the Greeks in pre-Roman Gaul and later Etruscan civilizations. Sarunas Milisauskas , European Prehistory: a survey, p. 354 Barry Cunliffe notes localization of La Tne culture during the 5th century when there arose "two zones of power and innovation: a Marne  Moselle zone in the west with trading links to the Po Valley via the central Alpine passes and the Golasecca culture, and a Bohemian zone in the east with separate links to the Adriatic via the eastern Alpine routes and the Venetic culture". Cunliffe 1997:66. A shift of settlement centres took place in the 4th century.

La Tne cultural material appeared over a large area, including parts of Ireland and Great Britain, northern Spain, Burgundy, and Austria. Elaborate burials also reveal a wide network of trade. In Vix, France, an elite woman of the 6th century BCE was buried with a very large bronze cauldron made in Greece. Exports from La Tne cultural areas to the Mediterranean cultures were based on salt, tin and copper, amber, wool and leather, furs and gold.

==La Tne "homeland"==
The Hallstatt and La Tne Cultures.

Though there is no agreement on the precise region in which La Tne culture first developed, there is a broad consensus that the center of the culture lay on the northwest edges of Hallstatt culture, north of the Alps, within the region between the valleys of the Marne and Moselle in the west and modern Bavaria and Austria in the east. In 1994 a prototypical ensemble of elite grave sites of the early 5th century BCE was excavated at Glauberg in Hesse, northeast of Frankfurt-am-Main, in a region that had formerly been considered peripheral to the La Tne sphere. Mystery of the Celts 

From their homeland, La Tne groups expanded in the 4th century to Hispania, the Po Valley, the Balkans, and even as far as Asia Minor, in the course of several major migrations. In the 4th century BCE, a Gallic army led by Brennus reached Rome and took the city. In the 3rd century BCE, Gallic bands entered Greece and threatened the oracle of Delphi, while another band settled Galatia in Asia Minor.

==Periodization==
Extensive contacts through trade are recognized in foreign objects deposited in elite burials; stylistic influences on La Tne material culture can be recognized in Etruscan, Italic, Greek, Dacian and Scythian sources. Dateable Greek pottery at La Tne sites and dendrochronology and thermoluminescence help provide date ranges in an absolute chronology at some La Tne sites.

As with many archaeological periods, La Tne history was originally divided into "early" (6th century BCE), "middle" (c. 450100 BCE), and "late" (1st century BCE) stages, with the Roman occupation effectively driving the culture underground and ending its development. A broad cultural unity was not paralleled by overarching social-political unifying structures, and the extent to which the material culture can be linguistically linked is debated.

==Ethnology==
Our knowledge of this cultural area derives from three sources: from archaeological evidence, from Greek and Latin literary evidence, and more controversially, from ethnographical evidence suggesting some La Tne artistic and cultural survivals in traditionally Celtic regions of far western Europe. Some of the societies that are archaeologically identified with La Tne material culture were identified by Greek and Roman authors from the 5th century onwards as Keltoi ("Celts") and Galli ("Gauls"). Herodotus (iv.49) correctly placed Keltoi at the source of the Ister/Danube, in the heartland of La Tne material culture: "The Ister flows right across Europe, rising in the country of the Celts", whom however, apparently misunderstanding his source, Lionel Pearson, "Herodotus on the Source of the Danube", Classical Philology 29.4 (October 1934:328337). he places "farthest to the west of any people of Europe" In another place (ii.33.) Herodotus mentions the Ister, which "rising in the country of the Celts, beginning from the city of Pyrene, cuts Europe in half", which would have made it intersect with the Rhone; Pyrene is not mentioned aside from this context. 

Whether the usage of classical sources means that the whole of La Tne culture can be attributed to a unified Celtic people is difficult to assess; archaeologists have repeatedly concluded that language, material culture, and political affiliation do not necessarily run parallel. Frey notes (Frey 2004) that in the 5th century, "burial customs in the Celtic world were not uniform; rather, localised groups had their own beliefs, which, in consequence, also gave rise to distinct artistic expressions".

==Material culture==

La Tne metalwork in bronze, iron and gold, developing technologically out of Hallstatt culture, is stylistically characterized by inscribed and inlaid intricate spirals and interlace, on fine bronze vessels, helmets and shields, horse trappings and elite jewelry, especially the neck rings called torcs and elaborate clasps called fibulae. It is characterized by elegant, stylized curvilinear animal and vegetal forms, allied with the Hallstatt traditions of geometric patterning. The Early Style of La Tne art and culture mainly featured static, geometric decoration, while the transition to the Developed Style constituted a shift to movement-based forms, such as triskeles. Some subsets within the Developed Style contain more specific design trends, such as the recurrent serpentine scroll of the Waldalgesheim Style Harding, D. W. The Archaeology of Celtic Art. New York: Routledge, 2007 

Initially La Tne folk lived in open settlements that were dominated by the chieftains towering hill forts. frankfurt,kultur,highlights,mystery of the kelts The development of towns&mdash; oppida&mdash; appears in mid-La Tne culture. La Tne dwellings were carpenter-built rather than of masonry. La Tne peoples also dug ritual shafts, in which votive offerings and even human sacrifices were cast. Severed heads appear to have held great power and were often represented in carvings. Burial sites included weapons, carts, and both elite and household goods, evoking a strong continuity with an afterlife.

==Discovery==
La Tne is a village on the northern shore of Lake Neuchtel, Switzerland. It is both an archaeological site and the eponymous site for the late Iron Age La Tne culture, also spelt "Latne" or "La-Tne".

In 1857, prolonged drought lowered the waters of the lake by about 2 m. On the northernmost tip of the lake, between the river Thielle and a point south of the village of Marin-Epagnier, Hansli Kopp, looking for antiquities for Colonel Frdric Schwab, discovered several rows of wooden piles that still reached about 50 cm into the water. From among these, Kopp collected about forty iron swords.

The Swiss archaeologist Ferdinand Keller published his findings in 1868 in his influential first report on the Swiss pile dwellings (Pfahlbaubericht). In 1863 he interpreted the remains as a Celtic village built on piles. Eduard Desor, a geologist from Neuchtel, started excavations on the lakeshore soon afterwards. He interpreted the site as an armory, erected on piles over the lake and later destroyed by enemy action. Another interpretation accounting for the presence of cast iron swords that had not been sharpened, was of a site of sacrifices.

With the first systematic lowering of the Swiss lakes from 1868 to 1883, the site fell completely dry. In 1880, Emile Vouga, a teacher from Marin-Epagnier, uncovered the wooden remains of two bridges (designated "Pont Desor" and "Pont Vouga") originally over 100 m long, that crossed the little Thielle River (today a nature reserve) and the remains of five houses on the shore. After Vouga had finished, F. Borel, curator of the Marin museum, began to excavate as well. In 1885 the canton asked the Socit d'Histoire of Neuchtel to continue the excavations, the results of which were published by Vouga in the same year.

All in all, over 2500 objects, mainly made from metal, have been excavated in La Tne. Weapons predominate, there being 166 swords (most without traces of wear), 270 lanceheads, and 22 shield bosses, along with 385 brooches, tools, and parts of chariots. Numerous human and animal bones were found as well.

Interpretations of the site vary. Some scholars believe the bridge was destroyed by high water, while others see it as a place of sacrifice after a successful battle (there are almost no female ornaments).

An exhibition marking the 150th anniversary of the discovery of the La Tne site was launched in June 2007 at the Muse Schwab in Bienne, Switzerland. It is scheduled to move to Zrich in 2008 and the Mont Beuvray in Burgundy in 2009.

==Sites==
Some sites are:

 *La Tne, Marin-Epagnier *Bern, Engehalbinsel: oppidum *Jolimont *Manching: oppidum *Mormont *Mnsingen, burial field *Petinesca *Basel oppidum *Bibracte, oppidum of the Aedui at Mont Beuvray in Burgundy *Erstfeld hoard *Hochdorf Chieftain's Grave *Bopfingen: Viereckschanze, a characteristic rectangular enclosure *Fellbach-Schmiden, near Stuttgart: Viereckschanze; ritual objects recovered from a well *Kleinaspergle: elite graves of La Tne I *Waldalgesheim: an elite chariot burial, 4th century *Glauberg, oppidum and elite graves *Drrnberg near Hallein: Burial field and earthworks of late Hallstatt&ndash;early La Tne *Donnersberg: oppidum *Vill near Innsbruck: remains of dwellings *Sandberg Celtic city near Platt and Roseldorf in Lower Austria *Vix/Mont Lassois: oppidum and elaborate graves *Titelberg: oppidum in Luxembourg *Reinheim: Tomb of a princess/priestess with burial gifts 

==Artifacts==
Some outstanding La Tne artifacts are:
*"Strettweg Cart" (7th century BCE), found in southeast Austria, a four-wheeled cart with a goddess, riders with axes and shields, attendants and stags. (Landesmuseum Johanneum, Graz, Austria)
*A woman in Vix (Chtillon-sur-Seine, Burgundy) buried with an 1100 litre (290 gallon) bronze Greek vase, the largest ever found.
*The silver "Gundestrup cauldron" (3rd or 2nd century BCE), found ritually broken in a peat bog near Gundestrup, Denmark, but probably made near the Black Sea, perhaps in Thrace. (National Museum of Denmark, Copenhagen)
*"Battersea Shield" (35050 BCE), found in the Thames, made of bronze with red enamel. (British Museum, London)
*"Witham Shield" (4th century BCE). (British Museum, London) British Museum - The Witham Shield Treasures Of The Celtic Causeway - The Fiskerton Log Boat | Culture24 
*"Chertsey Shield (400200 BCE). (British Museum, London) British Museum - Chertsey Shield 
*"Turoe stone" in Galway, Ireland
*Chariot burial found at Waldalgesheim, Bad Kreuznach, Germany, late 4th century BCE. (Bonn: Rheinisches Landesmuseum)
*Chariot burial found at La Gorge Meillet (St-Germain-en-Laye: Muse des Antiquits Nationales).
*A life-sized sculpture of a warrior that accompanied the Glauberg burials.
*A gold-and-bronze model of an oak tree (3rd century BCE) found at the Oppidum of Manching.
*Noric steel

==See also==
*Golasecca culture

==Notes==

==Further reading==
* Cunliffe, Barry. The Ancient Celts. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 1997
* Collis, John. The Celts: Origins, Myths, Invention. London: Tempus, 2003.
* Kruta, Venceslas, La grande storia dei Celti. La nascita, l'affermazione, la decadenza, Newton & Compton, Roma, 2003 ISBN 978-88-8289-851-9 (492 pp. - a translation of Les Celtes, histoire et dictionnaire. Des origines  la romanisation et au christianisme, Robert Laffont, Paris, 2000, without the dictionary)
* James, Simon. The Atlantic Celts. London: British Museum Press, 1999.
* James, Simon & Rigby, Valery. Britain and the Celtic Iron Age. London: British Museum Press, 1997.

==External links==

* Charles Bergengren, Cleveland Institute of Art, 1999: illustrations of La Tne artifacts
* La Tne Archaeological Sites in Romania



[[Lorenz curve]]

In economics, the Lorenz curve is a graphical representation of the cumulative distribution function of the empirical probability distribution of wealth, and was developed by Max O. Lorenz in 1905 for representing inequality of the wealth distribution.

The curve is a graph showing the proportion of the distribution assumed by the bottom y% of the values, although this is not rigorously true for a finite population (see below). It is often used to represent income distribution, where it shows for the bottom x% of households, what percentage y% of the total income they have. The percentage of households is plotted on the x-axis, the percentage of income on the y-axis. It can also be used to show distribution of assets. In such use, many economists consider it to be a measure of social inequality.

The concept is useful in describing inequality among the size of individuals in ecology, and in studies of biodiversity, where cumulative proportion of species is plotted against cumulative proportion of individuals. It is also useful in business modeling: e.g., in consumer finance, to measure the actual delinquency Y% of the X% of people with worst predicted risk scores.

A typical Lorenz curve

==Explanation==
Points on the Lorenz curve represent statements like "the bottom 20% of all households have 10% of the total income." (see Pareto principle).

A perfectly equal income distribution would be one in which every person has the same income. In this case, the bottom "N"% of society would always have "N"% of the income. This can be depicted by the straight line y = x; called the "line of perfect equality."

By contrast, a perfectly unequal distribution would be one in which one person has all the income and everyone else has none. In that case, the curve would be at "y" = 0 for all "x" < 100%, and "y" = 100% when "x" = 100%. This curve is called the "line of perfect inequality."

The Gini coefficient is the area between the line of perfect equality and the observed Lorenz curve, as a percentage of the area between the line of perfect equality and the line of perfect inequality. The higher the coefficient, the more unequal the distribution is. In the diagram on the right, this is given by the ratio A/(A+B), where A and B are the indicated areas.

== Definition and calculation==
The Lorenz curve can usually be represented by a function L(F), where F, the cumulative portion of the population, is represented by the horizontal axis, and L, the cumulative portion of the total wealth or income, is represented by the vertical axis.

For a population of size n, with a sequence of values y'i, i = 1 to n, that are indexed in non-decreasing order ( y'i  y'i+1), the Lorenz curve is the continuous piecewise linear function connecting the points ( F'i, L'i ), i = 0 to n, where F0 = 0, L0 = 0, and for i = 1 to n:
:
:
:

Note that the statement that the Lorenz curve gives the portion of the wealth or income held by a given portion of the population is only strictly true at the points defined above, but not at the points on the line segments between these points. For instance, in a population of 10 households, it doesn't make sense to say that 45% of them earn a certain portion of the total. If the population is modeled as a continuum then this subtlety disappears.

For a discrete probability function f(y), let y'i, i = 1 to n, be the points with non-zero probabilities indexed in increasing order ( y'i &lt; y'i+1). The Lorenz curve is the continuous piecewise linear function connecting the points ( F'i, L'i ), i = 0 to n, where F0 = 0, L0 = 0, and for i = 1 to n:
:
:
:

For a probability density function f(x) with the cumulative distribution function F(x), the Lorenz curve L(F(x)) is given by:

:

where denotes the average.

For a cumulative distribution function F(x) with inverse x(F), the Lorenz curve L(F) is given by:

:

The inverse x(F) may not exist because the cumulative distribution function has intervals of constant values. However, the previous formula can still apply by generalizing the definition of x(F):
:x(F1) = inf {y : F(y) &ge; F1}

For an example of a Lorenz curve, see Pareto distribution.

==Properties==
A practical example of a Lorenz curve: the Lorenz curves of Denmark, Hungary, and Namibia
A Lorenz curve always starts at (0,0) and ends at (1,1).

The Lorenz curve is not defined if the mean of the probability distribution is zero or infinite.

The Lorenz curve for a probability distribution is a continuous function. However, Lorenz curves representing discontinuous functions can be constructed as the limit of Lorenz curves of probability distributions, the line of perfect inequality being an example.

The information in a Lorenz curve may be summarized by the Gini coefficient and the Lorenz asymmetry coefficient. 

The Lorenz curve cannot rise above the line of perfect equality. If the variable being measured cannot take negative values, the Lorenz curve:
*cannot sink below the line of perfect inequality,
*is increasing, and convex.
Note however that a Lorenz curve for net worth would start out by going negative due to the fact that some people have a negative net worth because of debt.

The Lorenz curve is invariant under positive scaling. If X is a random variable, for any positive number c the random variable c X has the same Lorenz curve as X.

The Lorenz curve is flipped twice, once about F = 0.5 and once about L = 0.5, by negation. If X is a random variable with Lorenz curve LX(F), then &minus;X has the Lorenz curve:
: L &minus; X = 1 &minus; L X (1 &minus; F)

The Lorenz curve is changed by translations so that the equality gap F &minus; L(F) changes in proportion to the ratio of the original and translated means. If X is a random variable with a Lorenz curve L X (F) and mean  X , then for any constant c  &minus; X , X + c has a Lorenz curve defined by:
:

For a cumulative distribution function F(x) with mean  and (generalized) inverse x(F), then for any F with 0 &lt; F &lt; 1 :
*If the Lorenz curve is differentiable:
::
*If the Lorenz curve is twice differentiable, then the probability density function f(x) exists at that point and:
::
*If L(F) is continuously differentiable, then the tangent of L(F) is parallel to the line of perfect equality at the point F(). This is also the point at which the equality gap F &minus; L(F), the vertical distance between the Lorenz curve and the line of perfect equality, is greatest. The size of the gap is equal to half of the relative mean deviation:
::

==See also==

* Distribution (economics)
* Distribution of wealth
* Welfare economics
* Income inequality metrics
* Gini coefficient
* Hoover index (a.k.a. Robin Hood index)
* ROC analysis
* Social welfare (political science)
* Economic inequality
* Zipf's law
* Pareto distribution
* Mean deviation

==References==

==Further reading==
*
*
*
*

==External links==
* WIID: World Income Inequality Database, the most comprehensive source of information on inequality, collected by WIDER (World Institute for Development Economics Research, part of United Nations University)
* glcurve: Stata module to plot Lorenz curve (type "findit glcurve" or "ssc install glcurve" in Stata prompt to install)
* Free add-on to STATA to compute inequality and poverty measures
* Free Online Software (Calculator) computes the Gini Coefficient, plots the Lorenz curve, and computes many other measures of concentration for any dataset
* Free Calculator: Online and downloadable scripts (Python and Lua) for Atkinson, Gini, and Hoover inequalities
* Users of the R data analysis software can install the "ineq" package which allows for computation of a variety of inequality indices including Gini, Atkinson, Theil.
* A MATLAB Inequality Package, including code for computing Gini, Atkinson, Theil indexes and for plotting the Lorenz Curve. Many examples are available.
* A complete handout about the Lorenz curve including various applications, including an Excel spreadsheet graphing Lorenz curves and calculating Gini coefficients as well as coefficients of variation.
* LORENZ 3.0 is a Mathematica notebook which draw sample Lorenz curves and calculates Gini coefficients and Lorenz asymmetry coefficients from data in an Excel sheet.



[[Literate programming]]

Literate Programming by Donald Knuth is the seminal book on literate programming

Literate programming is an approach to programming introduced by Donald Knuth in which a program is given as an explanation of the program logic in a natural language, such as English, interspersed with snippets of macros and traditional source code, from which a compilable source code can be generated. 

The literate programming paradigm, as conceived by Knuth, represents a move away from writing programs in the manner and order imposed by the computer, and instead enables programmers to develop programs in the order demanded by the logic and flow of their thoughts. "I had the feeling that top-down and bottom-up were opposing methodologies: one more suitable for program exposition and the other more suitable for program creation. But after gaining experience with WEB, I have come to realize that there is no need to choose once and for all between top-down and bottom-up, because a program is best thought of as a web instead of a tree. A hierarchical structure is present, but the most important thing about a program is its structural relationships. A complex piece of software consists of simple parts and simple relations between those parts; the programmer's task is to state those parts and those relationships, in whatever order is best for human comprehension not in some rigidly determined order like top-down or bottom-up."  Donald E. Knuth, Literate Programming Literate programs are written as an uninterrupted exposition of logic in an ordinary human language, much like the text of an essay, in which macros are included to hide abstractions and traditional source code.

Literate programming tools are used to obtain two representations from a literate source file: one suitable for further compilation or execution by a computer, the "tangled" code, and another for viewing as formatted documentation, which is said to be "woven" from the literate source. If one remembers that the first version of the tool was called WEB, the amusing literary reference hidden by Knuth in these names becomes obvious: "Oh, what a tangled web we weave when first we practise to deceive"  Sir Walter Scott, in Canto VI, Stanza 17 of Marmion (1808) an epic poem about the Battle of Flodden Field in 1513.  the actual citation appeared as an epigraph in a May 1986 article by Jon Bentley and Donald Knuth in one of the classical Programming Pearls columns in Communications of the ACM, vol 29 num 5 on p.365 While the first generation of literate programming tools were computer language-specific, the later ones are language-agnostic and exist above the programming languages.

== Concept ==
A literate program is an explanation of the program logic in a natural language, such as English, interspersed with snippets of macros and traditional source code. Macros in a literate source file are simply title-like or explanatory phrases in a human language that describe human abstractions created while solving the programming problem, and hiding chunks of code or lower-level macros. These macros are similar to the algorithms in pseudocode typically used in teaching computer science. These arbitrary explanatory phrases become precise new operators, created on the fly by the programmer, forming a meta-language on top of the underlying programming language.

A preprocessor is used to substitute arbitrary hierarchies, or rather "interconnected 'webs' of macros", to produce the compilable source code with one command ("tangle"), and documentation with another ("weave"). The preprocessor also provides an ability to write out the content of the macros and to add to already created macros in any place in the text of the literate program source file, thereby disposing of the need to keep in mind the restrictions imposed by traditional programming languages or to interrupt the flow of thought.

=== Advantages ===
According to Knuth, 
 
literate programming provides higher-quality programs, since it forces programmers to explicitly state the thoughts behind the program, making poorly thought-out design decisions more obvious. Knuth also claims that literate programming provides a first-rate documentation system, which is not an add-on, but is grown naturally in the process of exposition of one's thoughts during a program's creation. The resulting documentation allows authors to restart their own thought processes at any later time, and allows other programmers to understand the construction of the program more easily. This differs from traditional documentation, in which a programmer is presented with source code that follows a compiler-imposed order, and must decipher the thought process behind the program from the code and its associated comments. The meta-language capabilities of literate programming are also claimed to facilitate thinking, giving a higher "bird's eye view" of the code and increasing the number of concepts the mind can successfully retain and process. Applicability of the concept to programming on a large scale, that of commercial-grade programs, is proven by an edition of TeX code as a literate program.

=== Contrast with documentation generation ===
Literate programming is very often misunderstood to refer only to formatted documentation produced from a common file with both source code and comments  which is properly called documentation generation  or to voluminous commentaries included with code. This is backwards: well-documented code or documentation extracted from code follows the structure of the code, with documentation embedded in the code; in literate programming code is embedded in documentation, with the code following the structure of the documentation.

This misconception has led to claims that comment-extraction tools, such as the Perl Plain Old Documentation or Java Javadoc systems, are "literate programming tools". However, because these tools do not implement the "web of abstract concepts" hiding behind the system of natural-language macros, or provide an ability to change the order of the source code from a machine-imposed sequence to one convenient to the human mind, they cannot properly be called literate programming tools in the sense intended by Knuth. 

== Example ==

A classic example of literate programming is the literate implementation of the standard Unix [[wc (Unix)|wc]] word counting program. Knuth presented a CWEB version of this example in Chapter 12 of his Literate Programming book. The same example was later rewritten for the noweb literate programming tool. This example provides a good illustration of the basic elements of literate programming.

;Creation of macros
The following snippet of the wc literate program shows how arbitrary descriptive phrases in a natural language are used in a literate program to create macros, which act as new "operators" in the literate programming language, and hide chunks of code or other macros. The mark-up notation consists of double angle brackets ("<<...>>") that indicate macros, the "@" symbol which indicates the end of the code section in a noweb file. The "<<*>>" symbol stands for the "root", topmost node the literate programming tool will start expanding the web of macros from. Actually, writing out the expanded source code can be done from any section or subsection (i.e. a piece of code designated as "<<name of the chunk>>=", with the equal sign), so one literate program file can contain several files with machine source code.

The purpose of wc is to count lines, words, and/or characters in a list of files. The
number of lines in a file is ......../more explanations/

Here, then, is an overview of the file wc.c that is defined by the noweb program wc.nw:
 <<*>>=
 <<Header files to include>>
 <<Definitions>>
 <<Global variables>>
 <<Functions>>
 <<The main program>>
 @

We must include the standard I/O definitions, since we want to send formatted output
to stdout and stderr.
 <<Header files to include>>=
 #include <stdio.h>
 @

Note also that the unraveling of the chunks can be done in any place in the literate program text file, not necessarily in the order they are sequenced in the enclosing chunk, but as is demanded by the logic reflected in the explanatory text that envelops the whole program.

;Program as a webmacros are not just section names
Macros are not the same as "section names" in standard documentation. Literate programming macros can hide any chunk of code behind themselves, and be used inside any low-level machine language operators, often inside logical operators such as "if", "while" or "case". This is illustrated by the following snippet of the wc literate program. 

The present chunk, which does the counting, was actually one of
the simplest to write. We look at each character and change state if it begins or ends
a word.

 <<Scan file>>=
 while (1) {
 <<Fill buffer if it is empty; break at end of file>>
 c = *ptr++;
 if (c > ' ' && c < 0177) {
 /* visible ASCII codes */
 if (!in_word) {
 word_count++;
 in_word = 1;
 }
 continue;
 }
 if (c == '\n') line_count++;
 else if (c != ' ' && c != '\t') continue;
 in_word = 0;
 /* c is newline, space, or tab */
 }
 @

In fact, macros can stand for any arbitrary chunk of code or other macros, and are thus more general than top-down or bottom-up "chunking", or than subsectioning. Knuth says that when he realized this, he began to think of a program as a web of various parts. 

;Order of human logic, not that of the compiler
In a noweb literate program besides the free order of their exposition, the chunks behind macros, once introduced with "<<...>>=", can be grown later in any place in the file by simply writing "<<name of the chunk>>=" and adding more content to it, as the following snippet illustrates ("plus" is added by the document formatter for readability, and is not in the code). 

 The grand totals must be initialized to zero at the beginning of the program.
If we made these variables local to main, we would have to do this initialization
explicitly; however, C globals are automatically zeroed. (Or rather,``statically
zeroed.'' (Get it?)

 <<Global variables>>+=
 long tot_word_count, tot_line_count,
 tot_char_count;
 /* total number of words, lines, chars */
 @

;Record of the train of thought
The documentation for a literate program is produced as part of writing the program. Instead of comments provided as side notes to source code a literate program contains the explanation of concepts on each level, with lower level concepts deferred to their appropriate place, which allows for better communication of thought. The snippets of the literate wc above show how an explanation of the program and its source code are interwoven. Such exposition of ideas creates the flow of thought that is like a literary work. Knuth wrote a "novel" which explains the code of the computer strategy game Colossal Cave Adventure. The game, also known as ADVENT, was originally written by Crowther in about 700 lines of FORTRAN code; Knuth recast it into the WEB idiom. It is available at literateprogramming.com or on Knuth's website. 

== Tools ==

The first published literate programming environment was WEB, introduced by Donald Knuth in 1981 for his TeX typesetting system; it uses Pascal as its underlying programming language and TeX for typesetting of the documentation. The complete commented TeX source code was published in Knuth's TeX: The program, volume B of his 5-volume Computers and Typesetting. Knuth had privately used a literate programming system called DOC as early as 1979. He was inspired by the ideas of Pierre-Arnoul de Marneffe. The free CWEB, written by Knuth and Silvio Levy, is WEB adapted for C and C++, runs on most operating systems and can produce TeX and PDF documentation.

There are various other implementations of the literate programming concept:

* noweb is independent of the programming language of the source code. It is well known for its simplicity: just two text markup conventions and two tool invocations are needed to use it, and it allows for text formatting in HTML rather than going through the TeX system.

* FunnelWeb is another LP tool that can produce HTML documentation output. It has more complicated markup (with "@" escaping any FunnelWeb command), but has many more flexible options. Like noweb, it is independent of the programming language of the source code.

* Nuweb can translate a single LP source into any number of code files in any mix of languages together with documentation in LaTeX. It does it in a single invocation; it does not have separate weave and tangle commands. It does not have the extensibility of noweb, but it can use the listings package of LaTeX to provide pretty-printing and the hyperref package to provide hyperlinks in PDF output. It also has extensive indexing and cross-referencing facilities including cross-references from the generated code back to the documentation, both as automatically generated comments and as strings that the code can use to report its behaviour. Vimes is a type-checker for Z notation which shows the use of nuweb in a practical application. Around 15,000 lines of nuweb source are translated into nearly 15,000 lines of C/C++ code and over 460 pages of documentation. See External links.

* Molly is a LP tool written in Perl, which aims to modernize and scale it with "folding HTML" and "virtual views" on code. It uses "noweb" markup for the literate source files. See External links.

* Codnar is an inverse literate programming tool available as a Ruby Gem (see External links). Instead of the machine-readable source code being extracted out of the literate documentation sources, the literate documentation is extracted out of the normal machine-readable source code files. This allows these source code files to be edited and maintained as usual. The approach is similar to that used by popular API documentation tools, such as JavaDoc. Such tools, however, generate API reference documentation, while Codnar generates a linear narrative describing the code, similar to that created by classical LP tools. Codnar can co-exist with API documentation tools, allowing both a reference manual and a linear narrative to be generated from the same set of source code files.

* The Leo text editor is an outlining editor which supports optional noweb and CWEB markup. The author of Leo mixes two different approaches: first, Leo is an outlining editor, which helps with management of large texts; second, Leo incorporates some of the ideas of literate programming, which in its pure form (i.e. the way it is used by Knuth Web tool and/or tools like "noweb") is possible only with some degree of inventiveness and the use of the editor in a way not exactly envisioned by its author (in modified @root nodes). However, this and other extensions (@file nodes) make outline programming and text management successful and easy and in some ways similar to literate programming. 

* The Haskell programming language has native support for semi-literate programming, generally inspired by CWEB but with a significantly reduced functionality and simpler implementation. When aiming for TeX output, one writes a plain LaTeX file where source code is marked by a given surrounding environment; LaTeX can be set up to handle that environment, while the Haskell compiler looks for the right markers to identify Haskell statements to compile, removing the TeX documentation as if they were comments. However, as described above, this is not literate programming in the sense intended by Knuth. Haskell's functional, modular nature makes literate programming directly in the language somewhat easier, but it is not nearly as powerful as one of the WEB tools where "tangle" can reorganize in arbitrary ways.

* The Web 68 Literate Programming system uses Algol 68 as the underlying programming language, although there is nothing in the pre-processor 'tang' to force the use of that language. 

* Emacs org-mode for literate programming of through Babel, http://orgmode.org/worg/org-contrib/babel/intro.html which allows embedding blocks of source code from multiple programming languages http://orgmode.org/worg/org-contrib/babel/languages.html#langs within a single text document. Blocks of code can share data with each other, display images inline, or be parsed into pure source code using the noweb reference syntax. http://orgmode.org/worg/org-contrib/babel/intro.html#literate-programming 

==See also==
* Sweave  an example of use of the "noweb"-like Literate Programming tool inside the R language for creation of dynamic statistical reports
* Self-documenting code  source code that can be easily understood without documentation

==References==

==Further reading==

*
* (includes software)
*
*

==External links==
*literateprogramming.com
*comp.programming.literate FAQ at Internet FAQ Archives
*Literate Programming newsgroup
*LiteratePrograms a literate programming wiki.
*Select A literate programming example using noweb
*nuweb The nuweb literate programming tool.
*Vimes A real project developed using nuweb.
*z-vimes Alternate source of Vimes.
*Softpanorama page on literate programming
*Haskell literate programming
*Specification of literate programming in the Haskell Report the accepted Haskell standard
*Noweb  A Simple, Extensible Tool for Literate Programming
*Molly  a standalone tool in Perl, which extends L.P. with "folding HTML" and uses noweb markup
*Codnar  An inverse literate programming tool
*Funnelweb  a complete standalone tool for L.P. independent of target language
*Lp4all  A Simple Literate Programming Tool with a wiki-like markup syntax
*pyWeb - Literate Programming tool that will work with any markup language and any programming language
*org-babel  an org-mode extension for literate programming in emacs.
* Using Docbook markup for literate programming. Known as xweb
*RawFile  a small MediaWiki extension implementing a basic form of literate programming
*Shuffle takes files with chunks of text defined in shuffle notation, and filters these chunks according to a requested selection of variant and aspects. It is a part of EHC/UHC (Essential Haskell Compiler/ Utrecht Haskell Compiler).
*Knuth: Literate Programming Knuth's home page containing information and errata for Literate Programming.
*RestructuredText to Code A tool for L.P. from RestructuredText documents.

*

[[Logistic map]]

The logistic map is a polynomial mapping (equivalently, recurrence relation) of degree 2, often cited as an archetypal example of how complex, chaotic behaviour can arise from very simple non-linear dynamical equations. The map was popularized in a seminal 1976 paper by the biologist Robert May, May, Robert M. 1976. "Simple mathematical models with very complicated dynamics." Nature 261(5560):459-467. in part as a discrete-time demographic model analogous to the logistic equation first created by Pierre Franois Verhulst. " 
Mathematically, the logistic map is written
:
where:
: is a number between zero and one, and represents the ratio of existing population to the maximum possible population at year n, and hence x0 represents the initial ratio of population to max. population (at year 0)
:r is a positive number, and represents a combined rate for reproduction and starvation.
This nonlinear difference equation is intended to capture two effects.
* reproduction where the population will increase at a rate proportional to the current population when the population size is small.
* starvation (density-dependent mortality) where the growth rate will decrease at a rate proportional to the value obtained by taking the theoretical "carrying capacity" of the environment less the current population.

However, as a demographic model the logistic map has the pathological problem that some initial conditions and parameter values lead to negative population sizes. This problem does not appear in the older Ricker model, which also exhibits chaotic dynamics.

The r=4 case of the logistic map is a nonlinear transformation of both the bit shift map and the case of the tent map.

==Behavior dependent on r==

By varying the parameter r, the following behavior is observed:
* With r between 0 and 1, the population will eventually die, independent of the initial population.
* With r between 1 and 2, the population will quickly approach the value , independent of the initial population.
* With r between 2 and 3, the population will also eventually approach the same value , but first will fluctuate around that value for some time. The rate of convergence is linear, except for r=3, when it is dramatically slow, less than linear.
* With r between 3 and (approximately 3.44949), from almost all initial conditions the population will approach permanent oscillations between two values. These two values are dependent on r.
* With r between 3.44949 and 3.54409 (approximately), from almost all initial conditions the population will approach permanent oscillations among four values. The latter number is a root of a 12th degree polynomial .
* With r increasing beyond 3.54409, from almost all initial conditions the population will approach oscillations among 8 values, then 16, 32, etc. The lengths of the parameter intervals which yield oscillations of a given length decrease rapidly; the ratio between the lengths of two successive such bifurcation intervals approaches the Feigenbaum constant  = 4.66920. This behavior is an example of a period-doubling cascade.
* At r approximately 3.56995 is the onset of chaos, at the end of the period-doubling cascade. From almost all initial conditions we can no longer see any oscillations of finite period. Slight variations in the initial population yield dramatically different results over time, a prime characteristic of chaos.
* Most values beyond 3.56995 exhibit chaotic behaviour, but there are still certain isolated ranges of r that show non-chaotic behavior; these are sometimes called islands of stability. For instance, beginning at (approximately 3.82843) there is a range of parameters r which show oscillation among three values, and for slightly higher values of r oscillation among 6 values, then 12 etc.
* The development of the chaotic behavior of the logistic sequence as the parameter r varies from approximately 3.56995 to approximately 3.82843 is sometimes called the PomeauManneville scenario, which is characterized by a periodic (laminar) phase interrupted by bursts of aperiodic behavior. Such a scenario has an application in semiconductor devices. 
 There are other ranges which yield oscillation among 5 values etc.; all oscillation periods occur for some values of r. A period-doubling window with parameter c is a range of r-values consisting of a succession of sub-ranges. The kth sub-range contains the values of r for which there is a stable cycle (a cycle which attracts a set of initial points of unit measure) of period This sequence of sub-ranges is called a cascade of harmonics. In a sub-range with a stable cycle of period there are unstable cycles of period for all The r value at the end of the infinite sequence of sub-ranges is called the point of accumulation of the cascade of harmonics. As r rises there is a succession of new windows with different c values. The first one is for c = 1; all subsequent windows involving odd c occur in decreasing order of c starting with arbitrarily large c. Baumol, William, and Benhabib, Jess, "Chaos: Significance, mechanism, and economic applications," Journal of Economic Perspectives 3, Winter 1989, 77-106. 
* Beyond r = 4, the values eventually leave the interval and diverge for almost all initial values.
For any value of r there is at most one stable cycle. A stable cycle attracts almost all points. Collet, Pierre, and Jean-Pierre Eckmann, Iterated Maps on the Interval as Dynamical Systems, Birkhauser, 1980. For an r with a stable cycle of some period, there can be infinitely many unstable cycles of various periods.

A bifurcation diagram summarizes this. The horizontal axis shows the values of the parameter r while the vertical axis shows the possible long-term values of x.

Bifurcation diagram for the logistic map
The bifurcation diagram is a self-similar: if you zoom in on the above mentioned value r = 3.82843 and focus on one arm of the three, the situation nearby looks like a shrunk and slightly distorted version of the whole diagram. The same is true for all other non-chaotic points. This is an example of the deep and ubiquitous connection between chaos and fractals.

==Chaos and the logistic map==
Two- and three-dimensional phase diagrams show the stretching-and-folding structure of the logistic map
A cobweb diagram of the logistic map, showing chaotic behaviour for most values of r > 3.57
Logistic function for r=3.5 after first 3 iterations
The relative simplicity of the logistic map makes it an excellent point of entry into a consideration of the concept of chaos. A rough description of chaos is that chaotic systems exhibit a great sensitivity to initial conditionsa property of the logistic map for most values of r between about 3.57 and 4 (as noted above). A common source of such sensitivity to initial conditions is that the map represents a repeated folding and stretching of the space on which it is defined. In the case of the logistic map, the quadratic difference equation (1) describing it may be thought of as a stretching-and-folding operation on the interval (0,1). 

The following figure illustrates the stretching and folding over a sequence of iterates of the map. Figure (a), left, gives a two-dimensional phase diagram of the logistic map for r=4, and clearly shows the quadratic curve of the difference equation (1). However, we can embed the same sequence in a three-dimensional phase space, in order to investigate the deeper structure of the map. Figure (b), right, demonstrates this, showing how initially nearby points begin to diverge, particularly in those regions of X't corresponding to the steeper sections of the plot.

This stretching-and-folding does not just produce a gradual divergence of the sequences of iterates, but an exponential divergence (see Lyapunov exponents), evidenced also by the complexity and unpredictability of the chaotic logistic map. In fact, exponential divergence of sequences of iterates explains the connection between chaos and unpredictability: a small error in the supposed initial state of the system will tend to correspond to a large error later in its evolution. Hence, predictions about future states become progressively (indeed, exponentially) worse when there are even very small errors in our knowledge of the initial state. This quality of unpredictability and apparent randomness led the logistic map equation to be used as a Pseudo-random number generator in early computers. 

Since the map is confined to an interval on the real number line, its dimension is less than or equal to unity. Numerical estimates yield a correlation dimension of 0.500  0.005 (Grassberger, 1983), a Hausdorff dimension of about 0.538 (Grassberger 1981), and an information dimension of 0.5170976... (Grassberger 1983) for r=3.5699456... (onset of chaos). Note: It can be shown that the correlation dimension is certainly between 0.4926 and 0.5024.

It is often possible, however, to make precise and accurate statements about the likelihood of a future state in a chaotic system. If a (possibly chaotic) dynamical system has an attractor, then there exists a probability measure that gives the long-run proportion of time spent by the system in the various regions of the attractor. In the case of the logistic map with parameter r = 4 and an initial state in (0,1), the attractor is also the interval (0,1) and the probability measure corresponds to the beta distribution with parameters a = 0.5 and b = 0.5. Specifically, Jakobson, M.,"Absolutely continuous invariant measures for one-parameter families of one-dimensional maps," Communications in Mathematical Physics 81, 1981, 39-88. the invariant measure is . Unpredictability is not randomness, but in some circumstances looks very much like it. Hence, and fortunately, even if we know very little about the initial state of the logistic map (or some other chaotic system), we can still say something about the distribution of states a long time into the future, and use this knowledge to inform decisions based on the state of the system.

==Solution in some cases==
The special case of r = 4 can in fact be solved exactly, as can the case with r = 2; however the general case can only be predicted statistically. 
The solution when r = 4 is, 
 Lorenz, Edward (1964), "The problem of deducing the climate from the governing equations," Tellus 16 (February): 1-11. 

:

where the initial condition parameter is given by . For rational , after a finite number of iterations maps into a periodic sequence. But almost all are irrational, and, for irrational , never repeats itself &ndash; it is non-periodic. This solution equation clearly demonstrates the two key features of chaos &ndash; stretching and folding: the factor 2n shows the exponential growth of stretching, which results in sensitive dependence on initial conditions, while the squared sine function keeps folded within the range 1.

By contrast, the solution when r=2 is

for . Since for any value of other than the unstable fixed point 0, the term goes to 0 as n goes to infinity, so goes to the stable fixed point 

==Finding cycles of any length when r = 4==
For the r = 4 case, from almost all initial conditions the iterate sequence is chaotic. Nevertheless, there exist an infinite number of initial conditions which lead to cycles, and indeed there exist cycles of length k for all integers k  1. We can exploit the relationship of the logistic map to the dyadic transformation (also known as the bit-shift map) to find cycles of any length. If x follows the logistic map and y follows the dyadic transformation

:

then the two are related by

:.

The reason that the dyadic transformation is also called the bit-shift map is that when y is written in binary notation, the map moves the binary point one place to the right (and if the bit to the left of the binary point has become a "1", this "1" is changed to a "0"). A cycle of length 3, for example, occurs if an iterate has a 3-bit repeating sequence in its binary expansion (which is not also a one-bit repeating sequence): 001, 010, 100, 110, 101, or 011. The iterate 001001001... maps into 010010010..., which maps into 100100100..., which in turn maps into the original 001001001...; so this is a 3-cycle of the bit shift map. And the other three binary-expansion repeating sequences give the 3-cycle 110110110...  101101101...  011011011...  110110110.... Either of these 3-cycles can be converted to fraction form: for example, the first-given 3-cycle can be written as 1/7  2/7  4/7  1/7. Using the above translation from the bit-shift map to the r = 4 logistic map gives the corresponding logistic cycle .611260467...  .950484434...  .188255099...  .611260467... . We could similarly translate the other bit-shift 3-cycle into its corresponding logistic cycle. Likewise, cycles of any length k can be found in the bit-shift map and then translated into the corresponding logistic cycles.

However, since almost all numbers in 1) are irrational, almost all initial conditions of the bit-shift map lead to the non-periodicity of chaos. This is one way to see that the logistic r = 4 map is chaotic for almost all initial conditions.

Amount of cycles of (minimal) length k for logistic map with r = 4 (tent map with ) is a known integer sequence : 2, 1, 2, 3, 6, 9, 18, 30, 56, 99, 186, 335, 630, 1161 ... It tells us that logistic map with r = 4 has 2 fixed points, 1 cycle of length 2, 2 cycles of length 3 and so on. This sequence takes a particularly simple form for prime k: . For example: is the number of cycles of length 13.

== See also ==
* Logistic function, the continuous version
* Lyapunov stability for iterated systems
* Malthusian growth model
* Radial basis function network This article illustrates the inverse problem for the logistic map.
* Schrder's equation
* Stiff equation

==Notes==

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* Logistic Map Simulation. A Java applet simulating the Logistic Map by Yuval Baror.
* [http://www.webcitation.org/query?url=http://www.geocities.com/CapeCanaveral/Hangar/7959/logisticmap.html&date=2009-10-25+06:37:07 Logistic Map. Contains an interactive computer simulation of the logistic map.
* The Chaos Hypertextbook. An introductory primer on chaos and fractals.
* Interactive Logistic map with iteration and bifurcation diagrams in Java.
* Interactive Logistic map showing fixed points.
* Macintosh Quadratic Map Program
* The transition to Chaos and the Feigenbaum constant- JAVA applet
* The Logistic Map and Chaos by Elmer G. Wiens
* Complexity & Chaos (audiobook) by Roger White. Chapter 5 covers the Logistic Equation.
* "History of iterated maps," in A New Kind of Science by Stephen Wolfram. Champaign, IL: Wolfram Media, p. 918, 2002.
* Discrete Logistic Equation by Marek Bodnar after work by Phil Ramsden, Wolfram Demonstrations Project.
* Multiplicative coupling of 2 logistic maps by C. Pellicer-Lostao and R. Lopez-Ruiz after work by Ed Pegg Jr, Wolfram Demonstrations Project.
* Using SAGE to investigate the discrete logistic equation



[[Levant]]

The Levant (), also known as the Eastern Mediterranean, is a geographic and cultural region consisting of the "eastern Mediterranean littoral between Anatolia and Egypt". Harris, William W. The Levant: a Fractured Mosaic The Levant today consists of the island of Cyprus, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, Palestine, and part of southern Turkey (the former Aleppo Vilayet).

Precise definitions have varied over time, and the term originally had a broader and less well-defined usage. The Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Greece and Rome, Volume 1, p247, "Levant" The Levant has been described as the "crossroads of western Asia, the eastern Mediterranean and northeast Africa". 

==Etymology==
The term Levant, which first appeared in English in 1497, originally meant the East in general or "Mediterranean lands east of Italy". It is borrowed from the French levant 'rising', that is, the point where the sun rises, Oxford English Dictionary, 2nd edition ultimately from Latin levare 'lift, raise'. Similar etymologies are found in Greek  (Anatol, cf. Anatolia), in Germanic Morgenland (which means, literally, "morning land"), in Italian (as in "Riviera di Levante", the portion of the Liguria coast east of Genoa), in the Hungarian Kelet, Spanish "Levante" and Catalan "Llevant" (the place of rising). Most notably, "Orient" and its Latin source oriens meaning "east", is literally "rising", deriving from Latin orior "rise".

The notion of the Levant has undergone a dynamic process of historical evolution in usage, meaning, and understanding. While the term "Levantine" originally referred to the European residents of the eastern Mediterranean region, it later came to refer to regional "native" and "minority" groups. 

===Early European usage===
The term became current in English in the 16th century, along with the first English merchant adventurers in the region; English ships appeared in the Mediterranean in the 1570s, and the English merchant company signed its agreement ("capitulations") with the Grand Turk in 1579 (Braudel). The English Levant Company was founded in 1581 to trade with the Ottoman Empire, and in 1670 the French Compagnie du Levant was founded for the same purpose. At this time, the Far East was known as the "Upper Levant". 

In 19th-century travel writing, the term incorporated eastern regions under then current or recent governance of the Ottoman empire, such as Greece. In 19th-century archaeology, it referred to overlapping cultures in this region during and after prehistoric times, intending to reference the place instead of any one culture.

===Since World War I===
The French mandates of Syria and Lebanon (19201946) were called the Levant states.

===Since World War II===
Today "Levant" is typically used by archaeologists and historians with reference to the prehistory and the ancient and medieval history of the region, as when discussing the Crusades. The term is also occasionally employed to refer to modern events, peoples, states or parts of states in the same region, namely Cyprus, Israel, Palestine, Jordan, Lebanon, and Syria (compare with Near East, Middle East, Eastern Mediterranean and Western Asia). Several researchers include the island of Cyprus in Levantine studies, including the Council for British Research in the Levant, the UCLA Near Eastern Languages and Cultures department, Biblical and Levantine studies, UCLA Journal of Levantine Studies and the UCL Institute of Archaeology, The Ancient Levant, UCL Institute of Archaeology, May 2008 the last of which has dated the connection between Cyprus and mainland Levant to the early Iron Age. Currently, a dialect of Levantine Arabic, Cypriot Maronite Arabic, is the most-spoken minority language in Cyprus. Archaeologists seeking a neutral orientation that is neither biblical nor national have used terms such as Syro-Palestinian archaeology and archaeology of the southern Levant. Dever, William G. "Syro-Palestinian and Biblical Archaeology", pp. 1244-1253. Sharon, Ilan "Biblical archaeology" in Encyclopedia of Archaeology Elsevier. 

While the usage of the term "Levant" in academia has been relegated to the fields of archeology and literature, there is a recent attempt to reclaim the notion of the Levant as a category of analysis in political and social sciences. Two academic journals were recently launched: Journal of Levantine Studies, published by The Van Leer Jerusalem Institute and The Levantine Review, published by Boston College.

==People==

The largest religious group in the Levant are the Muslims and the largest ethnic group are the Arabs, but there are also many other groups. Until the establishment of Israel in 1948, Jews lived throughout the southern Levant; Old Yishuv since then, excepting those living in Israel proper, only a few hundred remain. Jewish exodus from Arab and Muslim countries There are many Christian Levantine groups belonging to the Greek Orthodox Church of Antioch (Orthodox Christianity), Maronites belonging to the Eastern Catholic and Oriental Orthodoxy churches. There are Assyrian peoples belonging to the Assyrian Church of the East (autonomous) and the Chaldean Catholic Church (Catholic). There are Sunni Muslim and Yazidi Kurds. There are Shia Muslims, Alawites, Twelvers, Nizari, Druze and Ismailis. There are Armenians, mostly belonging to the Armenian Apostolic Church. There are a few Arab and Armenian Protestant Christians. There are Latin Catholics called Levantines or Franco-Levantines. There are also Circassians, Turks, Samaritans, and Nawars.

==Language==
The Levantine Muslims, Christians, Circassians and Christian Maronite Cypriot populations speak Levantine Arabic, also known as Mediterranean Arabic (). Small Greek and Armenian communities have retained their own languages and customs based usually on their religion. In Israel, the primary language is Hebrew. In Cyprus, the primary languages are Greek and Turkish.

==Culture==
The populations of the Levant Orfalea, Gregory The Arab Americans: A History. Olive Branch Press. Northampton, MA, 2006. Page 249 share not only the geographic position, but cuisine, some customs, and a very long history. The Levant Muslims, Christians, Circassians and Christian Maronite Cypriots populations speak Levantine Arabic also known as Mediterranean. In Israel Hebrew, English and Russian are spoken by the Jews who also observe laws, traditions and customs of Judaism. Greek and Armenian communities have retained their own languages and customs based usually on their religion mainly. Greeks constitute the majority of the population on the island of Cyprus and form groups in Lebanon, Syria and Israel, with majority of Greeks in Cyprus and Israel being Greek Orthodox Christians, whereas Lebanon and Syria have Greek Muslim populations.

==See also==

Overlapping regional designations
*Fertile Crescent
*Mashriq
*Mesopotamia
*Near East and Middle East
*Western Asia

Sub-regional designations
*Southern Levant and History of the Southern Levant

Other
*French post offices in the Ottoman Empire ("Levant" stamps)
*History of the Levant
*Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant
*Levantines (Latin Christians), Catholic Europeans in the Levant
*Levantine Sea

==Notes==

==References==
*Braudel, Fernand, The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of Phillip II
*Julia Chatzipanagioti: Griechenland, Zypern, Balkan und Levante. Eine kommentierte Bibliographie der Reiseliteratur des 18. Jahrhunderts. 2 Vol. Eutin 2006. ISBN 3-9810674-2-8
*Levantine Heritage site. Includes many oral and scholarly histories, and genealogies for some Levantine Turkish families.
*Philip Mansel, Levant: Splendour and Catastrophe on the Mediterranean, London, John Murray, 11 November 2010, hardback, 480 pages, ISBN 978-0-7195-6707-0, New Haven, Yale University Press, 24 May 2011, hardback, 470 pages, ISBN 978-0-300-17264-5
*Coelho, Paulo The Alchemist (Levant as wind originating from the Levant)

==External links==
*France and the Levant

 



[[League of Nations mandate]]

Mandates in the Middle East and Africa, which included: 1. Syria, 2. Lebanon, 3. Palestine, 4. Transjordan, 5. Mesopotamia, 6. British Togoland, 7. French Togoland, 8. British Cameroons, 9. French Cameroun, 10. Ruanda-Urundi, 11. Tanganyika and 12. South West Africa
Mandates in the Pacific. 1. South Pacific Mandate, 2. Territory of New Guinea, 3. Nauru and 4. Western Samoa

A League of Nations mandate was a legal status for certain territories transferred from the control of one country to another following World War I, or the legal instruments that contained the internationally agreed-upon terms for administering the territory on behalf of the League. These were of the nature of both a treaty and constitution which contained minority rights clauses that provided for the right of petition and adjudication by the International Court. The mandate system was established under Article 22 of the Covenant of the League of Nations, entered into on 28 June 1919. With the dissolution of the League of Nations after World War II, it was stipulated at the Yalta Conference that the remaining Mandates should be placed under the trusteeship of the United Nations, subject to future discussions and formal agreements. Most of the remaining mandates of the League of Nations (with the exception of South-West Africa) thus eventually became United Nations Trust Territories.

==Generalities==
All of the territories subject to League of Nations mandates were previously controlled by states defeated in World War I, principally Imperial Germany and the Ottoman Empire. The mandates were fundamentally different from the protectorates in that the Mandatory power undertook obligations to the inhabitants of the territory and to the League of Nations.

The process of establishing the mandates consisted of two phases: 
#the formal removal of sovereignty of the state previously controlling the territory
#the transfer of mandatory powers to individual states among the Allied Powers

===Treaties===
The divestiture of Germany's overseas colonies, along with three territories disentangled from its European homeland area (the Free City of Danzig, Memel Territory, and Saar), was accomplished in the Treaty of Versailles (1919), with the territories being allotted among the Allies on May 7 of that year. Ottoman territorial claims were first addressed in the Treaty of Svres (1920) and finalized in the Treaty of Lausanne (1923). The Turkish territories were allotted among the Allied Powers at the San Remo conference in 1920.

===Hidden agendas and objections===

Peace treaties have played an important role in the formation of the modern law of nations. Peace Treaties and International Law in European History, From the Late Middle Ages to World War One Many rules that govern the relations between states have been introduced and codified in the terms of peace treaties. See 'The Law of Nations or the Principles of Natural Law', Emmerich de Vattel, 1758, Book IV: Of The Restoration of Peace: And of Embassies, Chapter 2: Treaties of Peace. The first twenty-six articles of the Versailles Treaty of 28 June 1919 contained the Covenant of the League of Nations. It contained the international machinery for the enforcement of the terms of the treaty. Article 22 established a system of Mandates to administer former colonies and territories.

====Legitimacy of the allocations====

Article 22 was written two months before the signing of the peace treaty, before it was known what "communities", "peoples", or "territories" were related to sub-paragraphs 4, 5, and 6. The treaty was signed, and the peace conference had been adjourned, before a formal decision was made. The mandates were arrangements guaranteed by, or arising out of the general treaty which stipulated that mandates were to be exercised on behalf of the League.

The treaty contained no provision for the mandates to be allocated on the basis of decisions taken by four members of the League acting in the name of the so-called "Principal Allied and Associated Powers". The decisions taken at the conferences of the Council of Four were not made on the basis of consultation or League unanimity as stipulated by the Covenant. As a result, the actions of the conferees were viewed by some as having no legitimacy. see for example The Century, The San Remo Conference, By Herbert Gibbons 

In testimony before the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations a former US State Department official who had been a member of the American Commission at Paris, testified that the United Kingdom and France had simply gone ahead and arranged the world to suit themselves. He pointed out that the League of Nations could do nothing to alter their arrangements, since the League could only act by unanimous consent of its members - including the UK and France. Project Gutenberg: The Peace Negotiations by Robert Lansing, Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin Company. 1921, Chapter XIX. 'THE BULLITT AFFAIR' 

United States Secretary of State Robert Lansing was a member of the American Commission to Negotiate Peace at Paris in 1919. He explained that the system of mandates was a device created by the Great Powers to conceal their division of the spoils of war under the color of international law. If the former German and Ottoman territories had been ceded to the victorious powers directly, their economic value would have been credited to offset the Allies' claims for war reparations. "Thus under the mandatory system Germany lost her territorial assets, which might have greatly reduced her financial debt to the Allies, while the latter obtained the German colonial possessions without the loss of any of their claims for indemnity. In actual operation the apparent altruism of the mandatory system worked in favor of the selfish and material interests of the Powers which accepted the mandates. And the same may be said of the dismemberment of Turkey....The truth of this was very apparent at Paris. In the tentative distribution of mandates among the Powers, which took place on the strong presumption that the mandatory system would be adopted, the principal European Powers appeared to be willing and even eager to become mandatories over territories possessing natural resources which could be profitably developed and showed an unwillingness to accept mandates for territories which, barren of mineral or agricultural wealth, would be continuing liabilities rather than assets. This is not stated by way of criticism, but only in explanation of what took place.Project Gutenberg: The Peace Negotiations by Robert Lansing, Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin Company. 1921, Chapter XIII 'THE SYSTEM OF MANDATES' 
Article 243 of the treaty instructed the Reparations Commission that non-mandate areas of the Saar Valley and Alsace-Lorraine were to be reckoned as credits to Germany in respect of its reparation obligations. Peace Treaty of Versailles, Articles 231-247 and Annexes, Reparations 

====Legitimacy of the provisions====

Under the plan of the US Constitution the Congress was delegated the power to declare or define the Law of Nations in cases where its terms might be vague or indefinite. The US Senate refused to ratify the Covenant of the League of Nations. The legal issues surrounding the rule by force and the lack of self-determination under the system of mandates were cited by the Senators who withheld their consent. Senator Lodge, the Chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, had attached a reservation which read: 'No mandate shall be accepted by the United States under Article 22, Part 1, or any other provision of the treaty of peace with Germany, except by action of the Congress of the United States.'Henry Cabot Lodge: Reservations with Regard to the Treaty and the League of Nations Senator Borah, speaking on behalf on the 'Irreconcilables' stated 'My reservations have not been answered.' He completely rejected the proposed system of Mandates as an illegitimate rule by brute force. Classic Senate Speeches and the Denunciation of the Mandate System, starting on page 7, col. 1 The US government subsequently entered into individual treaties to secure legal rights for its citizens, to protect property rights and businesses interests in the mandates, and to preclude the mandatory administration from altering the terms of the mandates without prior US approval. see for example DELAY IN EXCHANGE OF RATIFICATIONS OF THE PALESTINE MANDATE CONVENTION PENDING ADJUSTMENT OF CASES INVOLVING THE CAPITULATORY RIGHTS OF AMERICANS, 1925 

The United States filed a formal protest because the preamble of the mandates indicated to the League that they had been approved by the Principal Allied and Associated Powers, when, in fact, that was not the case. see the text of the American note to the Council of the League of Nations, dated February 1, 1921 

The Official Journal of the League of Nations, dated June 1922, contained a statement by Lord Balfour (UK) in which he explained that the League's authority was strictly limited. The article related that the 'Mandates were not the creation of the League, and they could not in substance be altered by the League. The League's duties were confined to seeing that the specific and detailed terms of the mandates were in accordance with the decisions taken by the Allied and Associated Powers, and that in carrying out these mandates the Mandatory Powers should be under the supervisionnot under the controlof the League.' Excerpts from League of Nations Official Journal dated June 1922, pp. 546-549 

==Types of mandates==
The League of Nations decided the exact level of control by the Mandatory power over each mandate on an individual basis. However, in every case the Mandatory power was forbidden to construct fortifications or raise an army within the territory of the mandate, and was required to present an annual report on the territory to the League of Nations.

The mandates were divided into three distinct groups based upon the level of development each population had achieved at that time.

===Class A mandates===

The first group, or Class A mandates, were territories formerly controlled by the Ottoman Empire that were deemed to "... have reached a stage of development where their existence as independent nations can be provisionally recognized subject to the rendering of administrative advice and assistance by a Mandatory until such time as they are able to stand alone. The wishes of these communities must be a principal consideration in the selection of the Mandatory." 
 
The Class A mandates were:
*Palestine (United Kingdom), from 29 September 1923 &ndash; 15 May 1948. In April 1921, Transjordan provisionally became an autonomous area for 6 months but then continued to be part of the Mandate until independence. The Making of Jordan: Tribes, Colonialism and the Modern State, By Yoav Alon, Published by I.B.Tauris, 2007, ISBN 1-84511-138-9, page 21 Determining Boundaries in a Conflicted World: The Role of Uti Possidetis, By Suzanne Lalonde, Published by McGill-Queen's Press - MQUP, 2002, ISBN 0-7735-2424-X, page 89-100 It eventually became the independent Hashemite Kingdom of Transjordan (later Jordan) on 25 May 1946. A plan for peacefully dividing the remainder of the Mandate failed. The Mandate terminated at midnight between 14 and 15 May 1948. On the evening of 14 May, the Chairman of the Jewish Agency for Palestine had declared the establishment of the State of Israel. Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs: THE DECLARATION OF THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE STATE OF ISRAEL May 14, 1948: Retrieved 28 January 2013 Arab states attacked the following day, marking the start of the 1948 ArabIsraeli War. Following the war, 75% of the area west of the Jordan River was controlled by the new State of Israel. Other parts, until 1967, formed the West Bank of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the Egyptian-occupied Gaza Strip. Small slivers of territory east and south of the Sea of Galilee were held by Syria.

*Syria (France), 29 September 1923 &ndash; 1 January 1944. This mandate included Lebanon; Hatay (a former Ottoman Alexandretta sandjak) broke away from it and became a French protectorate until it was ceded to the new Republic of Turkey. Following the termination of the French mandate, two separate independent republics, Syria and Lebanon, were formed.

*Mesopotamia (United Kingdom), not enacted and replaced by the Anglo-Iraqi Treaty

===Class B mandates===
The second group of mandates, or Class B mandates, were all former Schutzgebiete (German territories) in West and Central Africa which were deemed to require a greater level of control by the mandatory power: "...the Mandatory must be responsible for the administration of the territory under conditions which will guarantee freedom of conscience and religion." The mandatory power was forbidden to construct military or naval bases within the mandates. 
 
The Class B mandates were:

*Ruanda-Urundi (Belgium), from 20 July 1922 to 13 December 1946. Formerly two separate German protectorates, they were joined as a single mandate on 20 July 1922. From 1 March 1926 to 30 June 1960, Ruanda-Urundi was in administrative union with the neighbouring colony of Belgian Congo. After 13 December 1946, it became a United Nations Trust Territory, remaining under Belgian administration until the separate nations of Rwanda and Burundi gained independence on 1 July 1962.
*Tanganyika (United Kingdom), from 20 July 1922 to 11 December 1946. It became a United Nations Trust Territory on 11 December 1946, and was granted internal self-rule on 1 May 1961. On 9 December 1961, it became an independent Commonwealth realm, transforming into a republic on the same day the next year. On 26 April 1964, Tanganyika merged with the neighbouring island of Zanzibar to become the modern nation of Tanzania.
*Kamerun was split on 20 July 1922 into British Cameroons (under a Resident) and French Cameroun (under a Commissioner until 27 August 1940, then under a Governor), on 13 December 1946 transformed into United Nations Trust Territories, again a British (successively under senior district officers officiating as Resident, a Special Resident and Commissioners) and a French Trust (under a Haut Commissaire)
*Togoland was split into British Togoland (under an Administrator, a post filled by the colonial Governor of the British Gold Coast (present Ghana) except 30 September 1920&ndash;11 October 1923 Francis Walter Fillon Jackson) and French Togoland (under a Commissioner) (United Kingdom and France), 20 July 1922 separate Mandates, transformed on 13 December 1946 into United Nations trust territories, French Togoland (under a Commissioner till 30 August 1956, then under a High Commissioner as Autonomous Republic of Togo) and British Togoland (as before; on 13 December 1956 it ceased to exist as it became part of Ghana)

===Class C mandates===
A final group, the Class C mandates, including South West Africa and certain of the South Pacific Islands, were considered to be "best administered under the laws of the Mandatory as integral portions of its territory"

The Class C mandates were former German possessions:
*former German New Guinea became the Territory of New Guinea (Australia/United Kingdom) from 17 December 1920 under a (at first Military) Administrator; after (wartime) Japanese/U.S. military commands from 8 December 1946 under UN mandate as North East New Guinea (under Australia, as administrative unit), until it became part of present Papua New Guinea at independence in 1975
*Nauru, formerly part of German New Guinea (Australia in effective control, formally together with United Kingdom and New Zealand) from 17 December 1920, 1 November 1947 made into a United Nations trust territory (same three powers) until its 31 January 1968 independence as a Republic - all that time under an Administrator
*former German Samoa (New Zealand/United Kingdom) 17 December 1920 a League of Nations mandate, renamed Western Samoa (as opposed to American Samoa), from 25 January 1947 a United Nations trust territory until its 1 January 1962 independence
*South Pacific Mandate (Japan)
*South West Africa (South Africa/United Kingdom)
** from 1 October 1922, Walvisbaai's administration (still merely having a Magistrate until its 16 March 1931 Municipal status, thence a Mayor) was also assigned to the mandate

==Rules of establishment==
According to the Council of the League of Nations, meeting of August 1920: (p109110) "draft mandates adopted by the Allied and Associated Powers would not be definitive until they had been considered and approved by the League ... the legal title held by the mandatory Power must be a double one: one conferred by the Principal Powers and the other conferred by the League of Nations," Quincy Wright, Mandates under the League of Nations, Univ. of Chicago Press, 1930. 

Three steps were required to establish a Mandate under international law:
(1) The Principal Allied and Associated Powers confer a mandate on one of their number or on a third power; (2) the principal powers officially notify the council of the League of Nations that a certain power has been appointed mandatory for such a certain defined territory; and (3) the council of the League of Nations takes official cognisance of the appointment of the mandatory power and informs the latter that it council considers it as invested with the mandate, and at the same time notifies it of the terms of the mandate, after assertaining whether they are in conformance with the provisions of the covenant." See also: Temperley, History of the Paris Peace Conference, Vol VI, p505506; League of Nations, The Mandates System (official publication of 1945); Hill, Mandates, Dependencies and Trusteeship, p133ff. 

The U.S. State Department Digest of International Law says that the terms of the Treaty of Lausanne provided for the application of the principles of state succession to the "A" Mandates. The Treaty of Versailles (1920) provisionally recognized the former Ottoman communities as independent nations. See Article 22 of the Peace Treaty of Versailles It also required Germany to recognize the disposition of the former Ottoman territories and to recognize the new states laid down within their boundaries. See Article 434 of the Peace Treaty of Versailles The terms of the Treaty of Lausanne required the newly created states that acquired the territory detached from the Ottoman Empire to pay annuities on the Ottoman public debt and to assume responsibility for the administration of concessions that had been granted by the Ottomans. The treaty also let the States acquire, without payment, all the property and possessions of the Ottoman Empire situated within their territory. Article 47, 60, and Protocol XII, Article 9 of the Treaty of Lausanne The treaty provided that the League of Nations was responsible for establishing an arbital court to resolve disputes that might arise and stipulated that its decisions were final. 

A disagreement regarding the legal status and the portion of the annuities to be paid by the "A" mandates was settled when an Arbitrator ruled that some of the mandates contained more than one State:The difficulty arises here how one is to regard the Asiatic countries under the British and French mandates. Iraq is a Kingdom in regard to which Great Britain has undertaken responsibilities equivalent to those of a Mandatory Power. Under the British mandate, Palestine and Transjordan have each an entirely separate organisation. We are, therefore, in the presence of three States sufficiently separate to be considered as distinct Parties. France has received a single mandate from the Council of the League of Nations, but in the countries subject to that mandate, one can distinguish two distinct States: Syria and the Lebanon, each State possessing its own constitution and a nationality clearly different from the other. See Marjorie M. Whiteman, Digest of International Law, vol. 1 (Washington, DC: U. S. Government Printing Office, 1963) pp 650-652, Questia, Web, 21 Apr. 2010 

==Later history==
After the United Nations was founded in 1945 and the League of Nations was disbanded, all but one of the mandated territories that remained under the control of the mandatory power became United Nations trust territories, a roughly equivalent status. In each case, the colonial power that held the mandate on each territory became the administering power of the trusteeship, except that Japan, which had been defeated in World War II, lost its mandate over the South Pacific islands, which became a "strategic trust territory" known as the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands under United States administration.
 
The sole exception to the transformation of League of Nations mandates into UN trusteeships was that South Africa refused to place South-West Africa under trusteeship. Instead, South Africa proposed that it be allowed to annex South-West Africa, a proposal rejected by the United Nations General Assembly. The International Court of Justice held that South Africa continued to have international obligations under the mandate for South-West Africa. The territory finally attained independence in 1990 as Namibia, after a long guerrilla war of independence against the apartheid regime.

Nearly all the former League of Nations mandates had become sovereign states by 1990, including all of the former United Nations Trust Territories with the exception of a few successor entities of the gradually dismembered Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands (formerly Japan's South Pacific Trust Mandate). These exceptions include the Northern Mariana Islands which is a commonwealth in political union with the United States with the status of unincorporated organized territory. The Northern Mariana Islands does elect its own governor to serve as territorial head of government, but it remains a U.S. territory with its head of state being the President of the United States and federal funds to the Commonwealth administered by the Office of Insular Affairs of the United States Department of the Interior.

Remnant Micronesia and the Marshall Islands, the heirs of the last territories of the Trust, attained final independence on 22 December 1990. (The UN Security Council ratified termination of trusteeship, effectively dissolving trusteeship status, on 10 July 1987). The Republic of Palau, split off from the Federated States of Micronesia, became the last to get its independence effectively on 1 October 1994.

==Sources and references==
*Tamburini, Francesco "I mandati della Societ delle Nazioni", in Africana, Rivista di Studi Extraeuropei, n.XV - 2009, pp. 99122.
* Anghie, Antony "Colonialism and the Birth of International Institutions: Sovereignty, Economy, and the Mandate System of the League of Nations" 34(3) New York University Journal of International Law and Politics 513 (2002)
* WorldStatesmen - links to each present nation

==References==

==Further reading==
* Anghie, Antony. "Colonialism and the Birth of International Institutions: Sovereignty, Economy, and the Mandate System of the League of Nations." NYUJ Int'l L. & Pol. 34 (2001): 513.
* Bruce, Scot David, Woodrow Wilson's Colonial Emissary: Edward M. House and the Origins of the Mandate System, 1917-1919 (University of Nebraska Press, 2013).
* Callahan, Michael D. Mandates and empire: the League of Nations and Africa, 1914-1931 (Brighton: Sussex Academic Press, 1999)
* Haas, Ernst B. "The reconciliation of conflicting colonial policy aims: acceptance of the League of Nations mandate system," International Organization (1952) 6#4 pp: 521-536.

 *



[[Loudon Classic]]

The Loudon Classic, held at the New Hampshire Motor Speedway (formerly Bryar Motorsport Park and New Hampshire International Speedway) is the longest running motorcycle race in the United States, and is held every year on Father's Day. While it is popularly known as Laconia, the location of the race was moved from Belknap Recreation Area to Loudon in 1964. 

== References ==



[[Lincoln, New Hampshire]]

Lincoln is a town in Grafton County, New Hampshire, United States. It is the second-largest town by area in New Hampshire. The population was 1,662 at the 2010 census. United States Census Bureau, American FactFinder, 2010 Census figures. Retrieved March 23, 2011. The town is home to the New Hampshire Highland Games and to a portion of Franconia Notch State Park. Set in the White Mountains, large portions of the town are within the White Mountain National Forest. The Appalachian Trail crosses in the northeast. Lincoln is the location of the Loon Mountain ski resort and associated recreation-centered development.

The primary settlement in town, where 993 people resided at the 2010 census, is defined as the Lincoln census-designated place (CDP) and is located along New Hampshire Route 112 east of Interstate 93. The town also includes the village of North Lincoln and the former village sites of Stillwater and Zealand (sometime known as Pullman) in the town's remote eastern and northern sections respectively, which are now within the White Mountain National Forest.

==History==
General view c. 1915
In 1764, Colonial Governor Benning Wentworth granted 32456 acre to a group of approximately 70 land investors from Connecticut. Lincoln was named after Henry Fiennes Pelham-Clinton, 2nd Duke of Newcastle, 9th Earl of Lincoln  a cousin of the Wentworth governors. He held the position of comptroller of customs for the port of London under George II and George III, which was important to trade between America and England. 

The town was settled about 1782. The 1790 census indicates that it had 22 inhabitants. Rocky soil yielded poor farming, but the area's abundant timber, combined with water power to run sawmills on the Pemigewasset River and its East Branch, helped Lincoln develop into a center for logging. By 1853, the Merrimack River Lumber Company was operating. The railroad transported freight, and increasingly brought tourists to the beautiful mountain region. In 1892, James E. Henry bought approximately 100000 acre of virgin timber and established a logging enterprise at what is today the center of Lincoln. In 1902, he built a pulp and paper mill. He erected The Lincoln House hotel in 1903, although a 1907 fire would nearly raze the community. Until he died in 1912, Henry controlled his company town, installing relatives in positions of civic authority. History of Lincoln, New Hampshire 

In 1917, Henry's heirs sold the business to the Parker Young Company, which in turn sold it to the Marcalus Manufacturing Company in 1946. Franconia Paper took over in 1950, producing 150 tons of paper a day until bankruptcy in 1971, at which time new river classification standards discouraged further papermaking in Lincoln. 

Tourism is today the principal business. Nearby Loon Mountain has long drawn skiers, and in recent years has attempted to convert itself into a four-season attraction. The Flume is one of the most visited attractions in the state. Discovered in 1808, it is a natural canyon extending 800 ft at the base of Mount Liberty. Walls of Conway granite rise to a height of 70 to 90 feet (21 to 27 m) and are only 12 to 20 feet (2.5 to 6.0 m) apart.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of 130.9 sqmi, of which 130.3 sqmi is land and 0.6 sqmi is water, comprising 0.43% of the town. It is the second-largest town in area in New Hampshire, after Pittsburg.

Lincoln is drained by the Pemigewasset River and its East Branch. Lincoln lies almost fully within the Merrimack River watershed, with the western edge of town in the Connecticut River watershed. Kancamagus Pass, elevation 2860 ft, is on the Kancamagus Highway at the eastern boundary. The highest point in Lincoln is either the summit of Mount Carrigain, at 4700 ft above sea level, plus or minus 10 ft, or the summit of Mount Bond at 4698 ft.

==Demographics==
Hiking trail in Franconia Notch State Park
The Flume c. 1915
As of the census of 2000, there were 1,271 people, 583 households, and 324 families residing in the town. The population density was 9.7 people per square mile (3.8/km). There were 2,339 housing units at an average density of 17.9 per square mile (6.9/km). The racial makeup of the town was 97.40% White, 0.39% Native American, 0.87% Asian, 0.16% from other races, and 1.18% from two or more races. 0.71% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 583 households out of which 22.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 43.4% were married couples living together, 8.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 44.4% were non-families. 35.7% of all households were made up of individuals and 12.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.18 and the average family size was 2.83.
